                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HOW DO VENTURE CAPITALISTS MAKE DECISIONS?

                                          Paul Gompers
                                         William Gornall
                                        Steven N. Kaplan
                                        Ilya A. Strebulaev

                                       Working Paper 22587
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22587


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




We thank Dasha Anosova and Kevin Huang for their research assistance. We thank the Kauffman
Fellows Program, the National Venture Capital Association, the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business, Harvard Business School, and the Stanford Graduate School of Business for
providing us access to their members and alumni. We thank Phil Wickham of the Kauffman
Fellows Program, Bobby Franklin and Maryam Haque of the National Venture Capital
Association for their help in disseminating the survey. We thank Shai Bernstein, Felda
Hardymon, Michal Kosinski, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute for helpful
discussions and comments. We also are very grateful to our many survey respondents. Gornall
thanks the SSHRC for its financial support. Gompers, Kaplan, and Strebulaev have consulted to
general partners and limited partners investing in venture capital. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22587.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Paul Gompers, William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Venture Capitalists Make Decisions?
Paul Gompers, William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev
NBER Working Paper No. 22587
September 2016
JEL No. G24,G3,L26

                                          ABSTRACT

We survey 885 institutional venture capitalists (VCs) at 681 firms to learn how they make
decisions across eight areas: deal sourcing; investment selection; valuation; deal structure; post-
investment value-added; exits; internal firm organization; and relationships with limited partners.
In selecting investments, VCs see the management team as more important than business related
characteristics such as product or technology. They also attribute more of the likelihood of
ultimate investment success or failure to the team than to the business. While deal sourcing, deal
selection, and post-investment value-added all contribute to value creation, the VCs rate deal
selection as the most important of the three. We also explore (and find) differences in practices
across industry, stage, geography and past success. We compare our results to those for CFOs
(Graham and Harvey 2001) and private equity investors (Gompers, Kaplan and Mukharlyamov
forthcoming).

Paul Gompers                                     Steven N. Kaplan
Harvard Business School                          Booth School of Business
Baker Library 263                                The University of Chicago
Soldiers Field                                   5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Boston, MA 02163                                 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                         and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu                                 steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu

William Gornall                                  Ilya A. Strebulaev
Stanford University                              Graduate School of Business
Graduate School of Business                      Stanford University
655 Knight Way                                   655 Knight Way
Stanford CA 94305                                Stanford, CA 94305
wrgornall@gmail.com                              and NBER
                                                 istrebulaev@stanford.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22587
1    Introduction

Over the past 30 years, venture capital (VC) has been an important source of financing for innovative
companies. Firms supported by VC, including Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Gilead Sciences, Google,
Intel, Microsoft, Starbucks, and Whole Foods have had a large impact on the U.S. and global economy.
Kaplan and Lerner (2010) estimate that roughly one-half of all true IPOs are VC-backed even though
fewer than one quarter of 1% of companies receive venture financing. Gornall and Strebulaev (2015)
estimate that public companies that previously received VC backing account for one-fifth of the
market capitalization and 44% of the research and development spending of U.S. public companies.
Consistent with this company-level performance, Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014, 2016) find
that, on average, VC funds have outperformed the public markets net of fees.

In this paper, we seek to better understand what venture capitalists (VCs) do and, potentially, why
they have been successful. We do so by surveying almost nine hundred VCs and asking how they
make decisions about their investments and portfolios. We provide detailed information on VCs’
practices in sourcing deals, evaluating and selecting investments, structuring investments, managing
deals post-investment, organizing their VC firms, and managing their relationships with limited
partners. We also explore cross-sectional variation in VC practices across industry, stage, geography
and past success.

The success of VC-backed companies is consistent with VCs taking actions that are effective at
generating value. In fact, Kaplan and Strömberg (2001) and Gompers and Lerner (2001) argue that
VCs are particularly successful at solving an important problem in market economies—connecting
entrepreneurs with good ideas (but no money) with investors who have money (but no ideas). The
solution, as suggested by theory and explored empirically in previous research on VCs, involves
specific actions taken by VCs to solve this funding gap. In other words, VCs are real world entities
that arguably approximate investors in economic theory, providing an additional reason to study
them.

Our survey results can be grouped into eight areas: deal sourcing; investment selection; valuation;
deal structure; post-investment value-add; exits; internal organization of firms; and relationships with
limited partners.


                                                   2
First, we consider how VCs source potential investments, a process also known as generating deal flow.
Sahlman (1990) discusses the process by which VCs attract would-be entrepreneurs. The VC’s network
is critical in this process. VC firms speak of the “deal funnel” by which opportunities are winnowed
down to a small number of investable deals. We explore where VCs’ investment opportunities come
from and how they sort through those opportunities.

Second, we examine VC investment selection decisions. There is a great deal of debate among
academics and practitioners as to which screening and selection factors are most important. Kaplan
and Strömberg (2004) describe and analyze how VCs select investments. They confirm previous survey
work that VCs consider factors that include the attractiveness of the market, strategy, technology,
product or service, customer adoption, competition, deal terms and the quality and experience of
the management team. The nature of the entrepreneurial team is an important component of the
sourcing and screening process. Baron and Hannan (2002) and Hellmann and Puri (2000) both focus
on how founding teams are formed and their attractiveness as investment opportunities. Gompers,
Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein (2010) show that past success as an entrepreneur is an important
factor that VC firms focus on when attracting potential investments. Kaplan, Sensoy and Strömberg
(2009) develop a “jockey vs. horse” framework to examine what factors are more constant over the
life of a successful VC investment. The entrepreneurial team is the “jockey” while the strategy and
business model are the “horse”. We ask the VCs whether they focus more on the jockey or the horse
in their investment decisions.

Third, we explore the tools and assumptions that VCs utilize in valuing companies. Prior survey
evidence on financial decisions makers is mixed. Graham and Harvey (2001) find that the CFOs of large
companies generally use discounted cash flow (DCF) analyses to evaluate investment opportunities.
Gompers et al. (forthcoming), in contrast, find that PE investors rarely use DCF, preferring internal
rate of return (IRR) or multiple of invested capital. The paucity of historical operating information
and the uncertainty of future cash flows makes VCs’ investment decisions difficult and less like those
in the typical setting taught in MBA finance curricula. Given this difference, we explore the extent
to which VCs employ the commonly-taught DCF method or, instead, rely on different ones.

Fourth, we ask how VCs write contracts and structure investments. VC contracts ensure both that
(1) the entrepreneur does very well if he or she performs well and (2) that investors can take control if


                                                    3
the entrepreneur does not perform. Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) study VC contracts and show that
VCs achieve these objectives by carefully allocating cash flow rights (the equity upside that provides
incentives to perform), control rights (the rights VCs have to intervene if the entrepreneur does not
perform), liquidation rights (the senior payoff to VCs if the entrepreneur does not perform), and
employment terms, particularly vesting (which gives the entrepreneur incentives both to perform and
stay with the firm). Kaplan and Strömberg (2004) show that VC contracts are related to internal
risk; external risk; and the risk of execution. Less is known, however, about which of these terms are
more important to VCs and how they make trade-offs among them. In our survey, we ask the VCs
which investment terms they use and which terms they are willing to negotiate.

Syndication of investment with other VCs is another important element of deal structuring. Hochberg,
Ljungqvist and Lu (2007) emphasize the important role that networks play in bringing new skills
and talent to the investment team. Lerner (1994) identifies factors related to the ability of VCs to
monitor companies as being important in how VCs choose their syndicate partners. Accordingly, our
survey also explores syndication.

Fifth, we examine how VCs monitor and add value to their portfolio companies after they invest.
Part of the added value comes from improving governance and active monitoring. This often means
replacing entrepreneurs if they are not up to the task of growing their companies. For example, Baker
and Gompers (2003) find that only about one-third of VC-backed companies still have a founder
as CEO at the time of IPO. Amornsiripanitch, Gompers and Xuan (2016) show that VCs provide
critical aid in hiring outside mangers and directors. Hellmann and Puri (2002) show that VCs are
essential to the professionalization of startups. Lerner (1995) examines how VCs are influential in
the structuring of the boards of directors. In their study of investment memoranda, Kaplan and
Strömberg (2004) find direct evidence that VCs expect to add value in their investments at the time
they make them. In this survey, we further explore these issues by asking the VCs to describe in
detail the ways in which they add value.

Sixth, we ask about VCs’ exits. Barry, Muscarella, Peavy and Vetsuypens (1990) and Brav and
Gompers (1997) explore the role and importance of VCs in the performance of IPOs. Cumming (2008)
and Cumming and MacIntosh (2003) look at broad patterns in VC exits. Sørensen (2007) seeks to
establish how much of VC returns are driven by deal sourcing and investment selection versus VC


                                                  4
value-added. He concludes that both matter, with roughly a 60/40 split in importance. Accordingly,
we further explore this issue by asking the VCs directly to assess the relative importance of deal
sourcing, deal selection, and post-investment actions in value creation in their investments. We also
ask the VCs what selection factors were most important in the ultimate success and failure of their
investments.

Seventh, we explore issues related to internal VC firm structure. With respect to internal firm
issues, Gompers et al. (2010) examine how VC firm specialization affects investment performance.
Understanding internal organization potentially can shed light on whether investment focus affects
decision-making and performance.

Eighth, and finally, we consider the relationship between VCs and their investors. Chung, Sensoy,
Stern and Weisbach (2012) look at VCs’ implicit and explicit incentives to perform well. Kaplan and
Schoar (2005) and Harris et al. (2014) document patterns of fund performance and persistence. Our
survey allows us to examine the alignment of incentives as well as marketed fund return expectations.

This paper complements several existing survey papers in the financial economics literature. Graham
and Harvey (2001) survey chief financial officers to understand how they make capital budgeting,
capital structure, and other financing decisions.1 They compare their survey findings of practice
to the recommendations or insights from different academic theories. Gompers et al. (forthcoming)
survey private equity investors to understand how they make decisions, and compare their results to
those in Graham and Harvey (2001) and those taught by finance academics. In this paper, we add to
these papers by discussing how our results compare to both finance theory and the results of the
surveys of CFOs and private equity investors.

Our 885 survey respondents represent 681 different VC firms. We report results by firm, averaging the
responses for firms with multiple respondents. The average firm in our sample screens 200 companies
and makes only four investments in a given year. Most of the deal flow comes from the VCs’ networks
in some form or another. Over 30% of deals are generated through professional networks. Another
20% are referred by other investors while 8% are referred by existing portfolio companies. Almost
30% are proactively self-generated. Only 10% come inbound from company management. These
results emphasize the importance of active deal generation.
  1
      See also Brav, Graham, Harvey and Michaely (2005) and Graham, Harvey and Rajgopal (2005).


                                                       5
In selecting investments, VCs place the greatest importance on the management/founding team. The
management team was mentioned most frequently both as an important factor (by 95% of VC firms)
and as the most important factor (by 47% of VC firms). Business (or horse) related factors were also
frequently mentioned as important with business model at 83%, product at 74% market at 68%, and
industry at 31%. The business related factors, however, were rated as most important by only 37% of
firms. The company valuation was ranked as fifth most important overall, but third in importance
for later stage deals. Fit with fund and ability to add value were ranked as less important.

Few VCs use discounted cash flow or net present value techniques to evaluate their investments.
Instead, by far the most commonly used metric is cash-on-cash return or, equivalently, multiple of
invested capital. The next most commonly used metric is IRR. Almost none of the VCs adjusted
their target returns for systematic risk. Strikingly, 9% of the overall respondents and 17% of the
early-stage investors do not use any quantitative deal evaluation metric. Consistent with this, 20% of
all VCs and 31% of early-stage VCs reported that they do not forecast cash flows when they make an
investment. These results contrast with those in Graham and Harvey (2001) who find that CFOs use
net present values as often as internal rates of return. The results are similar to, but more extreme
than those in Gompers et al. (forthcoming) who find that private equity (PE) investor rely extensively
on IRRs and multiples of invested capital.

In structuring their investments, VCs indicated that they were relatively inflexible on pro-rata
investment rights, liquidation preferences, anti-dilution protection, vesting, valuation and board
control. They were more flexible on the option pool, participation rights, investment amount,
redemption rights, and particularly dividends. The inflexibility, particularly on control rights and
liquidation rights is arguably consistent with the results in Kaplan and Strömberg (2003, 2004).

VCs generally responded that they provide a large number of services to their portfolio companies
post-investment—strategic guidance (87%), connecting investors (72%), connecting customers (69%),
operational guidance (65%), hiring board members (58%), and hiring employees (46%). This is
consistent with VCs adding value to their portfolio companies and similar to the results for PE
investors in Gompers et al. (forthcoming).




                                                  6
Largely consistent with actual outcomes, VCs claimed they exited roughly three-fourths of their
successful deals via acquisition rather than through an IPO. VCs also report a wide variation in the
outcomes of their investments, with roughly one-quarter losing money and almost 10% earning ten
times their investment.

When asked which of their activities—deal flow, deal selection or post-investment value-added—helped
generate their returns, a majority of VCs reported that each of the three contributed with deal
selection being the most important of the three. Deal selection was ranked as important by 86% of
VCs and as most important by 49% of VCs. Post-investment value-added was seen as important by
84% of VCs and as most important by 27% of VCs. Deal flow was ranked as important by 65% and as
most important by 23%. These results are consistent with the estimates in Sørensen (2007) that deal
flow and deal selection are more important than value-add, but all three are important. These results,
however, extend and inform Sørensen (2007) by distinguishing between deal flow and deal selection.

We also asked VCs what factors contributed most to their successes and failures. Again, the team
was by far the most important factor identified, both for successes (96% of respondents) and failures
(92%). For successes, each of timing, luck, technology, business model, and industry were of roughly
equal importance (56% to 67%). For failures, each of industry, business model, technology and timing
were of roughly equal importance (45% to 58%). Perhaps surprisingly, VCs did not cite their own
contributions as a source of success or failure.

We questioned VCs on their firms’ internal structures. The average VC firm in our sample is small,
with 14 employees and 5 senior investment professionals. Consistent with the importance of both deal
sourcing and post-investment value-added, the VCs report that they spend an average of 22 hours
per week networking and sourcing deals and an average of 18 hours per week working with portfolio
companies out of a total reported work week of 55 hours.

Finally, we asked VCs about their interactions with their investors. VCs report that they believe
that their LPs care about cash-on-cash returns and net IRRs. This is similar to the results found by
Gompers et al. (forthcoming) for PE investors. Surprisingly, and like the PE investors, the majority
of VCs mention that they believe their investors care more about absolute rather than relative
performance. Finally, VCs show confidence in their ability to generate above market returns. The



                                                   7
vast majority (93%) of those surveyed answered that they expected to beat the market on a relative
basis.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our research design and reports summary statistics.
Section 3 describes the VCs’ responses to our survey, with subsections corresponding to deal sourcing
(Section 3.1); investment selection (3.2); valuation (3.3); deal structure (3.4); post-investment value-
add (3.5); exits (3.6); internal organization of firms (3.7); and relationships with limited partners
(3.8). We highlight important cross sectional differences when relevant. Section 4 concludes.



2     Methodology

2.1      Design


In this section, we describe the research design of our survey. Surveys have become more common
recently in the financial economics literature. Accordingly, we reviewed many of the existing surveys
including those targeting CFOs of non-financial firms, limited partners of PE firms, and PE fund
managers, respectively, Graham and Harvey (2001); DaRin and Phalippou (2014); Gompers et al.
(forthcoming); Gorman and Sahlman (1989).

This paper is closest in spirit to the survey of private equity (PE) fund managers by Gompers et al.
(forthcoming), as the PE industry is similar to the VC industry in many respects. In particular, many
questions about investment decisions, valuation, deal structure, fund operations and the relationship
between general partners and limited partners are broadly similar in the two industries. Where
possible, we use similar questions so that we can compare the responses of VCs to those of PE
managers. The PE industry, however, focuses largely on mature or growth-stage companies, for
which financial data and forecasts are generally available. The VC industry targets companies at an
earlier stage of development, many of which have large technological and operational risks. These
differences mean that some questions, particularly those about portfolio company capital structure,
are important for PE investors but not applicable to VCs.




                                                   8
After developing a draft survey, we circulated it among academics and VCs for comments. We asked
four VCs to complete the draft survey and provide feedback. We also sought the advice of sociology
and marketing research experts on the survey design and execution. As a result of these efforts, we
made numerous changes to the format, style, and language of the survey questions. We then asked a
further eight VCs to take our updated survey and provide further comments. This yielded a smaller
round of modifications, primarily language changes to avoid ambiguity, which gave us the final version
of the survey. We have made the final version of the survey available as an Internet Appendix.

We designed the survey in Qualtrics and solicited all survey respondents via e-mail. We composed
our mailing list from several sources. First, we used alumni databases from the Chicago Booth School
of Business, Harvard Business School, and the Stanford Graduate School of Business. The MBA
graduates of these schools constitute a disproportionate number of active VCs. A study by Pitchbook
identified those schools as three of the top four MBA programs supplying VCs, with more than 40%
of all VCs holding an MBA from one of the three schools.2 We identified alumni related to VC and
manually matched them to VentureSource, a database of VC transactions maintained by Dow Jones.
We ended up with the 63, 871, and 540 individuals from Chicago, Harvard, and Stanford business
schools, respectively. Second, we used data from the Kauffman Fellowship programs for their VC
alumni. After excluding the alumni of the three business schools, we were left with a sample of 176
people. Third, the National Venture Capital Association (NVCA) generously gave us a list of their
individual members, yielding an additional 2,679 individuals. Finally, we manually gathered contact
information of VCs in the VentureSource database. After again excluding the people we previously
contacted, we arrived at a sample of 13,448 individuals. We believe our survey encompassed the
overwhelming majority of individuals that are active VCs in the U.S. as well as a large number of
non-U.S. VCs.

Our sample construction raises a number of issues that we attempted to address in the survey design.
One potential issue is that some of the people we emailed may not be VCs. Our first criteria for
deciding whether an individual is a venture capitalist was his or her identification as such either by
the organizations that provided us their information or by VentureSource. We emailed only people
  2
    Refer to http://pitchbook.com/news/articles/harvard-4-other-schools-make-up-most-mbas-at-pe-vc-firms for more
details.




                                                       9
that we positively identified as VCs. For example, we only e-mailed Stanford Graduate School of
Business alumni who were listed as VCs by Stanford or were listed in VentureSource.

As a further filter, at the start of the survey, we asked respondents whether they worked at an
institutional VC fund, a corporate VC vehicle, or neither. Supporting the notion that our initial
screen worked well, 94% of our respondents identified as working at either a corporate VC vehicle or
an institutional VC fund. The remainder were angel investors or worked at PE funds or family offices.
For our analyses, we exclude any respondent who did not identify as working at an institutional
VC fund. While the identification is self-reported, in conjunction with other questions in the survey
that are specific to the VC industry, we are confident that our final survey respondents are active
in the VC industry. We also acknowledge that there may be a grey area that separates late-stage
growth-equity VC funds and some PE funds. We do not believe that this distinction in any way
affects our analysis.

A second potential issue is that our population of VCs is not representative of the broader industry.
In our case, there are several factors that may bias our sample toward more successful VCs. First, a
disproportionate part of our sample comes from Kauffman Fellows and the graduates of top MBA
programs. Due to our connections, we explicitly targeted Chicago, Harvard, and Stanford MBAs
and Kauffman Fellows. We received very high response rates from those groups. Given that these
are top MBA programs and the Kauffman Fellows program is extremely selective, these alumni are
likely more successful than average VCs.3 Second, we are vulnerable to self-selection bias because we
include only the VCs who respond to the survey. This is, of course, an issue with any survey of this
kind. Both of these factors likely bias our final sample toward more successful VCs. To the extent
that we want to learn about best practices in the VC industry, this bias supports our investigation.
Taking into account our relatively high response rate and our large final sample, our results reflect
the views of a sample of VCs that may be somewhat more successful than representative.

We administered the survey between November 2015 and March 2016 in several waves using the
Qualtrics website. To encourage responses, we sent the survey requests to the alumni from those
of us on the faculty of their respective schools. To encourage completion, we offered those who
   3
     Gompers, Mukharlyamov and Xuan (2016) show that VCs who are graduates from top colleges and top MBA
schools perform better.




                                                  10
completed the survey an early look at the results. The survey is fully confidential and all the reported
results are based on the aggregation of many responses to exclude the possibility of inferring any
specific respondent’s answers. However, the survey was not anonymous and we matched the survey
respondents with VentureSource and other data sources. Our final response rates are 37%, 19%,
24%, 35%, 7%, and 4%, respectively, from the Chicago, Harvard, Stanford, Kauffman, NVCA, and
VentureSource samples.

As expected, we had a large response rate from the schools and organization (Kauffman) with which
we are connected. Our response rate from the schools is substantially larger than the rate reported
in a number of other surveys of similar nature. While the response rate from VentureSource is low,
we do not know to what extent the contact info given in VentureSource is current and how many
of these investors are VCs.4 Many individuals in this sample are also outside the U.S., where our
English-language reach and familiarity recognition would be lower.

Our survey has up to 71 questions (depending on the survey path chosen) and testing showed it
took 25–35 minutes to complete. Actual time spent by respondents matched our tests: the median
time for completion was 24 minutes, with the 25th and 75th percentiles being 13 and 58 minutes.
This suggests that most survey respondents took the survey seriously and devoted reasonable effort
towards it. Although we had relatively low explicit incentives for completing the entire survey, we
enjoyed high completion rates (57–78%) from our alumni groups. Completion rates among the NVCA
and the VentureSource samples were lower (42–56%); however, those that did complete the survey
spent as much time on the survey as our other samples.



2.2    Summary statistics


In this section, we provide the summary statistics of the sample and introduce the subsamples that we
use in our analyses. We received 1,110 individual responses overall. Table 2 describes how we filter the
responses. We exclude the 225 (20%) of respondents who did not self-report they were institutional
VCs.5 These investors are corporate VCs, PE investors, or angel investors; we exclude them in order
    4
      Indeed, 25% of our VentureSource contact emails bounced, and among the emails that did not we received a number
of replies that they are not active VCs but either PE investors, past VCs, or other investment professionals.
    5
      Institutional VC firms are independent partnerships that manage VC funds on behalf of investors. VCs who manage
funds are traditionally called general partners (GPs) and their investors—limited partners (LPs).


                                                         11
to focus on institutional VC investors. The second part of Table 2 reports the composition of the
final sample of institutional VC respondents. We use all answers from our 885 institutional VC
respondents, with 565 (64%) of those respondents finishing the survey. Only 11 (1%) respondents in
this sample indicated they completed the survey on behalf of someone else.

In a number of cases, we received multiple responses from different individuals at the same VC firm
and so we have only 681 VC firms for our 885 respondents. For VC firms where we had more than one
respondent, we averaged the responses of the individual VCs to get a firm-level response. We were
able to match 89% of the firms to VentureSource. Overall, 76% of the top 50 VC firms completed
our survey, including all but one of the top 10 firms, when ranked by number of investments in
VentureSource. (Using other measures such as the VC firms with the most IPOs produces similar
results.) It is worth noting that this means that a large fraction of the most successful VC firms are
in our sample. This is consistent with the possibility, noted earlier, that our sample is biased towards
more successful firms. It also is worth adding that our sample includes respondents from venture
capital firms accounting for 63% of US assets under management, according to VentureSource data.

Our first questions were general questions about the VC firm’s investment focus. We asked respondents
whether their firms specialized in a specific stage of company, industry, or geography. If respondents
answered yes to any of these possibilities, they were asked follow-up questions on specific specialization
strategies. For example, participants who indicated that their funds targeted companies at specific
stages were asked a follow-up question on which stages they specialized on (seed, early, mid, late).
Firms can specialize along multiple dimensions at the same time. Among our sample of institutional
VC firms, 62% specialize in a particular stage, 61% in a particular industry, and 50% in a particular
geography. Of those specializing in a particular investment stage, 245 (36%) firms indicated that they
invest only in seed- or early-stage companies (“Early” subsample), while 96 (14%) indicated that they
invest only in mid- or late-stage companies (“Late” subsample). Given that stage of development
should play a large role in the decision-making process of VC firms, our subsequent analysis breaks
out these two subsamples and compares their survey responses.

While VC firms invest in a variety of industries, two industries stood out in the survey. 135 (20%)
VC firms specialize in what can be broadly defined as the IT industry, including Software, IT,
and Consumer Internet (“IT” subsample). 88 (13%) of VC firms specialize in healthcare (“Health”


                                                   12
subsample). To capture any important distinctions that exist between these two industries, these
subsamples include VC firms that specialize only in these industries. If we include firms that list IT
as one of their industries of investment, the fraction increases from 20% to 41%. For healthcare, the
fraction goes up from 13% to 31%. Most VC firms invested in 3 or more industries, and a full 39%
were generalists without an industry focus.

Respondents were less likely to identify a specific geographic focus. For example, only 12% of VC
firms indicated that they focus on California. The geographical expansion and globalization of the
VC industry is a relatively recent phenomenon and our results suggest that most VC firms reach a
number of geographical markets at the same time. Chen, Gompers, Kovner and Lerner (2010) show
that VCs tended to open up new offices in the late 1990s and 2000s. Bengsston and Ravid (2015)
find that California-based VCs write more entrepreneur-friendly contracts.

To explore whether geography matters, we took where the venture capitalist lived from their LinkedIn
profile. If that was not available, we used the location of VC’s firm headquarters. Out of our sample,
28% of VCs are based in California (“CA” subsample); 40% in other U.S. locations, mostly in the
Eastern U.S. (“OthUS” subsample); and 37% outside of the U.S. (“Foreign” subsample).6 These
splits allow us to compare whether the perceived differences between the U.S. East Coast and West
Coast have any foundation, as well as whether U.S. and global VC firms operate in a similar manner.

Table 3 provides descriptive statistics on the sample of institutional VC firms represented by our
survey respondents. The variable Fund Size measures the capital under management of the current
fund of each VC firm. The average fund size is $286 million while the median is $120 million (as
reported by the respondents). These are quite similar to the average of $370 million and median of
$100 million for the matched VentureSource sample. Self-reported fund sizes, therefore, are very close
to those in VentureSource. Median size is substantially smaller than average size, because several VC
firms run very large funds. It is possible that fund size influences venture capitalist investing and
decision-making. Accordingly, we divide the sample into two subsamples—VC firms with fund sizes
below (“Small” subsample) and above median (“Large” subsample).
   6
     These percentages do not add to 100% as a small number of VCs work internationally for U.S. VC firms. The
internationally-based VCs will have their responses aggregated under a separate, foreign VC firm.




                                                     13
The median VC firm in our sample was founded in 1998, invested in 73 deals over its history, and
raised its most recent fund in 2012 as a follow on to a 2008 vintage fund. The average number of
deals is considerably larger at 169, indicating that some VC firms make a disproportionate number of
investments. The median average round size is $11 million. Consistent with VC firms being relatively
small organizations, the average VC firm has 4 investing GPs; the 25th and 75th percentiles having 3
and 5 GPs respectively. The majority of the responding firms are U.S.-based and make investments
primarily in the U.S.

Our sample contains both very successful and less successful VC firms. Our median VC reports being
in the top quartile. As reported performance appears unreliable, we use VentureSource data on IPOs
to provide an objective split on performance. We take firms with at least 10 exits in the past 10 years
in VentureSource and split those firms based on whether they have more than the median IPO rate
(“High IPO” subsample) or less (“Low IPO” subsample). Table 1 provides an overview of how these
subsamples are constructed.

Table 4 reports the positions our respondents hold in their VC firms. The bulk of our respondents are
active decision makers within their firms. Most of our sample, 82%, are partners, including Managing
Partners, General Partners, and Partners. Partners are generally senior positions with influence on
all aspects of investing including investment decisions. Managing Partners are typically a firm’s most
senior partners who coordinate operations and manage the firm’s non-investment business. Managing
Directors can be either General Partners or junior Partners, while Principals and Associates typically
have more junior status. Finally, Venture Partners are typically not employees of VC firms, but either
play the role of advisers or participate in the VC firm activities on a deal by deal basis.

This table and all following tables report averages and their standard errors (in parentheses). Most
tables report means and test differences between subsamples using a two sample, equal variance
t-test.7 IT firms are compared to Health firms; Early to Late; High IPO to Low IPO rate; CA
to OthUS; and Fgn to all other. ∗ ,           ∗∗ ,   and   ∗∗∗ denote   significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively. For some highly skewed variables, we report medians and test using bootstrapped
    7
      We use a t-test for all variables rather than using a binomial test for categorical variables. In practice, there is no
difference between the two for our sample sizes.




                                                              14
standard errors to get better power. Table 35 describes the correlation between indicator variables
for the different subsamples.



3     Results

3.1   Deal sourcing


The ability to generate a pipeline of high-quality investment opportunities or proprietary deal flow is
considered an important determinant of success in the VC industry. Prior research has emphasized the
importance of deal sourcing (and selection) in generating returns. Sørensen (2007) uses a two-sided
matching algorithm to argue that deal sourcing and selection are more important drivers of returns
(60%) than VC value-added (40%). He is not able to distinguish between sourcing and selection.
Similarly, Gompers et al. (2010) show that high performing VC firms are more likely to invest
in successful serial entrepreneurs who have higher investment success rates. Sahlman (1990) also
emphasizes the importance of having a wide funnel to find promising investments. We, therefore,
asked VCs to identify how they source their investments.

Table 5 reports that most VC deal flow comes from the VCs’ networks in some form or another. Over
30% are generated through professional networks. Another 20% are referred by other investors and
8% from a portfolio company. Almost 30% are proactively self-generated. Only 10% come inbound
from company management. These results emphasize the importance of active deal generation. Few
VC investments come from entrepreneurs who beat a path to the VC’s door without any connection.
Finally, a recent trend in the VC industry is so-called quantitative sourcing, where VCs quantitatively
analyze data from multiple sources to identify opportunities likely to have high returns, and seek out
investment positions in those firms. Few VC firms in our sample use this method.

There is some variation across stage. Later-stage investors are more likely to generate investment
opportunities themselves compared to early-stage investors. Early-stage investors are more likely to
be referred deals by portfolio companies and to invest in deals that are inbound from management. At
the same time, there is little difference between the pipeline sources of high and low IPO subsamples,
suggesting that the type of the sources is less important than sometimes claimed. It may also be


                                                  15
the case that the critical differentiating factor for the high IPO firms is the quality of their referral
network.

VCs use a multi-stage selection process to sort through investment opportunities. Most potential
deals pass through each stage of this so-called deal funnel before being funded by the firm. When a
member of the VC firm generates a potential deal, the opportunity is first considered by the individual
originator (who could be a senior partner, a junior partner, an associate, or an affiliated member
such as a venture partner). If the investment shows potential from this initial evaluation, a VC firm
member will meet the management of the potential portfolio company at least once. If the VC firm
member continues to be impressed with the potential investment, he or she will bring the company to
other members of the VC firm for the review. Potential investments will then be scrutinized and
evaluated by the other partners at the VC firm, a process that can itself take many forms. After this
approval, the other partners at the VC firm will start a more formal process of due diligence (e.g.,
calling more references, conducting industry analysis and peer comparison). If the company passes
the due diligence process, the VC firm will present a term sheet that summarizes the VC’s conditions
for a financing. Finally, if the company agrees to the term sheet, legal documents are drafted, a letter
of commitment is signed, and the deal closes.8

While the sequence and the structure of the process outlined above is fairly well known, little is
known about the relative proportion of opportunities that make it to any one particular stage of
the deal funnel. Table 6 provides a breakdown of the deal funnel process. The median firm closes
about 4 deals per year. The table shows that for each deal in which a VC firm eventually invests or
closes, the firm considers roughly 100 potential opportunities. At each subsequent stage a substantial
number of opportunities are eliminated. One in four opportunities lead to meeting the management;
one-third of those are reviewed at a partners meeting. Roughly half of those opportunities reviewed
at a partners meeting proceed onward to the due diligence stage. Conditional on reaching the due
diligence stage, startups are offered a term sheet in about a third of cases. Offering a term sheet does
not always result in a closed deal, as other VC firms can offer competing term sheets at the same
time. Similarly, legal documentation and representations/warranties may cause deals to fall apart
between agreeing to a term sheet and the deal closing. The fact that VC firms on average offer 1.7
  8
    Depending upon the VC market cycle, some stages of the deal funnel may not be utilized. For example, VC firms
occasionally provide “preemptive” term sheets even before formal due diligence, in an attempt to lock-up a deal.



                                                       16
term sheets for each deal that they close, a close rate of roughly 60%, suggests that a meaningful
number of opportunities that ultimately receive funding are not proprietary.

Late-stage VC firms offer 50% more term sheets per closed deal than early-stage firms, suggesting
more proprietary deal flow for early-stage deals and greater competition for late-stage deals. This
is consistent with early-stage opportunities requiring greater understanding of the technology and
development timelines as well as with late-stage opportunities having longer track records and being
easier to evaluate.

Large VC firms and more successful VC firms have more meetings with management and initiate due
diligence on more firms per closed deal than their smaller or less successful peers. This is consistent
with larger VC firms employing more junior partners in sourcing and evaluating deals.

The IT and Health subsamples also show substantial differences in deal funnel. While an IT VC
firm considers 151 deals for each investment made, a healthcare VC firm considers only 78. These
difference persist through the first part of the funnel, with IT firms meeting the management of twice
as many companies, although after that stage, the funnel narrows with both types VC firms. This is
consistent with larger fixed costs of evaluating investments in the healthcare industry. It may also
reflect the smaller universe of potential healthcare entrepreneurs given the specific domain expertise
and regulatory knowledge in the sector.



3.2   Investment selection


Our results show that VCs start with a pipeline of hundreds of potential opportunities and narrow
those down to make a very small number of investments. In this section, we examine the factors in
their deal selection process. Kaplan and Strömberg (2004) examine venture capitalist investment
memoranda that describe the investment theses and risks of their investments. They find that VCs
focus on the quality of the management team, the market or industry, the competition, the product
or technology and the business model in their investment decisions. However, investment memoranda
do not rank the importance of the different criteria.




                                                  17
Previous empirical and anecdotal evidence suggests that VCs have different views on how to select
investments. Some focus more heavily on the management team (the jockey) while other focus more
heavily on the business: the product, technology, and business model (the horse). Kaplan et al.
(2009) examine the IPO prospectuses of successful VC-backed companies and find that the horse
(product, technology, or business model) is more stable in these companies than the jockey (i.e., the
management team).

We asked the respondents to identify the factors that drive their selection decisions and then rank
them according to their importance. The top panel of Table 7 reports the percentage of respondents
who mentioned each factor as important. The bottom panel reports the percentage of respondents
who ranked each factor as the most important.

Table 7 shows that the VCs ranked the management team (or jockey) as the most important factor.
The management team was mentioned most frequently both as an important factor (by 95% of the
VC firms) and as the most important factor (by 47% of the VCs). Business (or horse) related factors
were also frequently mentioned as important with business model at 83%, product at 74%, market
at 68%, and industry at 31%. The business related factors, however, were rated as most important
by only 37% of the firms. Fit with the fund was of some importance. Roughly one-half of the VCs
mentioned it as important and 14% mentioned it as the most important. Valuation and VCs’ ability
to add value were each mentioned by roughly one-half of the VCs, but were viewed as most important
by fewer than 3% overall.

There is some interesting cross-sectional variation. The team is more likely to be the most important
factor for early-stage investors and IT investors than for late-stage and healthcare investors. Business
related factors are more likely to be most important for late-stage and healthcare investors. Indeed,
the Health subsample is the only one that did not overwhelmingly chose team as the most important
factor. Valuation is also more important, both as a factor and as the most important factor for
late-stage investors.

Comparing our results to Gompers et al. (forthcoming), late-stage funds are more similar to private
equity funds in that they see valuation and business model as highly important. Larger funds and
more successful firms care more about valuation and product and less about fit or ability to add



                                                  18
value. This valuation result is arguably consistent with Hsu (2004), who shows that high quality VC
firms are able to win deals despite submitting term sheets at a lower valuation.

Table 7 indicates that the management team is consistently the most important factor VCs consider
when they choose portfolio companies. Table 8 reports the qualities that are important in a
management team. Ability is the most mentioned factor, with more than two thirds of VCs claiming it
is important. Industry experience is the second most mentioned factor, with passion, entrepreneurial
experience, and teamwork filling out the ranking.

California VC firms are more likely to say passion is important and less likely to say experience is
important. Healthcare VCs, again, differ from other VCs in placing industry experience as by far the
most important quality and ranking passion as substantially less important.

We ask several additional questions about deal selection. Table 9 tabulates these results. VCs devote
substantial resources to conducting due diligence on (i.e., investigating) their investments. The
average deal takes 83 days to close; the average firm spends 118 hours on due diligence over that
period and the average firm calls 10 references. The deal period and time on due diligence are shorter
for early-stage, IT, and California firms; and longer for late-stage, healthcare, and non-California
firms. Late-stage firms also call more references (13 on average) than early-stage firms (8).



3.3   Valuation


Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) describe the typical terms used in VC financing and the theoretical
rationales for many of them. U.S. VC firms typically invest using convertible preferred equity, which
entitles them to cash flow rights and an ownership stake in the company. An important result of the
negotiation is the size of the ownership stake or, equivalently, the implied valuation the financing
terms create.

In the survey, we asked several questions about how VC firms approach valuation and how term
sheets are structured. We began by asking the VCs which factors are important in deciding on the
valuation they offer a company. Table 10 indicates that exit considerations are the most important
factor, with 86% of respondents identifying it as important and 46% as the most important factor.



                                                 19
Comparable company valuations rank second (with 80% rating it important and 29% most important)
and desired ownership third (with 63% rating it important and 18% most important).

The fourth factor, competitive pressure exerted by other investors was markedly less important (with
43% rating it important and only 3% most important), although the IT VC firms thought it was more
important than their peers in the healthcare VC firms. This suggests that the IT VC industry is
more competitive than the healthcare VC industry and may give the founders of IT companies better
bargaining power. This interpretation also is consistent with the steeper term sheet competition in
Table 6. Whether it is seen in the resulting payoff structure of both industries should be an important
subject for future research.

Late-stage VC firms found exit considerations to be more important, likely because it is easier to
predict by this stage of company development what shape the exit would take. Early-stage firms
cared more about desired ownership.

We also asked VCs whether they set valuations using investment amount and target ownership. The
third panel of Table 10 shows that roughly half of investors use this simple decision rule. There
is a large discrepancy, however, between early-stage and late-stage investors. Early-stage VCs are
more likely to set the valuation using investment amount and target ownership. This result is
consistent with early-stage companies having little information and high uncertainty that leads VCs
to simplify their valuation analysis. Late-stage VCs have more information and can potentially use
more sophisticated methods to arrive at the implied valuation.



3.3.1   Valuation methods


Finance theory teaches that investment decisions should be made using a discounted cash flow
(DCF) or net present value (NPV) analysis with a cost of capital based on the systematic risk of
the opportunity. Graham and Harvey (2001) find that 75% of CFOs always or almost always use
such analyses, using them as often as internal rates of return. Gompers et al. (forthcoming) find
that private equity investors rely primarily on internal rates of return and multiples to evaluate
investments. They infrequently use NPV methods. We repeated the analyses in those two papers by
asking our respondents a number of questions on the financial and valuation metrics they use.


                                                  20
First, we asked how important financial metrics such as internal rate of return (IRR), cash-on-cash
return, or NPV are in making investment decisions. The results in Table 11 are similar to those for
private equity investors. The most popular methods are cash-on-cash multiples (63% of the sample)
and IRR (42% of the sample). Only 22% of the VC investors use NPV methods. While this level
of reliance on NPV would be considered low for mature firms, the response rate does go against
anecdotal evidence that VCs rarely use NPV to evaluate investments. One possibility is that our
sample has a substantial proportion of MBA graduates who were exposed to modern finance valuation
methods in school.

At the same time, consistent with the anecdotal evidence, 9% of the VCs claim that they do not
use any financial metrics. This is particularly true for early-stage investors, 17% of whom do not
use any financial metrics. Furthermore, almost half of the VCs, particularly the early-stage, IT, and
smaller VCs, admit to often making gut investment decisions. We also asked respondents whether
they quantitatively analyze their past investment decisions and performance. This is very uncommon,
with only one out of ten VCs doing so.

Table 12 reports the required IRRs and cash-on-cash multiples for those respondents who indicated
they used them. The average required IRR is 31%, which is higher than the 20 to 25% IRR reported
by private equity investors in Gompers et al. (forthcoming). Late-stage and larger VCs require lower
IRRs of 28% to 29% while smaller and early-stage VCs have higher IRR requirements. The same
pattern holds in cash-on-cash multiples, with an average multiple of 5.5 and a median of 5 required
on average, with higher multiples for early-stage and small funds. The source of these differences is
not entirely clear. Early-stage funds may demand higher IRRs due to higher risk of failure, i.e., they
may calculate IRRs from “if successful” scenarios. Small funds potentially demand higher IRRs due
to capital constraints or the fact that they invest in, on average, earlier stage deals.

We also asked about adjustments to required IRR or cash-on-cash multiples. Table 13 shows that
64% of VC firms adjust their target IRRs or cash-on-cash multiples for risk. This is a smaller fraction
than the 85% reported by Gompers et al. (forthcoming) for private equity firms, but still the majority
of VC firms make an adjustment for risk. The Late, Large, and Health subsamples are likely to adjust
for risk, consistent with the notion that these samples use more technical methods in analysing their
investments. Roughly half of the VCs adjust for time to liquidity in making a decision. This may


                                                   21
simply reflect that longer-term investments require a larger multiple because of the greater elapsed
time at a given return. Alternatively, it may reflect that fact that VC funds have a limited lifetime
(typically ten years with three years of automatic extensions). At the same time, 23% of VCs use the
same metric for all investments, indicating that they do not make any adjustments for risk, time to
liquidity or industry conditions.

Adjusting IRRs or cash-on-cash multiples for risk is potentially consistent with the result in finance
theory that an investment’s discount rate should increase with the investment’s systematic or market
risk. However, the discount rate should not include idiosyncratic or non-market risk. Table 14 explores
this further. Only 5% of VCs discount systematic risk more. The majority (78%) either do not adjust
for risk or treat all risk the same, with an additional 14% discounting idiosyncratic risk more.

Overall, VC firms as a class appear to make decisions in a way that is inconsistent with predictions
and recommendations of finance theory. Not only do they adjust for idiosyncratic risk and neglect
market risk, 23% of them use the same metric for all investments, even though it seems likely that
different investments face different risks.



3.3.2   Forecasting


To use financial metrics such as IRR or cash-on-cash multiples, investors need to forecast the
underlying cash flows. Accordingly, we asked VCs whether they forecast company cash flows and if
so for how long. Table 15 reports that 20% of VC firms do not forecast company cash flows. This
seems surprisingly high, but matches the responses on other questions that suggest that many VCs
rely on more qualitative factors.

The prevalence of non-forecasting varies by the stage of company the firm targets. While only 7% of
late-stage funds do not forecast, fully 31% of the early-stage VCs report that they do not forecast
cash flows. Again, this is clearly not consistent with finance theory. On the other hand, this is
understandable given that early-stage funds often invest in companies that are far from generating
profit and, sometimes are not even generating revenue. For such early-stage companies, forecasting
and discounting cash flows arguably would generate very imprecise estimates of value.




                                                  22
For funds that do forecast, the median forecast period is 3 to 4 years. This is a shorter period than the
5-year forecast period used by virtually all private equity firms in Gompers et al. (forthcoming). The
median and average are greater for late-stage suggesting that as uncertainty declines, VC investors
behave more like PE investors.

We also ask about the extent to which portfolio companies meet their projections. VCs report that
fewer than 30% of the companies meet projections. Consistent with greater uncertainty, early-stage
VCs report their companies are less likely to meet projections (26%) than do late-stage VCs (33%).
This also potentially provides an explanation for the higher IRR requirements for early-stage VCs—the
higher IRR offsets greater (total) risk.



3.3.3   Unicorns


We included a set of questions regarding the valuations of so-called unicorns, companies with implied
valuations above $1 billion. Table 16 shows both whether a VC has invested in a unicorn and the
respondent’s investment opinion on whether unicorns are overvalued. Just under 40% of our sample
VCs claim to have invested in a unicorn. This suggests that a meaningful fraction of our sample has
been able to invest in high profile, successful companies. The VCs in IT and with higher IPO rates
are more likely to have done so.

Interestingly, 91% of our sample believe that unicorns are overvalued—either slightly or significantly.
There are no significant differences across our different subsamples. Perhaps more importantly, there
is no difference between VCs who invested in unicorns and VCs who did not. This lack of a difference
is particularly encouraging to us because it suggests that the VCs answered this question honestly.
One might have expected investors in unicorns to have been more favourable about unicorn valuations
than non-investors.




                                                   23
3.4     Deal structure


3.4.1    Contractual features


Valuation is one part of the negotiation process that takes place between new VC investors, existing
investors, and founders. Another part is the sophisticated contract terms—cash flow, control,
liquidation rights—that VCs negotiate in their investments. Kaplan and Strömberg (2003, 2004)
describe these terms and examine the role that internal risk, external risk, and execution risk play in
determining the contractual provisions seen in VC contracts.

Accordingly, we survey our VCs about the terms they use and the negotiability of those terms. Table
17 reports the average frequency with which VCs use each of several terms. The presence of each
of these terms favors the investor over the entrepreneur so a higher number suggests the investor
favorable or investor friendly provision is more common. Pro-rata rights, which give investors the
right to participate in the next round of funding, are used in 81% of investments. Participation
rights that allow VC investors to combine upside and downside protection (so that VC investors first
receive their downside protection and then share in the upside) are used on average 53% of the time.
Redemption rights give the investor the right to redeem their securities, or demand from the company
the repayment of the original amount. These rights are granted 45% of the time.

Other investor-friendly terms are less common. Cumulative dividends accumulate over time and
effectively increase the investor’s return (and sometimes ownership stake) upon eventual liquidation.
Our VC firms use this provision 27% of the time. Full-ratchet anti-dilution protection gives the
VC more shares (compared to the more standard choice of weighted-average dilution protection)
if the company raises a future round at a lower price; this investor protection is used 27% of the
time. Finally, liquidation preference gives investors a seniority position in liquidation. Typically,
investors receive a one-times (1X) liquidation preference in which an investor’s seniority extends
to their original investment. Any preference above that can be thought of as being more investor
friendly. We asked how frequently a 2-times (2X) or greater liquidation preference is used, in which
the investor receives back twice their original investment amount before common shareholders receive
anything. Such a provision is used 19% of the time.




                                                  24
There is substantial cross-sectional variation in the use of terms. The terms in the IT sector are more
founder friendly than in the healthcare sector. The IT VC firms are less likely to use participation
rights and less likely to use 2X or higher liquidation preferences. Given that the results of Table 10
suggest that the IT sector is more competitive, the founder friendliness of the terms is understandable.
Consistent with Bengtsson and Ravid (2015), California VC firms also use more founder friendly
terms. They are less likely to use participation rights, redemption rights, or cumulative dividends
than the VC firms elsewhere in the U.S. Again, this may reflect a more competitive VC industry in
CA, although it may also reflect a difference in approaches.

To understand which of the terms might vary with deal characteristics, we asked the survey respondents
to indicate the terms that they are more or less flexible with when negotiating new investments. In
addition to the terms in Table 17, we asked about option pools, vesting, control rights, and ownership.
An option pool is a set of shares set aside to compensate and incentivize employees, vesting refers to
a partial forfeiture of shares by the founders or employees who leave the company, and control rights
include features such as board seats, veto rights on important decisions, and protective provisions.
For each term, respondents rated their flexibility on that term on a scale of not at all flexible, not very
flexible, somewhat flexible, very flexible, and extremely flexible. We assigned a score to each choice,
with −100 being investor friendly (Not at all flexible) and +100 being founder friendly (Extremely
flexible). A value of 0 means that on average survey respondents were somewhat flexible about the
term.

Table 18 reports the results. Overall, the VCs are not overly flexible on their terms with most terms
scoring between not very flexible and somewhat flexible. Only one term, dividends, scores appreciably
above somewhat flexible (at +28). Consistent with previous work, this suggests that the terms are
very important to the VCs.

The least negotiable provisions for VC firms in descending order are pro-rata rights, liquidation
preference, anti-dilution protection, valuation, board control, and vesting. The provisions on which
VCs are most flexible (again, in descending order, the first being most flexible) are dividends,
redemption rights, option pool, investment amount, and participation. In Kaplan and Strömberg
(2004), liquidation preferences and board control are related to internal and external risk; anti-dilution
protection is related to only internal risk; and redemption rights are related to external risk. We


                                                    25
cautiously interpret these results as showing that that VCs are somewhat less flexible on terms that
manage internal risk.

Healthcare VC firms are substantially less flexible on many features than the IT VC firms. In addition
to participation that we already discussed, the Health subsample is less flexible on control, valuation,
ownership stake, and dividends. The board control provisions are particularly striking, because
Healthcare VC firms rank them as their least flexible term, while the IT VC firms rank control in the
middle of their concerns. This is consistent with Healthcare companies being more susceptible to
internal risks (e.g., project selection).



3.4.2   Syndication


VC firms routinely invest with other firms as part of a syndicate. Hochberg et al. (2007) suggest
a number of reasons for the prevalence of syndication, such as reputation, capital constraints of
investors, and risk sharing. Lerner (1994) argues that the ability to monitor (from industry expertise
or proximity to the company) is related to syndication.

Accordingly, we asked the VCs several questions to learn more about the syndication process. In
our sample, Table 19 indicates that syndication is common with the average VC firm syndicating an
average 65% of its investments. Early-stage and healthcare VC firms are more likely to syndicate
their deals.

Consistent with Hochberg et al. (2007) and Lerner (1994), complementary expertise, capital constraints,
and risk sharing are all important factors in syndication decisions with more than 70% of the VCs
mentioning each of them. Among these, capital constraints are the most important for 39%, followed
by complementary expertise by 33% and risk sharing by 24%. Syndication in order to participate in
future deals and, arguably, build reputation, is perceived as substantially less important, with only
29% of VC firms identifying it as important and only 3% as most important.

There is some cross-sectional variation within our sample as well. Early-stage VC firms care more
about risk sharing, possibly because of the greater uncertainty at the early-stage, and also care more
about the ability to participate in future deals. Healthcare VC firms also identify risk sharing as



                                                  26
more important factor than their counterparts in the IT sample. Not surprisingly, small VC firms
believe that capital constraints play a more prominent role than do large VC firms. They also believe
that participation in future deals is more important.

We next asked about the factors that were important in choosing a syndicate partner. Table 20
shows that expertise and past shared successes were identified as important (73% and 65%) and
most important (25% and 28%) by the most VCs. Reputation, track record and capital also were
consistently important for roughly 60% of the VCs, but they were less likely to be most important
at 16%, 16% and 9%, respectively. Expertise is relatively more important in healthcare (versus IT)
while geography and social connections are identified as less important. This suggests that in the IT
sector, clustering and network effects play a larger role, while in the healthcare sector, product or
technology rather than location is more influential.



3.5   Post-investment value-added


Previous empirical work finds evidence that VCs add value to their portfolio companies after they invest.
Hellmann and Puri (2002) show that VCs are essential to the professionalization of startups. Lerner
(1995) examines how VCs are influential in the structuring of the boards of directors. Amornsiripanitch
et al. (2016) show that VCs are critical aids in hiring outside mangers and directors. In their study of
investment memoranda, Kaplan and Strömberg (2004) find that VCs expect to add value when they
make their investment decision. In this section, we attempt to add to the previous work by asking
the VCs to describe their post-investment deal management, particularly activities in adding value to
portfolio companies.

We asked several questions about how VCs interact with their portfolio companies after investment.
Previous research as well as anecdotal evidence suggests that VCs are actively involved in managing
their portfolio companies, frequently meeting with their portfolio companies’ management and playing
an important role in critical hiring and strategic decisions.

Table 21 reports that VCs (say they) interact frequently with their portfolio companies. Over 25%
interact multiple times per week and an additional one-third interact once a week, indicting that
60% of VCs report interacting at least once per week with their portfolio companies. Fewer than


                                                   27
one-eighth report interacting once per month or less. The high level of involvement is consistent with
previous work and anecdotal evidence.

There is little variation across subsamples. Whatever their specialization, VCs are actively involved
in their portfolio companies. This lack of observed difference is arguably a surprising result. It is
not consistent with early-stage and late-stage VCs being fundamentally different in the frequency of
interactions. It seems plausible that companies at all stages of development go through a number of
critical phases (raising funding, exiting, hiring senior executives, deciding on a strategic plan) that
require the regular involvement of investors. It is also likely that VCs monitor their investment closely,
because even late-stage VC companies have a relatively high rate of failure.

Table 22 looks more deeply into VC interaction with their portfolio companies by asking what type
of value-add VCs provide. 87% of VCs are involved in strategic guidance of their portfolio companies.
This is not surprising because many VCs serve either as board members or board observers. 72% of VC
firms help their companies connect with investors in future rounds. Again, this is not surprising given
that they are investors and are presumably knowledge about the VC industry and other investors.
Perhaps more surprisingly, 69% of the VCs say they help their companies connect to customers and
65% of VC firms say they provide operational guidance. Both of these responses suggest a substantial
and more day-to-day practical involvement. Finally, the VCs say they also help in hiring—both board
members (58%) and employees (46%).

Across subsamples, connecting to investors is more important for early-stage investors. This is
consistent with more competition for late-stage deals (as suggested in Table 6). Early-stage VCs and
California VC are more likely to help with hiring employees. California VCs also are more involved in
helping companies find customers, potentially because they work in a cluster-like environment that
makes them better connected along the whole of the supply chain of their ecosystem.

We also gave respondents an opportunity to describe their activities, if they felt the offered list was
not sufficient. One out of five respondents used this opportunity. The more frequently mentioned
activities were related to liquidity events (introducing a company to acquirers or connecting with
investment banks, helping with M&A), mentoring, fund raising, product development (including help




                                                   28
with global expansion, technical advice, operating procedures) and various board service activities
(such as board governance).

Overall, the results in Table 22 suggest that VCs are not passive investors and actively add value to
their portfolio companies. The results add to and confirm the previous work by suggesting that VCs
take an active role in customer introductions and operational guidance in addition to providing help
with hiring and strategy.



3.6   Exits


Because VCs invest in private companies through funds that are usually structured as ten-year
vehicles and because VCs receive their profit share or carry only when they return capital to their
investors, the timing and type of exit is critical to VC investment success. Gompers (1996) shows that
achieving a successful IPO exits is useful for VC firms to establish a reputation and raise new capital.

Accordingly, we surveyed our VCs on their exits. Table 23 reports the statistics on exit outcomes
experienced by their portfolio companies. Overall, the average VC firm reports that 15% of its exits
are through IPOs, 53% are through M&A, and 32% are failures. These rates of successful outcomes
may seem high to some readers. It is possible, however, that some M&A events are disguised failures
in the VC industry and so statistics on M&A may not be a valid measure of success. A major concern
with any survey is that survey respondents would bias their responses by overweighting positive
outcomes and underweighting less favorable outcomes. Indeed, many of our respondents said that
their previous fund was well above the median in terms of performance. On the other hand, our
respondents gave what appear to be honest answers to the question of unicorn valuation.

To ascertain whether there is an appreciable bias, we compare the survey responses with data matched
from VentureSource. We report two different measures of exits from VentureSource, the first using
data over the past 10 years, spanning approximately respondents’ previous fund and the second
including the full sample data for the VC firm. The responses of our respondents and the data from
VentureSource exhibit a high degree of correspondence although our respondents report a slightly
higher percentage of IPOs and a lower percentage of failures, suggesting that our survey respondents
are more successful than a random sampling of VCs. Survey respondents report that on average, 15%


                                                  29
of the deals end in IPO, while the IPO rate in VentureSource data is 13%. Moreover, the subsample
results are also consistent. For example, the Health and IT subsamples report 23% and 13% of IPOs,
respectively. The matched VentureSource samples report similar values of 22% and 12%. Several VCs
explicitly said that many of their M&A are disguised failures, supporting the difficulty of interpreting
the M&A results from available datasets on VC outcomes. Overall, these results again suggest that
the VC are, on average, reporting their experience truthfully.9

Empirically, it is difficult to measure the exact returns earned by VC firms using commercially
available datasets, because doing so requires data on deal structure and eventual exits that are usually
not available. To estimate the return distribution, we asked our survey respondents to describe the
distribution of exit multiples that they experienced on their past investments. Table 24 indicates that,
on average, 9% of exits have a multiple greater than 10 and a further 12% have a multiple between
5 and 10. There are more high multiple exits than IPOs (and not all IPOs result in such high exit
multiples). On the other end of the spectrum, 24% of outcomes are reported to have lost money
in a cash-on-cash calculation. 19% had an exit multiple of between 1 and 2, likely losing money
on a present value basis. These results confirm the wide dispersion of financial outcomes for VC
investments and further supports the notion that there is a wide distribution among of outcome for
M&A transactions. Early-stage and high IPO firms report higher multiples. The IT, Large, and CA
subsamples have higher dispersion of outcomes, with more of the least and most successful outcomes.



3.6.1      Relative importance of deal sourcing, investment selection, and value-add


The previous sections have shown that VCs exert effort and expend resources on deal sourcing,
deal selection and post-investment value-add. As mentioned earlier, Sørensen (2007) estimates the
contribution of VC value-add to be 40% and that of deal sourcing and selection combined to be 60%.
In Table 25, we ask the VCs both to assess and rank the importance of deal sourcing, deal selection,
and VC value-add in contributing to value creation.

The top part of Table 25 indicates that a majority of VCs believe that all three are important for
value creation with selection and value-add being important for roughly 85% and deal flow for 65%.
  9
      If we use only the matched VentureSource sample, the self-reported exit outcomes are virtually the same.




                                                          30
The bottom part of Table 25 shows that deal selection emerges as the most important of the three
with 49% of VCs ranking it most important. Value-add follows with 27% and deal flow lags with 23%.

Selection is assessed as the most important factor for all of the sub-categories, and is relatively more
important for the high IPO firms. Deal flow is relatively more important for IT investors, large
investors, and less successful investors, while value-add is relatively more important for small investors,
health investors, and foreign investors.

Overall, consistent with Sørensen (2007), deal sourcing and selection combined are more important
than value-add, but all three factors are important. Different from and extending Sørensen (2007),
we distinguish between sourcing and selection, and find a great role for selection.



3.6.2   Sources of success and failure


At this point, we have reported survey results on how VCs source, select, add value to and exit
deals. For our final questions regarding investments, we asked the VCs to identify the most important
drivers of both their successful and failed investments. Tables 26 and 27 show the results for success
and failure, respectively. For both success and failure, the team is by far the most important factor.
Recalling our discussion of horse vs. jockey, the jockey is very important in the minds of VCs. 96%
(92%) of VC firms identified team as an important factor and 56% (55%) identified team as the
most important factor for success (failure). Team was the most important for all subsamples, but
particularly important for early-stage and IT VCs.

Not one of the business-related factors—business model, technology, market and industry—was rated
most important by more than 10% of the VCs for success or failure. Cumulatively, the four were
rated most important by 25% for success and 31% for failure. The business-related factors were more
important for later-stage and, particularly, for healthcare VCs.

Timing and luck also mattered with the two being rated as the most important factor by 18% of the
VCs for success and 12% for failure. The California VCs viewed themselves as being more dependent
on luck than the VCs elsewhere. Interestingly, very few of the VCs ranked the board of directors
or their own contribution as the most important factor for either success or failure. We view this,



                                                    31
again, as encouraging that the VCs answered truthfully. One might have expected self-serving or
even simply overconfident VCs to rank their own contributions more highly.

The emphasis on team as critical for success is consistent with the VCs emphasis on team in selection.
The lack of emphasis on own contribution appears less consistent with the finding in Table 25 that
27% of the VCs view value-add as the most important source of value creation. One way to reconcile
these is that some value-add takes the form of choosing or putting in the right management team as
well as improving the business model or picking the right time to invest.

In comparing success and failure, there are no significant differences in the most important factors. The
VCs do mention several factors more often as having importance in success rather than failure—luck
(26%), timing (18%), own contribution (17%) and technology (14%).



3.7   Internal organization of VC firms


Relatively little is known about the internal organization of VC firms. Because VCs are often secretive
about the internal workings of their firms, we took this opportunity to ask how their firms are
organized and structured.

Table 28 confirms the perception that institutional VC firms are small organizations. The average
VC firm in our survey employs 14 people, 5 of whom are senior partners in decision-making positions.
VC firms have relatively few junior deal-making personnel (about one for each two partners) and an
average of 1.3 venture partners. Others working at VC firms would include entrepreneurs in residence,
analysts (likely at larger firms), back-end office personnel, and logistics personnel. Note that, as Table
4 shows, 82% of our survey respondents are senior partners, so our survey oversamples VCs in senior
decision-making positions.

Early-stage VC firms are smaller and, in particular, have fewer junior deal-making personnel than
late-stage VC firms. Late-stage firms deal with companies that require more due diligence and have
more information available for analysis; the presence of associates and similar personnel makes sense.
Healthcare VC firms are more likely to have venture partners, potentially because healthcare and
biotech industry investments require specialized skills that non-full time venture partners (such as



                                                   32
medical school faculty) can provide. Other than for these two subsamples, the composition of VC
firms is relatively uniform—although larger and more successful funds are, of course, larger.

Table 29 considers the extent to which VCs specialize. In 60% of the funds, partners specialize in
different tasks; this degree of specialization is relatively uniform across subsamples. If respondents
answered that partners in their VC firm specialized in different tasks, we asked what the respondents
specialized in. Respondents could choose more than one option. Table 29 shows that for those firms
with specialized partners, 44% of respondents are generalists, 52% of respondents are responsible
for fund raising, and 55% and 53% of them are also responsible for deal making and deal sourcing,
respectively. Interestingly, almost a third of respondents also reported that they specialized in helping
start-ups with networking activities. IT VC firms are much more likely to have partners that specialize
in fund raising. Partners of large VC firms are less likely to specialize in sourcing deals, making deals,
or networking.

We also asked the survey respondents to describe the structure of their normal work-week.10 In Table
30, respondents report working an average of 55 hours per week. VCs spend the single largest amount
of time working with their portfolio companies, 18 hours a week. This may not be surprising given
that the typical respondent holds 5 board seats. Healthcare VCs spend somewhat more time helping
their companies than do IT VCs even though they serve on slightly fewer boards. Overall, the amount
of time and involvement in portfolio companies is consistent with their reporting that they add value
and help their companies.

Consistent with the importance of sourcing and selecting potential deals, sourcing is the second most
important activity, at 15 hours per week. Networking is the fourth most important at 7 hours per
week. It seems likely that networking is useful both for deal sourcing and for adding value to portfolio
companies (through hiring and referring customers). VCs, then spend the bulk of their time on
sourcing and value-adding activities. In addition, VCs spend about 8 hours per week on managing
their firms and about 3 hours each week managing LP relationships and fundraising.

The next set of questions address the compensation and investment practices in the VC industry.
In the VC industry, attribution of success is easier to accomplish, because in most cases a specific
partner is responsible for each portfolio company. Alternatively, firms may choose to compensate
  10
       Hoyt., Gouw and Strebulaev (2012) and Rust (2003) present some earlier evidence on VCs’ time use.


                                                          33
partners on firm success to encourage cooperation among partners and to remove incentive to do
suboptimal deals in order to get credit for them. We therefore were interested in whether partners
of VC firms are compensated depending on individual investments. Table 31 reports that 74% of
VC firms compensate their partners based on individual success. Interestingly, more successful and
larger VC firms are less likely to allocate compensation based on success. Table 31 also reports that
in 44% of VC firms partners receive an equal share of the carry, particularly partners in early-stage
funds. Similarly, in 49% of the firms, partners invest an equal share of fund capital. These results
are arguably consistent with firms balancing the need for cooperation against the need to reward
individual success.

Overall, VC firms appear to approach compensating their partners in different ways. This has not
been explored in detail in academic research. Agency theories suggest that compensation structures
should have a substantial impact on effort provision and eventual outcomes. Chung et al. (2012) show
that explicit pay for performance incentives exist in VC and PE, but there are also powerful implicit
incentives that come with the need to raise additional capital in the future. Our results suggest that
studying the relationship between compensation of VCs, their contracts with their investors (LPs),
and outcomes would be an interesting avenue for further research.

We conclude this section by asking reporting how funds make initial investment decisions.11 Table 32
reports that roughly half the funds—particularly smaller funds, healthcare funds and non-California
funds—require a unanimous vote of the partners. An additional 7% of funds require a unanimous
vote less one. Roughly 20% of the funds require consensus with some partners having veto power.
Finally, 15% of the funds require a majority vote. Understanding whether these decision rules affect
investment and partnership success is also an interesting avenue for future research.



3.8      Relationships with limited partners


We conclude our survey by asking a set of questions concerning the interactions VCs have with their
limited partner investors similar to the questions in Gompers et al. (forthcoming). Table 33 indicates
that the VCs believe that cash-on-cash multiples and net IRR are important benchmark metrics
 11
      Not reported, most firms use the same decision process for subsequent financing rounds.




                                                          34
for most LPs, at 84% and 81%, respectively. These benchmarks are considered the most important
benchmarks by, respectively, 52% and 32% of the VCs. While performance relative to VC funds (for
60%) and relative to the S&P 500 (for 23%) are presumed to be important, they are considered most
important by fewer than 10% of the sample VCs. These results are present for all of the subsamples.
Accordingly, we conclude that the VCs strongly believe that LPs are primarily motivated by absolute
rather than relative performance. This finding is similar to the result in Gompers et al. (forthcoming)
for private equity investors, but inconsistent with finance theory where LPs should allocate their
money to funds according to their relative performance expectations. It is also inconsistent with the
common practices in the mutual fund industry, in which relative performance is paramount.

Table 34 shows the net IRR and cash-on-cash multiple marketed by VC firms to their LPs. The mean
net IRR is consistently about 24%, with a median of 20% for all subsamples. This IRR is similar to
the IRR private equity investors market to their LPs in Gompers et al. (forthcoming). Interestingly,
this is not consistent with VC investments being riskier than private equity investments. At the same
time, VC firms also market on average a 3.5 cash-on-cash multiple to their LPs, with early-stage VCs
marketing more at 3.8 and late-stage VCs marketing less at 2.8. While these multiples are slightly
higher than those for the private equity investors, the difference from private equity investments is
likely explained by the longer duration of VC investments.

Finally, Table 34 asks VCs about their expectations for future performance. The vast majority (93%)
of VCs expect to beat the public markets; 71% of VCs are similarly optimistic about the VC industry
as a whole. While this may seem to be unreasonably optimistic, Harris et al. (2016) find that the
average VC fund has performed at least as well as the S&P 500 for most vintages since 2004.



4    Conclusion

In this paper, we seek to better understand what VCs do and, potentially, why they have been
successful. We survey 885 institutional VCs at 681 firms to learn how they make decisions across eight
areas: deal sourcing; investment selection; valuation; deal structure; post-investment value-added;
exits; internal VC firm issues; and external VC firm issues.




                                                  35
The paper makes a contribution in two broad areas. First, our results add to the literature on
the nature of and relative important of deal sourcing, deal selection, and value-added. VCs devote
substantial resources to all three. While deal sourcing, deal selection, and post-investment value-added
all contribute to value creation, deal selection emerges as the most important of the three for the
sample VCs with roughly one-half of the VCs ranking it as such.

Furthermore, a recurring theme in the survey—particularly in deal selection and in understanding
ultimate deal outcomes—is the pre-eminence of team in the mind of the VCs. In selecting investments,
the VCs consider the management team as more important than business related characteristics
such as product and technology. They also view the team as more important than the business to
the ultimate success or failure of their investments. The survey, therefore, finds that VCs, on the
whole, favor the jockey view of VC investing over the horse view. This result is consistent with the
results in Bernstein, Korteweg and Laws (2015). A potential future use of this data set is to see if
cross-sectional variation in that view predicts future VC performance.

Second, we find little evidence that VCs use the net present value or discounted cash flow techniques
taught at business schools and recommended by academic finance. This contrasts with the results in
Graham and Harvey (2001) for CFOs, but is more similar to the results for private equity investors in
Gompers et al. (forthcoming). Like the private equity investors, the VCs rely on multiples of invested
capital and internal rates of return. Unlike the CFOs and private equity investors, a meaningful
minority of VCs do not forecast cash flows at all.




                                                  36
References

Amornsiripanitch, N., Gompers, P. and Xuan, Y. (2016), More than money: Venture capitalists on
  boards. Harvard Business School Working Paper.

Baker, M. and Gompers, P. A. (2003), ‘The determinants of board structure at the initial public
  offering’, Journal of Law and Economics 46(2), 569–598.

Baron, J. N. and Hannan, M. T. (2002), ‘Organizational blueprints for success in high-tech start-
  ups: Lessons from the Stanford project on emerging companies’, California Management Review
  44(3), 8–36.

Barry, C. B., Muscarella, C. J., Peavy, J. W. and Vetsuypens, M. R. (1990), ‘The role of venture
  capital in the creation of public companies: Evidence from the going-public process’, Journal of
  Financial Economics 27(2), 447–471.

Bengtsson, O. and Ravid, S. A. (2015), ‘Location specific styles and us venture capital contracting’,
  Quarterly Journal of Finance 5(03), 1550012.

Bernstein, S., Korteweg, A. G. and Laws, K. (2015), ‘Attracting early stage investors: Evidence from
  a randomized field experiment’, Journal of Finance, Forthcoming pp. 14–17.

Brav, A. and Gompers, P. A. (1997), ‘Myth or reality? The long-run underperformance of initial
  public offerings: Evidence from venture and nonventure capital-backed companies’, The Journal of
  Finance 52(5), 1791–1821.

Brav, A., Graham, J. R., Harvey, C. R. and Michaely, R. (2005), ‘Payout policy in the 21st century’,
  Journal of Financial Economics 77(3), 483–527.

Chen, H., Gompers, P., Kovner, A. and Lerner, J. (2010), ‘Buy local? The geography of venture
  capital’, Journal of Urban Economics 67(1), 90–102.

Chung, J.-W., Sensoy, B. A., Stern, L. and Weisbach, M. S. (2012), ‘Pay for performance from future
  fund flows: The case of private equity’, Review of Financial Studies 25(11), 3259–3304.

Cumming, D. (2008), ‘Contracts and exits in venture capital finance’, Review of Financial Studies
  21(5), 1947–1982.

                                                 37
Cumming, D. J. and MacIntosh, J. G. (2003), ‘A cross-country comparison of full and partial venture
  capital exits’, Journal of Banking & Finance 27(3), 511–548.

DaRin, M. and Phalippou, L. (2014), There is something special about large investors: Evidence
  from a survey of private equity limited partners. TILEC Discussion Paper.

Gompers, P. A. (1996), ‘Grandstanding in the venture capital industry’, Journal of Financial
  Economics 42(1), 133–156.

Gompers, P. A., Mukharlyamov, V. and Xuan, Y. (2016), ‘The cost of friendship’, Journal of Financial
  Economics 119(3), 626–644.

Gompers, P., Kaplan, S. N. and Mukharlyamov, V. (forthcoming), ‘What do private equity firms say
  they do?’, Journal of Financial Economics .

Gompers, P., Kovner, A., Lerner, J. and Scharfstein, D. (2010), ‘Performance persistence in en-
  trepreneurship’, Journal of Financial Economics 96(1), 18–32.

Gompers, P. and Lerner, J. (2001), The Money of Invention, Harvard Business School Press, Boston.

Gorman, M. and Sahlman, W. A. (1989), ‘What do venture capitalists do?’, Journal of Business
 Venturing 4(4), 231–248.

Gornall, W. and Strebulaev, I. A. (2015), The economic impact of venture capital: Evidence from
  public companies. Stanford University Working Paper.

Graham, J. R. and Harvey, C. R. (2001), ‘The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence
  from the field’, Journal of Financial Economics 60(2), 187–243.

Graham, J. R., Harvey, C. R. and Rajgopal, S. (2005), ‘The economic implications of corporate
  financial reporting’, Journal of Accounting and Economics 40(1), 3–73.

Harris, R., Jenkinson, T. and Kaplan, S. (2016), ‘How do private equity investments perform compared
  to public equity?’, Journal of Investment Management 14(3), 1–24.

Harris, R. S., Jenkinson, T. and Kaplan, S. N. (2014), ‘Private equity performance: What do we
  know?’, The Journal of Finance 69(5), 1851–1882.


                                                38
Hellmann, T. and Puri, M. (2000), ‘The interaction between product market and financing strategy:
  The role of venture capital’, Review of Financial Studies 13(4), 959–984.

Hellmann, T. and Puri, M. (2002), ‘Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up firms:
  Empirical evidence’, The Journal of Finance 57(1), 169–197.

Hochberg, Y. V., Ljungqvist, A. and Lu, Y. (2007), ‘Whom you know matters: Venture capital
  networks and investment performance’, The Journal of Finance 62(1), 251–301.

Hoyt., D., Gouw, T. and Strebulaev, I. (2012), A day in the life of a venture capitalist. Teaching
  Note.

Hsu, D. H. (2004), ‘What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation?’, The Journal of
  Finance 59(4), 1805–1844.

Kaplan, S. N. and Lerner, J. (2010), ‘It ain’t broke: The past, present, and future of venture capital’,
  Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 22(2), 36–47.

Kaplan, S. N. and Schoar, A. (2005), ‘Private equity performance: Returns, persistence, and capital
  flows’, The Journal of Finance 60(4), 1791–1823.

Kaplan, S. N., Sensoy, B. A. and Strömberg, P. (2009), ‘Should investors bet on the jockey or the
  horse? Evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans to public companies’, The
  Journal of Finance 64(1), 75–115.

Kaplan, S. N. and Strömberg, P. (2001), ‘Venture capitals as principals: Contracting, screening, and
  monitoring’, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 91(2), 426–430.

Kaplan, S. N. and Strömberg, P. (2003), ‘Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An
  empirical analysis of venture capital contracts’, The Review of Economic Studies 70(2), 281–315.

Kaplan, S. N. and Strömberg, P. E. (2004), ‘Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence from
  venture capitalist analyses’, The Journal of Finance 59(5), 2177–2210.

Lerner, J. (1994), ‘The syndication of venture capital investments’, Financial Management pp. 16–27.

Lerner, J. (1995), ‘Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms’, The Journal of Finance
  50(1), 301–318.

                                                  39
Rust, C. (2003), The role of human capital assessment (HCA) in venture capital due diligence. Masters
  Thesis for the Engineering Management College of Engineering and Applied Science.

Sahlman, W. A. (1990), ‘The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations’, Journal of
  Financial Economics 27(2), 473–521.

Sørensen, M. (2007), ‘How smart is smart money? A two-sided matching model of venture capital’,
 The Journal of Finance 62(6), 2725–2762.




                                                 40
                             Table 1: Description of Subsamples

This table describes the subsamples used in our main analysis.

 Subsample           Description

 Stage: Early        Respondents who answered that they specialize on seed- or early-stage companies
                     and do not specialize on mid- or late-stage companies.

 Stage: Late         Respondents who answered that they specialize on mid- or late-stage companies
                     and not on seed- or early-stage companies.

 Industry: IT        Respondents who answered that they specialize in the IT, software, or consumer
                     internet industries and do not specialize in any industry other than those three.

 Industry: Health    Respondents who answered that they specialize on the healthcare industry and
                     do not specialize in any other industry.

 IPO Rate: High      Respondents whose VC firm has at least 10 exited investments over the past
                     ten years and has an above-median % IPO rate for those investments.

 IPO Rate: Low       Respondents whose VC firm has at least 10 exited investments over the past
                     ten years and has a below-median % IPO rate for those investments.

 Fund Size: Large    Respondents who reported an above-median committed capital for their current
                     fund. If a response was not given, the fund size from VentureSource was used.

 Fund Size: Small    Respondents who reported a below-median committed capital for their current
                     fund. If a response was not given, the fund size from VentureSource was used.

 Location: CA        Respondents whose LinkedIn profile indicates they are located in California. If
                     this information is not available, the firm headquarters location is used.

 Location: OthUS     Respondents whose LinkedIn profile indicates they are located in the U.S. but
                     not in California. If this information is not available, the firm headquarters
                     location is used.

 Location: Fgn       Respondents whose LinkedIn profile indicates they are located outside of the
                     U.S. If this information is not available, the firm headquarters location is used.




                                                  41
                          Table 2: Number of VC Firm Respondents
Count of survey respondents and the firms that they belong to. The first panel looks at all surveys,
the second panel looks at our main sample of completed surveys from respondents at institutional
VC funds.
                                                              Respondents Firms
                                                                 N     %    N  %
               Total responses                                1110    100 860 100
               Respondents at institutional VC firms           885     80 681 79
               Respondents in corporate VC                     141     13 120 14
               Respondents at other investors                   84      8 82 10

               Sample: Respondents at institutional VC funds
               Total responses                               885       100   681 100
               Completed surveys                             565        64   470 69
               Surveys completed on behalf of someone else    11         1    11   2
               Matched to VentureSource                      789        89   589 86
               Specialize on an investment stage             524        59   423 62
                   Seed- or early-stage                      401        45   325 48
                   Only seed- or early-stage                 292        33   245 36
                   Mid- or late-stage                        217        25   192 28
                   Only mid- or late-stage                   108        12    96 14
               Specialize on an investment industry          527        60   417 61
                   Software, IT, Consumer Internet           347        39   282 41
                   Only Software, IT, Consumer Internet      159        18   135 20
                   Healthcare                                260        29   210 31
                   Only Healthcare                           113        13    88 13
                   Financial                                 109        12   100 15
                   Energy                                     76         9    69 10
               Specialize on an investment geography         404        46   342 50
                   California                                 92        10    80 12
                   U.S. East Coast                            81         9    71 10
                   Other                                      75         8    66 10
               Location of venture capitalist                885       100   681 100
                   California                                258        29   190 28
                   Other U.S.                                340        38   275 40
                   Foreign                                   287        32   249 37




                                                 42
                         Table 3: Statistics on VC Firm Respondents
A number of statistics on our sample of firms. For each measure, we report the number of firms we
have that measure for and the across-firm averages, quartiles, and standard deviations. The symbol VS
denotes data from Dow Jones VentureSource.
                                           N Mean Pct 25 Median Pct 75 Std Dev
          Fund characteristics
          Fund Size ($m)                  557    286         58      120     286      775
          Fund Size ($m)VS                471    370         34      100     253     1335
          Vintage year                    547   2012       2011     2014    2015        4
          Vintage yearVS                  477   2010       2008     2012    2014        5

          Firm characteristics
          Year foundedVS                  508   1998       1994     2000    2005       10
          Number of partners              602    4.8        3.0      4.0     5.0      6.1
          Number of investmentsVS         484    169         28       73     196      261
          Average round size ($m)VS       467     33          6       11      19      178
          % of exited investments IPOVS   482     12          0        8      20       14
          % of investments exitedVS       484     71         58       77      89       22
          % US dealsVS                    484     66         17       91     100       41
          Intend to raise another fund    436     84        100      100     100       36
          Previous fund decile            280    7.8        7.0      8.0     9.0      1.9
          Previous fund vintage year      329   2007       2005     2008    2011        5




                              Table 4: Job Title of Respondents
The percentage of respondents who report having each job title.
                             Stage          Industry      IPO Rate Fund Size           Location
                       All Early Late      IT Health      High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Managing Partner      20   21    19       20      18       23 23      22    19 19         21 20
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 4)      ( 3)    ( 4)     ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 3)
  General Partner       22   21    22       27      20       25 22      24    20 26         23 17∗∗
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 4)      ( 4)    ( 4)     ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 2)
  Partner               40   39    40       40      43       34 34      32∗∗∗ 45∗∗∗ 37      36 45∗∗
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 5)      ( 4)    ( 5)     ( 4) ( 3)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 3)
  Venture Partner        3    3     2        2∗      6∗       5    4     4     3     4       3    3
                       ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)      ( 1)    ( 3)     ( 2) ( 1)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)
  Principal              3    3     3        2       1        2    2     3     2     4       3    2
                       ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)      ( 1)    ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)
  Associate              5    5     6        3       4        3    6     5     5     3       5    6
                       ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)      ( 1)    ( 2)     ( 1) ( 2)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)
  Managing Director      2    1     2        1       2        2    1     3∗    1∗ 3          1    2
                       ( 0) ( 1) ( 1)      ( 1)    ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1)  ( 1) ( 0) ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)
  Other                  7    6     6        5       5        7    8     7     6     5∗      8∗   7
                       ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)      ( 2)    ( 2)     ( 2) ( 2)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)      ( 2) ( 2)
  Number of responses 623 244      96     133       88     148 164    265 340 178         245 224




                                                 43
                                  Table 5: Sources of Investments
  The percentage of deals closed in the past twelve months originating from each source.
                                     Stage       Industry         IPO Rate Fund Size         Location
                               All Early Late IT Health           High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
Inbound from management         10   12∗    7∗ 10        13          11 10      10   10 10         9 11
                               ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 1)      ( 2)        ( 2) ( 1)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 2)
Referred by portfolio company    8    9∗∗ 4∗∗ 10          6           6    8     7    8    7       7 10∗
                               ( 1) ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)      ( 2)        ( 1) ( 1)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)
Referred by other investors     20   22    17 21         18          21 20      18   21 18        22 18
                               ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 2)      ( 3)        ( 2) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)
Professional network            31   31    25 27         29          30 33      31   31 33        30 29
                               ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)      ( 4)        ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 2) ( 2)
Proactively self-generated      28   23∗∗∗ 42∗∗∗ 28      30          29 28      30   27 27        28 29
                               ( 1) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 3)        ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)
Quantitative sourcing            2    1     3     3       2           3∗   1∗    2    2    2       2    2
                               ( 0) ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)      ( 1)        ( 1) ( 1)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)
Number of responses           446 202      72 107        68        114 122    200 246 123       179 160



          Table 6: Potential Investments that Reach Each Stage of the Deal Funnel
  The first panel shows the median number of potential investments reaching each stage of consideration,
  among investments considered in the past twelve months. The second panel reports the average
  number of deals at each stage for every closed deal.
                                  Stage      Industry     IPO Rate Fund Size         Location
                           All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Median number of potential investments reaching stage
  Considered              200 250∗∗∗100∗∗∗275       185 300∗∗ 150∗∗ 200 180 200         150 200
                           (20) (32) (27) (55) (53) (40) (43) (30) (28) (31)            (34) (42)
  Met management            50    60    40 100∗∗∗ 40∗∗∗ 60       40    50   44    90∗∗∗ 45∗∗∗ 50
                           ( 1) (14) ( 7) (13)       ( 8) (17) ( 5) (11) ( 4) (18)       ( 5) ( 4)
  Reviewed with partners    20    20    20    30∗∗∗ 15∗∗∗ 23     20    20   20    23      20   20
                           ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 4)       ( 3) ( 3) ( 2)   ( 1) ( 2) ( 3)     ( 2) ( 2)
  Exercised due diligence   12    13    12    15      10    17∗∗ 11∗∗ 15∗∗ 10∗∗ 15        12   10∗∗∗
                           ( 2) ( 2) ( 3) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)   ( 2) ( 1) ( 2)     ( 2) ( 1)
  Offered term sheet       5.5   5.0 6.0 7.0∗       5.0∗ 5.0 5.5      5.5  5.0 6.0       5.0 5.5
                          (0.4) (0.6) (0.5) (0.8) (0.5) (0.6) (0.5) (0.5) (0.4) (0.6) (0.5) (0.4)
  Closed                   4.0   4.0 3.0 5.0∗∗∗ 3.0∗∗∗ 3.5 4.0        3.5  4.0 4.0       3.5 4.0
                          (0.3) (0.5) (0.2) (0.3) (0.4) (0.5) (0.5) (0.5) (0.4) (0.6) (0.5) (0.4)

  Potential investments reaching stage per closed deal
  Considered per close      101 119        94 151∗∗     78∗∗   123 107          111        96 115      87 110
                             ( 7) (14) (17) (22) (10)           (15) (13)        (11)     ( 9) (15)   ( 9) (12)
  Met management              28    34     24     50∗   20∗      45∗ 23∗          37∗∗     21∗∗ 46∗∗∗ 22∗∗∗ 23
                             ( 3) ( 7) ( 3) (13)       ( 3)     (11) ( 2)        ( 6)     ( 2) (10)   ( 2) ( 2)
  Reviewed with partners      10    11     10     13    11       15∗     8∗       11       10    10    12     8
                             ( 1) ( 3) ( 2) ( 5)       ( 3)     ( 4) ( 1)        ( 1)     ( 2) ( 1)   ( 3) ( 1)
  Exercised due diligence 4.8      4.6 4.4 5.3         5.3      6.3∗∗∗ 4.1∗∗∗    5.3∗     4.4∗ 5.2    5.4 3.7∗∗∗
                           (0.3) (0.4) (0.4) (0.6) (0.6)       (0.7) (0.4)      (0.4)    (0.4) (0.3) (0.5) (0.4)
  Offered term sheet        1.7    1.5∗∗∗ 2.3∗∗∗ 1.6   1.6      1.8 1.7          1.7      1.7 1.7     1.8 1.6
                           (0.1) (0.0) (0.2) (0.1) (0.1)       (0.1) (0.1)      (0.1)    (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1)

  Number of responses       442    195    76   106        64   117    119       205      238   125   180   155



                                                     44
                     Table 7: Important Factors for Investment Selection
The percentage of respondents who marked each attribute as important (top) and as most important
(bottom) when deciding whether to invest.
                               Stage        Industry IPO Rate Fund Size      Location
                         All Early Late     IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Important factor
  Team                    95     96    93 96          91       96      96      96        95      97      93      96
                         ( 1)   ( 1) ( 3) ( 2)       ( 3)     ( 2)    ( 1)    ( 1)      ( 1)    ( 1)    ( 2)    ( 1)
  Business Model          83     84    86 85∗         75∗      79      82      83        82      83      84      81
                         ( 2)   ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)       ( 4)     ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 2)      ( 2)    ( 3)    ( 2)    ( 3)
  Product                 74     81∗∗∗ 60∗∗∗ 75       81       75      74      71∗       77∗     81∗∗    71∗∗    73
                         ( 2)   ( 2) ( 5) ( 4)       ( 4)     ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 3)      ( 2)    ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 3)
  Market                  68     74    69 80∗∗∗       56∗∗∗    68      74      67        70      76∗∗    66∗∗    64
                         ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 3)       ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 3)      ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 3)
  Industry                31     30    37 33∗∗        19∗∗     25      29      30        31      31      37      24∗∗∗
                         ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)       ( 4)     ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 3)      ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 3)
  Valuation               56     47∗∗∗ 74∗∗∗ 54∗      42∗      59∗     49∗     59∗       52∗     63      60      46∗∗∗
                         ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)       ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)      ( 3)    ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 3)
  Ability to add value    46     44    54 41          45       39∗     48∗     41∗∗      51∗∗    46      48      46
                         ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)       ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)      ( 3)    ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 3)
  Fit                     50     48    54 49          40       38∗∗    50∗∗    46∗∗      54∗∗    48      51      50
                         ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)       ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)      ( 3)    ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 3)
  Most important factor
  Team                   47       53∗∗ 39∗∗ 50∗∗∗     32∗∗∗ 44          51      44        50 42         44 55∗∗∗
                        ( 2)     ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)      ( 5) ( 4)         ( 4)    ( 3)      ( 3) ( 4)     ( 3) ( 3)
  Business model         10        7∗∗∗ 19∗∗∗ 10       6     7          11      10        10 11         11    8
                        ( 1)     ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 2)         ( 2)    ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)     ( 2) ( 2)
  Product                13       12     8 12∗∗∗      34∗∗∗ 18∗         11∗     15∗       10∗ 13        14 11
                        ( 1)     ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)      ( 5) ( 3)         ( 2)    ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)     ( 2) ( 2)
  Market                  8        7    11 13∗         6∗ 11            10      11∗∗∗      5∗∗∗ 15∗∗∗    5∗∗∗ 5
                        ( 1)     ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 2)         ( 2)    ( 2)      ( 1) ( 3)     ( 1) ( 2)
  Industry                6        6     4     3∗      9∗    6           3       7∗        4∗ 7          7    2∗∗
                        ( 1)     ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)      ( 3) ( 2)         ( 1)    ( 2)      ( 1) ( 2)     ( 2) ( 1)
  Valuation               1        0∗∗∗ 3∗∗∗ 0∗        2∗    3           1       2         1     2       1    1
                        ( 0)     ( 0) ( 2) ( 0)      ( 2) ( 1)         ( 1)    ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1)
  Ability to add value    2        2     2     1       1     2           2       1         2     1       2    2
                        ( 1)     ( 1) ( 2) ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)         ( 1)    ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1)
  Fit                    14       13    13     9       9     9          12      10∗∗      17∗∗ 10∗      16∗ 15
                        ( 1)     ( 2) ( 4) ( 2)      ( 3) ( 2)         ( 2)    ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)     ( 2) ( 2)
  Number of responses 558       241     90 129        86 138          156     251       310 161       218 199

                     Table 8: Important Qualities in a Management Team
The fraction of respondents who marked each quality as among the most important qualities in a
management team.
                                  Stage     Industry IPO Rate Fund Size                                Location
                            All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small                         CA OthUS Fgn
Industry experience          60   58    55 54∗∗∗ 77∗∗∗ 62 61         60   60                        53∗∗    65∗∗ 61
                            ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)    ( 4) ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3)                      ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Entrepreneurial experience 50     48    44 49       55   48 53       47   52                        46      55 48
                            ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)    ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3)                      ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Ability                      67   65∗∗ 76∗∗ 69      59   70 63       69   64                        72      69 62∗∗
                            ( 2) ( 3) ( 4) ( 4)    ( 5) ( 3) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3)                      ( 3)    ( 3) ( 3)
Teamwork                     50   52    50 47       49   42∗∗ 54∗∗ 50     51                        47      52 50
                            ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)    ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3)                      ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Passion                      54   59    53 60∗∗∗ 42∗∗∗ 55 57         53   56                        58∗     49∗ 58
                            ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)    ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3)                      ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Number of responses        561 242      91 132      87 139 157     250 314                        161     220 202


                                                    45
                             Table 9: Investment Process Questions
This table summarizes the responses to a number of questions on VC firm’s investment process.
                                 Stage       Industry IPO Rate Fund Size          Location
                           All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
 Days to close deal         83   73∗∗∗106∗∗∗ 59∗∗∗ 98∗∗∗ 83 83       80   86 65∗∗      83∗∗ 96∗∗∗
                           ( 3) ( 3) (14) ( 3)      ( 5) ( 8) ( 4)  ( 5) ( 3) ( 8)    ( 3) ( 4)
 Number of responses      523 223      83 120        84 133 142    231 294 144       206 192

 Hours on due diligence 118           81∗∗∗184∗∗∗ 76∗∗∗ 120∗∗∗ 101 121                125 111 81∗∗            129∗∗ 132
                         ( 9)        ( 6) (39) ( 7) (10) (10) (23)                    (16) ( 9) ( 8)          (17) (14)
 Number of responses    433         194     68 95        72 116 115                   201 232 127             178 144

 References called          10         8∗∗∗ 13∗∗∗ 10         11   12 11                 12∗∗∗ 9∗∗∗ 11           11    9∗∗
                           ( 0)      ( 0) ( 1) ( 1)         ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)             ( 1) ( 0) ( 1)          ( 1) ( 1)
 Number of responses      439       195     70 100           71 117 116               204 235 126             180 150




                Table 10: Important Factors for Portfolio Company Valuation
The percentage of respondents who marked each factor as important (top) and as most important
(bottom) for setting valuation.
                                   Stage          Industry IPO Rate Fund Size      Location
                             All Early Late       IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
Important factor
Anticipated exit              86       81∗∗ 91∗∗ 80∗∗∗        93∗∗∗    90∗     83∗       87       84 85          85     87
                             ( 1)     ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)         ( 3)     ( 2)    ( 3)      ( 2)     ( 2) ( 3)      ( 2)   ( 2)
Comparable companies          80       77    84 81            79       77      82        83       78 78          81     81
                             ( 2)     ( 3) ( 4) ( 3)         ( 4)     ( 3)    ( 3)      ( 2)     ( 2) ( 3)      ( 3)   ( 3)
Competitive pressure          43       47    39 55∗∗∗         27∗∗∗    45      44        52∗∗∗    37∗∗∗ 49       42     41
                             ( 2)     ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)      ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)      ( 3)   ( 3)
Desired ownership             63       75∗∗∗ 46∗∗∗ 70         67       59      62        62       65 65          62     63
                             ( 2)     ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)      ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)      ( 3)   ( 3)
Most important factor
Anticipated exit              46       38∗∗∗ 58∗∗∗ 34∗∗       50∗∗      46      49       45        47 48         43      49
                             ( 2)     ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)      ( 4)    ( 4)     ( 3)      ( 3) ( 4)     ( 3)    ( 3)
Comparable companies          29       30    31 35            29        28      24       31        27 25∗        33∗     26
                             ( 2)     ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)      ( 4)    ( 3)     ( 3)      ( 2) ( 3)     ( 3)    ( 3)
Competitive pressure           3        2     2     2          1         5       3        4∗∗∗      1∗∗∗ 5        3       1∗
                             ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)         ( 1)      ( 2)    ( 1)     ( 1)      ( 1) ( 2)     ( 1)    ( 1)
Desired ownership             18       27∗∗∗ 5∗∗∗ 24          15        14      19       16        19 19         15      20
                             ( 2)     ( 3) ( 2) ( 4)         ( 4)      ( 3)    ( 3)     ( 2)      ( 2) ( 3)     ( 2)    ( 3)
Number of responses         544      236     87 126           85      135     151      245       302 155       218     192

Set valuation using invest- 49         63∗∗∗ 29∗∗∗ 59∗∗∗ 41∗∗∗ 47 53                     48   50 55∗∗∗ 40∗∗∗ 54
ment and ownership           ( 2)     ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)     ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)                 ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3)
Number of responses         544      237     89 129       87 135 150                   243 304 156     216 194

Target ownership stake        23       20∗∗∗ 27∗∗∗ 21         23   22 23                 25∗∗∗ 22∗∗∗ 21∗         23∗ 25∗∗∗
                             ( 1)     ( 1) ( 2) ( 1)         ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)             ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)          ( 1) ( 1)
Number of responses         495      215     76 120           86 118 144               217 281 135             194 184




                                                       46
                 Table 11: Financial Metrics Used to Analyze Investments
 The percentage of respondents who use each financial metric to analyze investments.
                                   Stage        Industry    IPO Rate Fund Size        Location
                            All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
None                          9    17∗∗∗ 1∗∗∗ 13         7    10  12     9   10    11       8   10
                            ( 1) ( 2) ( 1) ( 3)        ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)     ( 2) ( 2)
Cash-on-cash multiple        63    56∗∗∗ 71∗∗∗ 57∗∗     72∗∗ 72∗ 63∗    65   61    66      66   58∗∗
                            ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)        ( 5) ( 3) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)     ( 3) ( 3)
IRR                          42    26∗∗∗ 60∗∗∗ 33       42    35  36    40   42    31∗∗∗ 49∗∗∗ 42
                            ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)        ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)     ( 3) ( 3)
NPV                          22    12∗∗ 21∗∗ 16∗∗       29∗∗ 19   16    24   21    16      20   29∗∗∗
                            ( 2) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)        ( 5) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 3) ( 2) ( 3)     ( 3) ( 3)
Other                         8     9      4      7     10     8   8     8    7     9       6    9
                            ( 1) ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)        ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 1) ( 2)     ( 2) ( 2)
Number of metrics           2.1   1.8∗∗∗ 2.4∗∗∗ 2.0    2.0 2.0 2.0    2.1   2.0 2.0       2.1 2.1
                           (0.0) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1)
Number of responses        546 238        90 130        88 136 152    243 306 156        217 195

Often make gut in-           44      48∗ 37∗ 45∗       34∗ 42    43      40∗  47∗ 41       41   49∗∗
vestment decisions          ( 2)    ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)    ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Number of responses        563     243    91 132       88 140 158      251 315 162       221 202

Quantitatively   analyze     11      12    8   11      16   15   11      11   11   12       9   13
past investments            ( 1)    ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)    ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)    ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 2) ( 3)
Number of responses        488     213    82 115       76 127 138      228 263 140       199 169




                                                 47
           Table 12: Required IRR and Cash-on-Cash Multiples for Investments
 The mean and median required IRR and the mean and median required cash-on-cash multiple for
 investment.
                                 Stage    Industry         IPO Rate Fund Size         Location
                           All Early Late IT Health        High Low Large Small CA OthUS                Fgn
 Required IRR               31   33∗ 29∗ 34       33         30   30   28∗∗∗ 33∗∗∗ 31      30             31
                           ( 1) ( 2) ( 1) ( 2)   ( 2)       ( 2) ( 2) ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)      ( 1)           ( 1)
 Median                     30   30    30  30     30         30   28   25∗∗ 30∗∗ 30        30             30
                           ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)   ( 2)       ( 2) ( 2) ( 2) ( 1) ( 1)      ( 2)           ( 1)
 Number of responses      216    58    49  41     35         48   52   99 114      48      93             79

 Required cash-on-cash     5.5   7.5∗∗∗ 3.2∗∗∗ 7.0     4.9 6.2 5.4         4.9∗∗    6.2∗∗ 6.7∗∗    4.8∗∗ 5.5
                          (0.3) (0.8) (0.1) (1.3)     (0.3) (0.9) (0.3)   (0.2)    (0.6) (1.0)    (0.2) (0.3)
 Median                    5.0   5.0∗ 3.0∗ 5.0         4.5 5.0 5.0         4.0∗∗    5.0∗∗ 5.0      4.0 5.0
                          (0.5) (0.8) (0.0) (0.1)     (0.5) (0.3) (0.2)   (0.4)    (0.2) (0.4)    (0.5) (0.4)
 Number of responses      346 127        63     73      61 104      96    165      179 103        141 114

                     Table 13: Adjustments to Required Financial Metrics
 The percentage of respondents who report that their required financial metrics vary with each factor.
                                   Stage       Industry IPO Rate Fund Size          Location
                             All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
Same for all investments      23   26    30 27         21   23 22      19∗∗ 27∗∗ 24      22 23
                             ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Investment’s riskiness        64   52∗∗∗ 69∗∗∗ 53∗∗    67∗∗ 71 67      68∗  61∗ 63       65 65
                             ( 2) ( 4) ( 5) ( 5)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Financial market conditions 19     16    17 19         19   19 19      17   20 17        21 18
                             ( 2) ( 3) ( 4) ( 4)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 3)
Industry conditions           26   26    19 21         25   24 23      25   27 23        28 26
                             ( 2) ( 3) ( 4) ( 4)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Time to liquidity             56   57∗ 46∗ 49∗∗∗ 73∗∗∗ 58 57           59   54 56        60 52
                             ( 2) ( 4) ( 5) ( 5)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 4)
Other                          5    4     4     9∗∗     2∗∗  3∗   7∗    6    4    6       5    5
                             ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 3)      ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 2)
Number of responses         490 192      89 109        78 123 131    224 267 136       195 178




                                                     48
        Table 14: Adjustments to Financial Metrics for Systematic and Idiosyncratic Risk
    The percentage of respondents who adjust their required financial metric more or less for systematic
    risk than for idiosyncratic risk.
                                               Stage       Industry IPO Rate Fund Size          Location
                                         All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
Do not adjust for risk                    36   48∗∗∗ 31∗∗∗ 47∗∗    33∗∗ 29 33      32∗  39∗ 37       35 35
                                         ( 2) ( 4) ( 5) ( 5)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Adjust, treat all risk the same           42   33∗∗∗ 50∗∗∗ 35      40   47 40      42   41 42        41 44
                                         ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 4)
Adjust, discount systematic risk more      5    5     2     6       8    4    3     4    5    3       4    7
                                         ( 1) ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)      ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)    ( 1) ( 2)
Adjust, discount idiosyncratic risk more 14    13    13 10         13   14 18      17∗  11∗ 14       15 12
                                         ( 1) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 2)
Other                                      4    2     4     3       6    7    6     5    4    4       5    3
                                         ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 1)      ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 1)
Number of responses                     490 192      89 109        78 123 131    224 267 136       195 178




                                      Table 15: Forecasting Period
    The portion of respondents who report forecasting portfolio company financials for each time period.
                                     Stage        Industry     IPO Rate Fund Size       Location
                              All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
    Do not forecast            20    31∗∗∗ 7∗∗∗ 22        29     19  17    17∗∗ 24∗∗ 24      20   18
                              ( 2) ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)        ( 5) ( 3) ( 3)   ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 3)
    1-2 years                  11    14      8     20∗∗    8∗∗ 12    12     9    11  12       9   12
                              ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 4)        ( 3) ( 3) ( 3)   ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 2) ( 2)
    3-4 years                  40    38     39     41∗    28∗ 38     43    44∗   36∗ 38      36   44∗
                              ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)        ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
    5-6 years                  27    16∗∗∗ 42∗∗∗ 16∗      27∗ 28     25    27    27  24∗∗    34∗∗ 21∗∗
                              ( 2) ( 2) ( 5) ( 3)        ( 5) ( 4) ( 3)   ( 3) ( 3) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 3)
    7+ years                    3     1∗∗ 5∗∗ 1∗∗∗         8∗∗∗ 4     2     3     2   2       1    5∗∗
                              ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 0)        ( 3) ( 1) ( 1)   ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)    ( 1) ( 2)
    Average                   3.1   2.4∗∗∗ 3.9∗∗∗ 2.5∗∗ 3.2∗∗ 3.2 3.0    3.2    2.9 2.8     3.1 3.2
                             (0.1) (0.1) (0.2) (0.2) (0.3) (0.2) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.2) (0.1) (0.2)
    Number of responses      530 225        90 123        82 131 146     237 295 149       211 191

    % of companies which       28      26∗∗∗ 33∗∗∗ 28         28   28∗∗ 23∗∗ 31∗∗∗ 26∗∗∗ 28      27   29
    meet projections          ( 1)    ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)         ( 2) ( 2) ( 1)   ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 1)
    Number of responses      493     214     82 115           77 126 129     228 264 141       195 176




                                                        49
                     Table 16: Investment in and Opinions on Unicorns
This table reports the average fraction of respondents who invested in unicorns and the percentage
of respondents who think unicorns are either slightly or significantly overvalued. The percentage of
respondents who think unicorns are overvalued is calculated separately for unicorn investors and
non-investors.
                             Stage           Industry IPO Rate Fund Size            Location
                       All Early Late       IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Investor in unicorns  37   39    37        50∗∗∗ 29∗∗∗ 60∗∗∗ 31∗∗∗ 52∗∗∗ 27∗∗∗ 55∗∗∗ 37∗∗∗ 28∗∗∗
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 5)       ( 5)    ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
  Number of responses 516 226      84      121       79 130 143      233 285 143       207 186

  Unicorns overvalued    91    91  93 87            89   92 94          92   91 90          92 92
                        ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)        ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)
  Number of responses 514 221      83 118           82 134 140        231 282 144         202 189
  Among investors in unicorns
  Unicorns overvalued    92    93  89 90            92     94 94        92     92 91       91 93
                        ( 2) ( 3) ( 6) ( 4)        ( 5)   ( 2) ( 3)    ( 2)   ( 3) ( 3)   ( 3) ( 3)
  Number of responses 185      81  28 55            23     81 41      118      70 74       74 51
  Among non-investors in unicorns
  Unicorns overvalued    91    90  95 85            88     90 95        92   91 90          91 92
                        ( 2) ( 3) ( 3) ( 5)        ( 4)   ( 4) ( 2)    ( 3) ( 2) ( 4)      ( 2) ( 2)
  Number of responses 307 132      50 55            54     53 94      109 192 61          121 128




              Table 17: Frequency with which Contractual Features Are Used
The average frequency with which each contractual feature is used by respondents.
                                  Stage       Industry IPO Rate Fund Size          Location
                            All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
Pro-rata rights              81   85    83 85∗∗       77∗∗ 82∗ 87∗    83∗  79∗ 81       84 78∗∗
                            ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 2)      ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)
Participation                53   51    54 41∗∗∗ 67∗∗∗ 52 53          49∗∗ 55∗∗ 42∗∗∗ 57∗∗∗ 56
                            ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 2) ( 2)
Redemption rights            45   42∗ 50∗ 43          51   42 43      46   43 35∗∗∗ 56∗∗∗ 39∗∗∗
                            ( 2) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 2) ( 3)
Cumulative dividends         27   21∗∗∗ 35∗∗∗ 25∗∗    35∗∗ 23 25      28   25 22∗∗∗ 35∗∗∗ 20∗∗∗
                            ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)      ( 4) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 2) ( 2)
Full-ratchet antidilution    27   22∗∗∗ 34∗∗∗ 21∗∗    31∗∗ 26 22      26   28 21        24 34∗∗∗
                            ( 1) ( 2) ( 4) ( 2)      ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)
≥2x liquidation preference 19     15    18 12∗∗∗ 27∗∗∗ 21∗∗∗ 14∗∗∗ 19      18 14∗∗      19∗∗ 22∗∗
                            ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)      ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 1) ( 1)    ( 2) ( 2)
Number of responses        509 220      81 118        79 130 142    234 278 145       203 181




                                                 50
                           Table 18: Flexibility on Contractual Terms
The flexibility respondents have when negotiating each of the following contractual features on a
new investment. The table gives the average flexibility reported on a scale of -100 to 100 (not at
all flexible and investor friendly is -100, not very flexible -50, somewhat flexible 0, very flexible 50,
extremely flexible and founder friendly 100).
                               Stage       Industry IPO Rate Fund Size          Location
                         All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
Pro-rata rights         -47   -49 -43 -51        -41 -51 -51     -50    -45 -47    -48 -45
                         ( 2) ( 3) ( 4) ( 4)      ( 5) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
Liquidation preferences -29   -24 -34 -34        -33 -30 -28     -29    -28 -31    -28 -28
                         ( 2) ( 4) ( 5) ( 4)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 4)
Anti-dilution           -25   -19 -29 -24        -24 -25 -22     -27    -23 -21    -26 -26
                         ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 5)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 4)
Valuation               -20   -17∗ -25∗ -16∗∗ -28∗∗ -26 -21      -19    -20 -17    -20 -21
                         ( 1) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2) ( 3)
Board control           -17   -16 -13      -8∗∗∗ -43∗∗∗ -14 -13  -18    -18 -12    -13 -26∗∗∗
                         ( 2) ( 4) ( 6) ( 4)      ( 5) ( 5) ( 4)  ( 4) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 4) ( 4)
Vesting                 -17   -20∗∗∗ -4∗∗∗-24    -23 -21 -17     -21    -15 -23    -18 -11∗∗
                         ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 3)
Ownership stake           -8  -13∗∗ -0∗∗ -6∗∗ -19∗∗ -10      -7  -10     -7 -11      -5    -7
                         ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 3) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 3)
Participation             -2    3     1     7∗∗∗ -15∗∗∗ -5    3     4∗∗ -6∗∗ 7∗      -2∗ -7∗
                         ( 2) ( 3) ( 4) ( 5)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 4)
Investment amount         -0   -0     7     4∗     -6∗   -3   0     0    -0   2       3    -3
                         ( 2) ( 2) ( 5) ( 3)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 3)
Option pool                2    0∗    9∗ -3         2     0   2     2     2   0       0     6
                         ( 2) ( 3) ( 4) ( 4)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 3)
Redemption rights          4   16∗∗∗ -7∗∗∗ 14∗     -0∗ 15     9     6     3 20∗∗∗    -1∗∗∗ -0
                         ( 2) ( 4) ( 5) ( 5)      ( 5) ( 5) ( 4)  ( 4) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 4) ( 4)
Dividends                 28   33    23 41∗∗∗ 14∗∗∗ 38∗∗ 24∗∗ 29         27 45∗∗∗ 25∗∗∗ 20∗∗
                         ( 2) ( 4) ( 6) ( 5)      ( 6) ( 5) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 4)
Average                 -11    -9    -9    -8∗∗∗ -18∗∗∗ -11 -10  -11    -11  -8    -11 -13
                         ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 2)      ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)
Number of responses     524 227      85 121        80 132 144    239 288 146       209 189




                                                   51
                           Table 19: Factors That Lead to Syndication
 The first panel gives the average fraction of rounds syndicated. The second panel gives the percentage
 of respondents who marked each factor as important (top) and as most important (bottom) when
 deciding whether to syndicate a round.
                                   Stage       Industry IPO Rate Fund Size                             Location
                             All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small                        CA OthUS Fgn
% of investments syndicated 65     73∗∗∗ 49∗∗∗ 64∗∗∗ 79∗∗∗ 65∗∗ 73∗∗ 64     68                      67      67 61∗∗
                             ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)      ( 2) ( 3) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 2)                    ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)
Number of responses         410 177      65 99         65 107 110    193 220                      109     166 149

Important factor
Complementary expertise        77     80    71 84∗          73∗     75     80     78       76 74           76     80
                              ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 3)        ( 5)    ( 4)   ( 3)   ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)       ( 3)   ( 3)
Capital constraints            75     76    73 76           76      67     72     68∗∗∗    81∗∗∗ 74        80     70∗
                              ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)        ( 5)    ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)     ( 2) ( 4)       ( 3)   ( 4)
Risk sharing                   71     77∗∗∗ 53∗∗∗ 66∗∗      82∗∗    74     75     72       71 75           73     67
                              ( 2)   ( 3) ( 6) ( 5)        ( 4)    ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)       ( 3)   ( 4)
Future deals                   29     30∗∗ 17∗∗ 29          22      28     30     24∗∗     33∗∗ 29         27     31
                              ( 2)   ( 3) ( 4) ( 4)        ( 5)    ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)       ( 3)   ( 4)
Most important factor
Complementary expertise        33     27     34     36∗∗    22∗∗    30     36     36       31      36∗     27∗    38
                              ( 2)   ( 3)   ( 6)   ( 5)    ( 5)    ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)     ( 3)    ( 4)    ( 3)   ( 4)
Capital constraints            39     42     43     37      41      36     35     33∗∗     43∗∗    34      43     37
                              ( 2)   ( 3)   ( 6)   ( 5)    ( 6)    ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)     ( 3)    ( 4)    ( 4)   ( 4)
Risk sharing                   24     27     20     21∗     34∗     28     25     28       22      26      28     20∗
                              ( 2)   ( 3)   ( 5)   ( 4)    ( 5)    ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)     ( 3)    ( 4)    ( 3)   ( 3)
Future deals                    3      3      0      3       3       3      3      2        4       2       1      4
                              ( 1)   ( 1)   ( 0)   ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 1)   ( 1)   ( 1)     ( 1)    ( 1)    ( 1)   ( 2)

Number of responses           459    205    71 106         74      120 126       211      249 131        187 158




                                                     52
               Table 20: Important Factors when Choosing Syndicate Partners
The percentage of respondents who marked each factor as important (top) and as most important
(bottom) when choosing syndicate partners.
                               Stage            Industry IPO Rate Fund Size      Location
                         All Early Late         IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Important factor
  Expertise              73     74       64      68∗∗      83∗∗     73     70     74      72      74       74 70
                        ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 6)    ( 4)      ( 4)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 4)     ( 3) ( 3)
  Past shared success    65     67       72      65∗∗      78∗∗     75     72     66      65      73       69 54∗∗∗
                        ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 5)    ( 5)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 4)     ( 3) ( 4)
  Reputation             60     59       56      63∗∗      48∗∗     54     57     58      63      62       59 62
                        ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 6)    ( 5)      ( 6)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 4)     ( 4) ( 4)
  Track record           61     63       61      66        59       60     63     61      63      70∗∗∗    55∗∗∗ 63
                        ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 6)    ( 5)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 4)     ( 4) ( 4)
  Capital                59     60       51      54        64       60     54     54∗∗    63∗∗    61       59 57
                        ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 6)    ( 5)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 4)     ( 4) ( 4)
  Geography              24     24       16      31∗∗∗     10∗∗∗    22     21     23      26      19       23 30∗∗
                        ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 4)    ( 4)      ( 3)     ( 3)   ( 3)   ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 3)     ( 3) ( 3)
  Social connections     20     21∗∗     10∗∗    23∗∗      11∗∗     17     15     16∗∗    23∗∗    21∗      14∗ 26∗∗∗
                        ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 3)    ( 4)      ( 3)     ( 3)   ( 3)   ( 2)    ( 3)    ( 3)     ( 2) ( 3)
  Most important factor
  Expertise              25      26      20 19∗∗           32∗∗      20 25       25        24 22            26      25
                        ( 2)    ( 3)    ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)      ( 3) ( 4)   ( 3)      ( 3) ( 3)        ( 3)    ( 3)
  Past shared success    28      29      32 25             34        39∗∗ 27∗∗ 29          28 30            33      21∗∗
                        ( 2)    ( 3)    ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)      ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3)      ( 3) ( 4)        ( 3)    ( 3)
  Reputation             16      14      21 18             12         9∗ 16∗     17        16 14            16      19
                        ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 5) ( 4)         ( 3)      ( 2) ( 3)   ( 2)      ( 2) ( 3)        ( 3)    ( 3)
  Track record           16      15      21 22∗            12∗       14 18       16        17 18            14      18
                        ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 5) ( 4)         ( 4)      ( 3) ( 3)   ( 2)      ( 2) ( 3)        ( 2)    ( 3)
  Capital                 9      10∗∗     3∗∗ 9             8        12    8      8        11 11             6      11
                        ( 1)    ( 2)    ( 2) ( 3)         ( 3)      ( 3) ( 2)   ( 2)      ( 2) ( 3)        ( 2)    ( 2)
  Geography               2       2       0    3            0         1    2      3         1    0           2       3
                        ( 1)    ( 1)    ( 0) ( 2)         ( 0)      ( 1) ( 1)   ( 1)      ( 1) ( 0)        ( 1)    ( 1)
  Social connections      3       2       0    3            1         2    2      1∗∗       4∗∗ 2            1       5∗∗
                        ( 1)    ( 1)    ( 0) ( 2)         ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)   ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)        ( 1)    ( 2)
  Number of responses 464      208       73 106            74      121 126     213       251 132          189     160


                        Table 21: Involvement in Portfolio Companies
The percentage of respondents who answered that they interacted with their portfolio companies at
each frequency in the first six months after investment.
                             Stage                Industry         IPO Rate Fund Size                 Location
                       All Early Late            IT Health         High Low Large Small          CA OthUS Fgn
 Less than monthly       2    1     3              1       1           3    2      2    2           2       2    2
                       ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)            ( 1)    ( 1)        ( 2) ( 1)   ( 1) ( 1)        ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)
 Once a month           10   13     7             10       8           7    8      9   10           7      11 10
                       ( 1) ( 2) ( 3)            ( 3)    ( 3)        ( 2) ( 2)   ( 2) ( 2)        ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)
 2-3 times a month      26   23    26             28      25          33∗∗ 22∗∗ 28     25          34      26 23
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 5)            ( 4)    ( 5)        ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3)        ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
 Once a week            33   33    39             36      36          29 35       32   34          28      34 35
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 6)            ( 5)    ( 5)        ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3)        ( 4)    ( 3) ( 4)
 Multiple times a week 27    28    23             23      30          28 33       28   27          27      26 28
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 5)            ( 4)    ( 5)        ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3)        ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
 Every day               1    2     1              2       0           0    1      0    2           2       1    1
                       ( 0) ( 1) ( 1)            ( 1)    ( 0)        ( 0) ( 1)   ( 0) ( 1)        ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)
 Number of responses 469 209       76           105       76        121 127     213 256          132     192 162



                                                         53
                        Table 22: Activities in Portfolio Companies
The average percentage of portfolio companies with which respondents undertake each activity.
                            Stage       Industry IPO Rate Fund Size            Location
                      All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
 Hire board members    58   55    60 52∗∗∗ 70∗∗∗ 65 61          60    57 56         59 61
                      ( 2) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)      ( 2) ( 3)
 Hire employees        46   51∗∗ 41∗∗ 49        43   46 49      44    48 52∗        46∗ 41∗∗
                      ( 2) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 3)
 Connect customers     69   69    67 71         71   70 67      68    69 74∗∗       67∗∗ 67
                      ( 1) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 2) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)
 Connect investors     72   81∗∗∗ 58∗∗∗ 76      81   74 76      69∗∗∗ 76∗∗∗ 76∗∗    69∗∗ 75
                      ( 1) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 3) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)      ( 2) ( 2)
 Strategic guidance    87   86    88 87         89   87 89      86    88 87         87 87
                      ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)  ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)      ( 1) ( 1)
 Operational guidance 65    65    62 67         66   66 67      63    67 68         66 61∗∗
                      ( 1) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 2) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)      ( 2) ( 2)
 Other                 20   19    17 23∗∗       12∗∗ 18 19      20    21 19         23 19
                      ( 2) ( 2) ( 4) ( 4)      ( 3) ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)      ( 3) ( 3)
 Number of responses 444 196      71 101        75 118 122    202 243 125         180 154




                                               54
                       Table 23: Frequency of IPO, M&A, and Failure
This table looks at how frequent each outcome is among exited investments. The first panel
calculated the rates using respondent answers; the second calculates the rates from the last 10 years
of VentureSource data; the third calculates the rates using all VentureSource data.
                                 Stage      Industry IPO Rate Fund Size            Location
                         All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Frequency of exit reported in survey
  % IPO                   15     12∗∗∗ 19∗∗∗13∗∗∗ 23∗∗∗ 24∗∗∗ 11∗∗∗ 20∗∗∗ 12∗∗∗ 20∗∗∗ 14∗∗∗ 14
                         ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2) ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 1)
  % MA                    53     50∗∗∗ 60∗∗∗55∗∗   48∗∗ 47∗∗∗ 55∗∗∗ 51     54 50        54 54
                         ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 2)      ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)     ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)
  % Failure               32     38∗∗∗ 21∗∗∗32     29   29∗∗ 34∗∗ 29∗∗ 34∗∗ 30          32 32
                         ( 1) ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)     ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 2)
  Number of responses 426 187          69 98       72 117 114       198 231 118       171 151

  Frequency of exit in last ten   years of VentureSource data
  % IPO                    11        9    11   9∗∗∗ 17∗∗∗ 21∗∗∗ 2∗∗∗       15∗∗∗      7∗∗∗ 13     12      10
                          ( 1)     ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)   ( 2) ( 1) ( 0)        ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)    ( 2)    ( 1)
  % MA                     43       42∗ 50∗ 49∗∗     39∗∗ 47 47            48∗∗∗     38∗∗∗ 47     47      34∗∗∗
                          ( 1)     ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)   ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)        ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  % Apparent failure       46       49∗∗ 39∗∗ 42     44    32∗∗∗ 51∗∗∗     37∗∗∗     56∗∗∗ 40     41      55∗∗∗
                          ( 1)     ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)   ( 3) ( 1) ( 2)        ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  Number of responses 312         140     53 64      62 117 114          164       155 95       127     103

  Frequency of exit in all years VentureSource data
  % IPO                    13     12    13 12∗∗∗ 22∗∗∗ 23∗∗∗ 6∗∗∗          18∗∗∗      9∗∗∗ 17     13      12
                          ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)     ( 2) ( 1) ( 1)          ( 1)      ( 1) ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 1)
  % MA                     43     42∗∗ 49∗∗ 48∗∗∗ 38∗∗∗ 46 47              47∗∗∗     39∗∗∗ 48     47      35∗∗∗
                          ( 1) ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)     ( 2) ( 1) ( 2)          ( 1)      ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  % Apparent failure       44     47∗∗∗ 37∗∗∗40    40   31∗∗∗ 47∗∗∗        35∗∗∗     52∗∗∗ 36     40      53∗∗∗
                          ( 1) ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)     ( 3) ( 1) ( 2)          ( 1)      ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  Number of responses 317 143           54 65      63 117 114            166       158 97       129     104




                                                   55
                                Table 24: Exit Multiple Frequency
The average percentage of cash-on-cash exit multiples in each range. Mean reported multiple is the
average of these, with each bucket coded as its midpoint and the 10x+ bucket coded at 15.
                               Stage       Industry    IPO Rate Fund Size             Location
                        All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
<1                       24    27∗∗ 20∗∗ 26∗∗      20∗∗ 25     28     25    24     25      25   23
                        ( 1) ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 2)
1-2                      19    18    18    15∗     19∗ 17      20     18    19     19      20   19
                        ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 1)       ( 2) ( 1) ( 2)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)       ( 1) ( 1)
2-3                      19    14∗∗∗ 28∗∗∗ 18      19    17    19     19    19     17      19   20
                        ( 1) ( 1) ( 3) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 1) ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)       ( 1) ( 2)
3-5                      16    16    20    17      17    17    16     17    16     16      16   16
                        ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 1) ( 2)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)       ( 1) ( 2)
5-10                     12    13∗∗ 8∗∗ 12         16    15∗∗ 10∗∗ 13       12     12      13   11
                        ( 1) ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)       ( 3) ( 2) ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)       ( 1) ( 2)
10+                       9    12∗∗ 7∗∗ 13          9     9∗    7∗     9     9     10∗      7∗ 10
                        ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 1) ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)       ( 1) ( 2)
Mean reported multiple 3.8    4.2∗∗ 3.5∗∗ 4.2     4.1 4.0∗∗∗ 3.4∗∗∗ 3.8    3.8 3.9        3.6 3.9
                       (0.1) (0.2) (0.2) (0.3) (0.3) (0.2) (0.2) (0.1) (0.2) (0.2) (0.2) (0.2)
Std reported multiple   2.9   3.1∗∗ 2.6∗∗ 3.4∗∗∗ 2.7∗∗∗ 3.3∗∗ 2.9∗∗ 3.1∗∗∗ 2.7∗∗∗ 3.2∗    2.9∗ 2.5∗∗∗
                       (0.1) (0.1) (0.2) (0.2) (0.2) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.1) (0.2) (0.1) (0.1)
Number of responses    410 179       70    96      67 115 109       189 221 114          165 144




                     Table 25: Important Contributors to Value Creation
The percentage of respondents who marked each factor as important (top) and as most important
(bottom) for value creation.
                               Stage            Industry IPO Rate Fund Size      Location
                         All Early Late         IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Important factor
  Deal flow               65      68     65     73∗∗∗      49∗∗∗    62     64     69     62     73     67      57∗∗∗
                         ( 2)    ( 3)   ( 5)   ( 4)       ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)   ( 3)   ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 4)
  Selection               86      87     87     91∗∗       81∗∗     89     88     88     85     87     87      84
                         ( 1)    ( 2)   ( 4)   ( 3)       ( 4)     ( 3)   ( 3)   ( 2)   ( 2)   ( 3)   ( 2)    ( 3)
  Value-add               84      85∗    77∗    78∗∗       89∗∗     87     83     84     83     86∗    79∗     89∗∗
                         ( 2)    ( 2)   ( 5)   ( 4)       ( 4)     ( 3)   ( 3)   ( 2)   ( 2)   ( 3)   ( 3)    ( 2)
  Other                    4       3      6      3          3        5      4      4      4      2      4       5
                         ( 1)    ( 1)   ( 3)   ( 1)       ( 2)     ( 2)   ( 2)   ( 1)   ( 1)   ( 1)   ( 1)    ( 2)
  Most important factor
  Deal flow              23       27     19      29∗∗∗     13∗∗∗ 19∗∗ 31∗∗ 27             21 27         25      18∗∗
                        ( 2)     ( 3)   ( 4)    ( 4)      ( 4) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3)         ( 2) ( 4)     ( 3)    ( 3)
  Selection              49       44     52      49        52    57∗∗ 46∗∗ 51             46 48         50      48
                        ( 2)     ( 3)   ( 5)    ( 4)      ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)    ( 3)         ( 3) ( 4)     ( 3)    ( 4)
  Value-add              27       27     27      21∗∗      35∗∗ 22 22        22∗∗∗        32∗∗∗ 23      23      34∗∗
                        ( 2)     ( 3)   ( 5)    ( 4)      ( 5) ( 3) ( 3)    ( 3)         ( 3) ( 3)     ( 3)    ( 3)
  Other                   1        1      2       1         0     2    1      1            1     1       1       0
                        ( 0)     ( 1)   ( 1)    ( 1)      ( 0) ( 1) ( 1)    ( 1)         ( 1) ( 1)     ( 1)    ( 0)
  Number of responses 509       226      82    122         78 129 139      231          281 145       205     179




                                                         56
               Table 26: Factors That Contributed to Successful Investments
The percentage of respondents who marked each factor as important (top) and as most important
(bottom) to the success of startups.
                              Stage         Industry IPO Rate Fund Size      Location
                        All Early Late      IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Important factor
  Team                   96     96    94 94            96       97      96      97       96 96       96      97
                        ( 1)   ( 1) ( 3) ( 2)         ( 2)     ( 1)    ( 2)    ( 1)     ( 1) ( 2)   ( 1)    ( 1)
  Business model         60     55∗∗∗ 73∗∗∗ 63∗∗∗      32∗∗∗    54      55      63       58 59       60      61
                        ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 3)
  Technology             59     60    52 53∗∗∗         79∗∗∗    62      59      58       59 67∗      58∗     53∗
                        ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 4)
  Market                 34     34∗ 44∗ 42             36       37      30      36       33 39       36      31
                        ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 3)
  Industry               59     54∗∗ 68∗∗ 59           48       49∗∗    60∗∗    58       60 59       60      57
                        ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 4)
  Timing                 67     64    62 69∗∗          55∗∗     70      65      67       66 71       65      65
                        ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 3)
  Luck                   56     61∗∗∗ 38∗∗∗ 63∗        51∗      57      58      53       58 64∗∗     51∗∗    55
                        ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 4)
  Board of directors     29     32    24 26            27       25      33      25∗∗     34∗∗ 31     31      26
                        ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 3)    ( 4)    ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)   ( 3)    ( 3)
  My contribution        26     25    25 25            23       17      23      20∗∗∗    30∗∗∗ 27    25      25
                        ( 2)   ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)         ( 5)     ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 2)     ( 3) ( 3)   ( 3)    ( 3)
  Most important factor
  Team                   56      64∗∗∗ 42∗∗∗ 55∗       42∗ 53            59      52∗  59∗     55      55      60
                        ( 2)    ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)        ( 5) ( 4)         ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)    ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 4)
  Business model          7       4∗∗∗ 18∗∗∗ 8          3     5           6       8    7       6       8       7
                        ( 1)    ( 1) ( 4) ( 2)        ( 2) ( 2)         ( 2)    ( 2) ( 1)    ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  Technology              9       6    11     7∗∗∗     31∗∗∗ 12          10      10    9       9       9      10
                        ( 1)    ( 2) ( 3) ( 2)        ( 5) ( 3)         ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  Market                  2       1∗    4∗ 0∗           3∗    4           2       3    1       2       2       2
                        ( 1)    ( 0) ( 2) ( 0)        ( 2) ( 2)         ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)    ( 1)    ( 1)    ( 1)
  Industry                7       6    10     6         6     6           8       8    6       6       7       6
                        ( 1)    ( 2) ( 3) ( 2)        ( 3) ( 2)         ( 2)    ( 2) ( 1)    ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  Timing                 12      11    11 16∗           7∗    7           9      10   13      11      11      11
                        ( 1)    ( 2) ( 3) ( 3)        ( 3) ( 2)         ( 2)    ( 2) ( 2)    ( 3)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  Luck                    6       7     5     6         3     9           6       7    5      11∗      5∗      3∗
                        ( 1)    ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)        ( 2) ( 2)         ( 2)    ( 2) ( 1)    ( 2)    ( 1)    ( 1)
  Board of directors      1       0     2     1         4     2           1       1    1       0       1       1
                        ( 0)    ( 0) ( 2) ( 1)        ( 2) ( 1)         ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)    ( 0)    ( 1)    ( 1)
  My contribution         0       0     0     0         1     0           0       0    0       0       1       0
                        ( 0)    ( 0) ( 0) ( 0)        ( 1) ( 0)         ( 0)    ( 0) ( 0)    ( 0)    ( 1)    ( 0)
  Number of responses 513      225     84 120          78 130          140     236 281      145     206     182




                                                     57
                   Table 27: Factors That Contributed to Failed Investments
The percentage of respondents who marked each factor as important (top) and as most important
(bottom) to the failure of startups.
                               Stage            Industry IPO Rate Fund Size      Location
                         All Early Late         IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Important factor
  Team                    92     91       91     93∗∗      84∗∗     90     91     92        91     92      91      91
                         ( 1)   ( 2)     ( 3)   ( 2)      ( 4)     ( 3)   ( 2)   ( 2)      ( 2)   ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  Business model          57     54       60     63∗∗∗     39∗∗∗    54     57     58        57     58      61      52∗
                         ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 5)   ( 4)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)      ( 3)   ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 4)
  Technology              45     46       36     41∗∗∗     64∗∗∗    49     44     46        45     51      46      41
                         ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 5)   ( 4)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)      ( 3)   ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 4)
  Market                  31     35∗      25∗    26∗       37∗      35     27     30        33     37      34      25∗∗
                         ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 5)   ( 4)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)      ( 3)   ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 3)
  Industry                58     57       60     59∗       46∗      50     59     56        59     58      59      56
                         ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 5)   ( 4)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)      ( 3)   ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 4)
  Timing                  49     50       42     57∗∗      41∗∗     46     50     48        50     50      47      51
                         ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 5)   ( 4)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)      ( 3)   ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 4)
  Luck                    30     30       24     32        32       31     29     29        32     38∗∗    27∗∗    30
                         ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 5)   ( 4)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)      ( 3)   ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 3)
  Board of directors      33     28       33     25        30       35     36     31        35     39∗∗    27∗∗    36
                         ( 2)   ( 3)     ( 5)   ( 4)      ( 5)     ( 4)   ( 4)   ( 3)      ( 3)   ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 3)
  My contribution          9      8        6     10         6        7      8      7        11     11       7      10
                         ( 1)   ( 2)     ( 3)   ( 3)      ( 3)     ( 2)   ( 2)   ( 1)      ( 2)   ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
  Most important factor
  Team                   55       60∗     48∗ 57∗∗∗        34∗∗∗ 51 59             50∗∗      59∗∗ 54        52 59
                        ( 2)     ( 3)    ( 5) ( 4)        ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)          ( 3)      ( 3) ( 4)      ( 3) ( 4)
  Business model         10        7∗∗    16∗∗ 13          10     7    9            6∗∗      12∗∗ 8         11 10
                        ( 1)     ( 2)    ( 4) ( 3)        ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)          ( 1)      ( 2) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)
  Technology              8        6       7    3∗∗∗       36∗∗∗ 16∗∗∗ 7∗∗∗        13∗∗∗      5∗∗∗ 8         9    8
                        ( 1)     ( 2)    ( 3) ( 1)        ( 5) ( 3) ( 2)          ( 2)      ( 1) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)
  Market                  3        3       1    3           3     4    2            0∗∗∗      4∗∗∗ 6∗∗       2∗∗ 1∗∗
                        ( 1)     ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)        ( 2) ( 2) ( 1)          ( 0)      ( 1) ( 2)      ( 1) ( 1)
  Industry               10       10      16 13             7     9    8           14∗∗       8∗∗ 9         13    9
                        ( 1)     ( 2)    ( 4) ( 3)        ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)          ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)
  Timing                  9        8      10    9           5     8    9           10         8 10           9    9
                        ( 1)     ( 2)    ( 3) ( 3)        ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)          ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)      ( 2) ( 2)
  Luck                    3        4       1    2           1     4    4            3         2    4         3    1
                        ( 1)     ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)        ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)          ( 1)      ( 1) ( 2)      ( 1) ( 1)
  Board of directors      3        2       1    2           4     1    3            2         3    1         2    4
                        ( 1)     ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)        ( 2) ( 1) ( 1)          ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)      ( 1) ( 1)
  My contribution         0        0       0    0           0     0    0            0         0    0         0    0
                        ( 0)     ( 0)    ( 0) ( 0)        ( 0) ( 0) ( 0)          ( 0)      ( 0) ( 0)      ( 0) ( 0)
  Number of responses 511       226       82 120           78 130 141            235       279 145        205 181




                                                         58
                        Table 28: Number of People Working at Funds
The number of people in each role and the percentage of total people in each role at each responding
fund.
                                 Stage        Industry    IPO Rate Fund Size             Location
                     All      Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
Partners             4.7        3.9∗∗∗ 6.3∗∗∗ 4.1    4.4 7.2∗∗∗ 4.2∗∗∗ 6.2∗∗∗ 3.5∗∗∗ 5.3     4.5 5.3
                    (0.2)      (0.2) (1.2) (0.2) (0.3) (0.7) (0.2) (0.3) (0.2) (0.5) (0.2) (0.7)
Venture partners     1.3        1.2 1.4 0.9∗∗∗ 2.1∗∗∗ 1.9∗∗ 1.3∗∗ 1.8∗∗∗ 1.0∗∗∗ 1.6          1.2 1.4
                    (0.1)      (0.1) (0.3) (0.1) (0.3) (0.2) (0.2) (0.2) (0.2) (0.3) (0.2) (0.2)
Associates           2.9        2.0∗∗∗ 4.7∗∗∗ 2.4    2.2 4.4∗∗∗ 2.4∗∗∗ 4.4∗∗∗ 1.7∗∗∗ 2.7     2.7 3.7∗∗
                    (0.2)      (0.2) (0.7) (0.3) (0.3) (0.7) (0.2) (0.4) (0.1) (0.3) (0.3) (0.5)
Other                4.5        3.2∗∗ 5.3∗∗ 5.0      3.1 9.9∗∗∗ 3.1∗∗∗ 7.8∗∗∗ 2.2∗∗∗ 5.8     4.5 4.6
                    (0.7)      (0.4) (0.9) (1.4) (0.5) (2.6) (0.4) (1.5) (0.3) (1.3) (0.9) (1.4)
Total               13.5      10.3∗∗∗17.7∗∗∗12.3 11.8 23.5∗∗∗11.0∗∗∗ 20.2∗∗∗ 8.4∗∗∗15.4     12.9 15.0
                    (0.9)      (0.7) (2.4) (1.7) (0.9) (3.4) (0.7) (1.9) (0.6) (1.8) (1.4) (1.9)
% Partners            48         50∗∗ 43∗∗ 48         47    44   48      42∗∗∗ 53∗∗∗ 51        49   44∗∗∗
                     ( 1)       ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)        ( 2) ( 2)
% Venture partners    10         10      8      8∗∗∗ 15∗∗∗ 11    11      10    10     11        9   10
                     ( 1)       ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)       ( 2) ( 1) ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)        ( 1) ( 1)
% Associates          20         18∗∗∗ 24∗∗∗ 20       17    20   19      22∗∗ 19∗∗ 17∗         20∗ 24∗∗∗
                     ( 1)       ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 1) ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)        ( 1) ( 1)
% Other               22         22     25     24     21    25   22      25∗∗∗ 19∗∗∗ 21        22   22
                     ( 1)       ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 2) ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)        ( 1) ( 1)
Number of responses 610        245      96 131        87 144 165       263 335 176           239 219




                               Table 29: Partners’ Specialization
The first panel reports the fraction of respondents where partners specialize in different taskes. The
second panel reports the roles selected among those respondents who stated that partners in their
fund specialized.
                             Stage           Industry      IPO Rate Fund Size         Location
                       All Early Late       IT Health      High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
  Partners specialize   60   58    63        53      62       52 54      59   60 59        59 62
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 6)       ( 5)    ( 5)     ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 4) ( 4)
  Number of responses 448 194      74      101       75     119 117    208 245 128       181 155

  Among funds where partners specialize, the respondent’s role is
  Generalist            44    41    38 34         33   39 46             44        44 43        45      45
                       ( 3) ( 5) ( 7) ( 6)       ( 7) ( 6) ( 6)         ( 4)      ( 4) ( 5)    ( 5)    ( 5)
  Fund raising          52    54    56 65∗∗       43∗∗ 50 50             54        50 53        51      52
                       ( 3) ( 5) ( 7) ( 6)       ( 7) ( 6) ( 6)         ( 4)      ( 4) ( 5)    ( 5)    ( 5)
  Deal making           55    56    56 54         59   52 59             46∗∗∗     62∗∗∗ 51     58      57
                       ( 3) ( 5) ( 7) ( 7)       ( 7) ( 6) ( 6)         ( 4)      ( 4) ( 6)    ( 5)    ( 5)
  Sourcing deals        53    51    49 53         55   47 52             44∗∗∗     61∗∗∗ 55     57      46∗
                       ( 3) ( 5) ( 7) ( 7)       ( 7) ( 6) ( 6)         ( 4)      ( 4) ( 5)    ( 5)    ( 5)
  Networking            32    40∗∗ 21∗∗ 36        31   32 27             26∗∗      38∗∗ 36      33      28
                       ( 3) ( 5) ( 6) ( 6)       ( 7) ( 5) ( 5)         ( 4)      ( 4) ( 5)    ( 4)    ( 4)
  Other                 17    17    22 14         22   20 20             15        18 19        17      15
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 6) ( 4)       ( 6) ( 5) ( 5)         ( 3)      ( 3) ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 3)
  Number of responses 287 116       48 59         50   76 69           136       152 82       112     100




                                                  59
                                               Table 30: Time Use
    The first panel reports the average hours per week spent by respondents on each activity in a normal
    week. The second reports the number of board seats they hold.
                                             Stage         Industry     IPO Rate  Fund Size        Location
                                    All   Early Late       IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS                Fgn
Sourcing deals                    15.2    14.9 16.6       15.7 14.7 16.4 15.1 16.2∗∗ 14.3∗∗ 16.4      15.5        14.1∗∗
                                  (0.4)    (0.6) (1.2)    (0.8) (1.0) (0.8) (0.7) (0.6) (0.5) (0.8) (0.6)         (0.6)
Assisting portfolio companies     18.3    18.7 17.3       16.6∗∗ 20.4∗∗ 17.2 19.1 18.4 18.1 17.8      18.4        18.5
                                  (0.5)    (0.7) (1.4)    (0.8) (1.4) (0.7) (1.0) (0.7) (0.6) (0.9) (0.8)         (0.8)
Networking                         7.4      8.3∗ 7.1∗      7.9∗∗ 6.3∗∗ 6.6    7.2  7.3   7.4   7.5     7.5         7.2
                                  (0.2)    (0.4) (0.6)    (0.5) (0.5) (0.4) (0.4) (0.3) (0.3) (0.4) (0.4)         (0.4)
Managing VC firm                   8.5      8.2   8.8      8.1    9.5    8.5  7.6  8.3   8.7   7.2∗∗ 9.0∗∗         8.9
                                  (0.3)    (0.4) (0.7)    (0.6) (0.8) (0.5) (0.5) (0.4) (0.4) (0.4) (0.5)         (0.5)
Meeting LPs                        3.0      2.8∗∗ 3.9∗∗    2.8    3.0    2.6  2.8  2.6∗∗ 3.4∗∗ 2.7     2.9         3.4
                                  (0.2)    (0.2) (0.5)    (0.3) (0.5) (0.3) (0.3) (0.2) (0.2) (0.3) (0.3)         (0.3)
Other                              2.4      2.4   1.5      2.4    2.2    2.3  2.8  2.4   2.4   2.3     2.1         2.8
                                  (0.2)    (0.3) (0.4)    (0.4) (0.5) (0.4) (0.4) (0.3) (0.3) (0.4) (0.3)         (0.4)
Total hours                       54.7    55.2 55.2       53.6 56.1 53.6 54.6 55.1 54.3 53.9          55.4        54.9
                                  (0.7)    (1.1) (1.8)    (1.3) (2.1) (1.2) (1.3) (1.0) (1.0) (1.3) (1.1)         (1.3)
Number of responses                444     192     71       99     73 118 118      205 239 126         181         153

Boards memberships                 4.8    5.2∗∗∗ 4.1∗∗∗ 5.4∗   4.6∗ 5.1      5.1    4.9    4.7    5.0       4.6    4.9
                                 ( 0.1) ( 0.2) ( 0.3) ( 0.3) ( 0.3) ( 0.2) ( 0.2) ( 0.2) ( 0.2) ( 0.2)    ( 0.2) ( 0.3)
Number of responses               456 204         73 103        76 118 126         207 251 129             185 159




                                    Table 31: Fund Structure Questions
    This table summarizes the responses to a number of questions on VC fund structure.
                                  Stage               Industry      IPO Rate Fund Size            Location
                            All Early Late           IT Health      High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
     Compensation depends 74      78∗ 67∗             81      77       66∗∗∗ 81∗∗∗ 65∗∗∗ 84∗∗∗ 73      76 73
     on individual success  ( 2) ( 3) ( 5)           ( 4)    ( 5)     ( 4) ( 4)     ( 3) ( 2) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 4)
     Number of responses   446 193      74          101       74     118 117       205 244 127       181 154

     Partners get equal 44                51∗∗ 35∗∗ 50           52   44 48        42   48 43          43 46
     shares of carry      ( 2)           ( 4) ( 6) ( 5)         ( 6) ( 5) ( 5)    ( 3) ( 3) ( 5)      ( 4) ( 4)
     Number of responses 429            182    71 95             71 113 110      197 234 110         178 152

     Partners invest equal        49      53   44 55             52   50 54        47   52 55          46 47
     shares of fund capital      ( 2)    ( 4) ( 6) ( 5)         ( 6) ( 4) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)      ( 4) ( 4)
     Number of responses        442     193    71 101            73 118 116      203 242 127         179 152




                                                           60
                         Table 32: Fund-Level Decision Making Process
This table lists the fraction of funds using each decision rule for their initial investments.
                             Stage     Industry IPO Rate Fund Size           Location
                       All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
 Unanimous              49   53    53 41∗∗     56∗∗ 40∗∗ 52∗∗ 40∗∗∗ 56∗∗∗ 35∗∗∗ 55∗∗∗ 52
                       ( 2) ( 3) ( 5) ( 4)    ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)
 Unanimous - 1           7    6     6   7       6    9    7      8    6    5       6 10∗∗
                       ( 1) ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)    ( 3) ( 2) ( 2)   ( 2) ( 1) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 2)
 Consensus              20   18    21 23       21   20 19       25∗∗ 17∗∗ 26      22 14∗∗∗
                       ( 2) ( 2) ( 4) ( 4)    ( 4) ( 3) ( 3)   ( 3) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 2)
 Majority of partners   15   11    17 15       14   20 15       18   13 19∗∗∗ 10∗∗∗ 18
                       ( 1) ( 2) ( 4) ( 3)    ( 3) ( 3) ( 3)   ( 2) ( 2) ( 3)    ( 2) ( 3)
 Scoring                 2    3     1   2       0    2    3      2    2    3       1    1
                       ( 1) ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)    ( 0) ( 1) ( 1)   ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)    ( 1) ( 1)
 Independent decisions   4    6∗∗ 0∗∗ 7∗        2∗   5    3      4    3    8∗∗     3∗∗ 3
                       ( 1) ( 2) ( 0) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 2) ( 1)   ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 1)
 Other                   3    3     2   6       2    4    2      3    3    5       4    2
                       ( 1) ( 1) ( 2) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 1) ( 1)   ( 1) ( 1) ( 2)    ( 1) ( 1)
 Number of responses 556 239       90 130      88 139 155     248 311 158       219 201


                             Table 33: Benchmarks Important to LPs
The percentage of respondents who indicate a given benchmark is important (top) and as most
important (bottom) to LPs. ‘Fraction that are relative’ is the average percentage of selected
benchmarks that are relative to either the S&P 500 or to other VC funds.
                                    Stage     Industry IPO Rate Fund Size     Location
                              All Early Late IT Health High Low Large Small CA OthUS Fgn
Important benchmark
Cash-on-cash multiple         84     87      85 89          87      85 88          90∗∗∗    80∗∗∗ 90∗    83∗     82
                             ( 2)   ( 2)    ( 4) ( 3)      ( 4)    ( 3) ( 3)      ( 2)     ( 3) ( 3)    ( 3)    ( 3)
Net IRR                       81     77∗∗    89∗∗ 84        75      87 80          84       78 78        85      78
                             ( 2)   ( 3)    ( 3) ( 4)      ( 5)    ( 3) ( 4)      ( 2)     ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 3)
Gross IRR                     27     26      32 29          21      15∗∗∗ 29∗∗∗    23∗      31∗ 28       21      32∗
                             ( 2)   ( 3)    ( 5) ( 4)      ( 5)    ( 3) ( 4)      ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 4)
Perf. relative to S&P 500     23     25      28 25∗         14∗     24 23          25       22 29        27      14∗∗∗
                             ( 2)   ( 3)    ( 5) ( 4)      ( 4)    ( 4) ( 4)      ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 3)
Perf. relative to VC funds    60     63      61 66          55      70 64          65∗      56∗ 67       59      57
                             ( 2)   ( 3)    ( 6) ( 5)      ( 6)    ( 4) ( 4)      ( 3)     ( 3) ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 4)
Other                          2      1       0    0∗∗       5∗∗     2     1        1        3     3      2       1
                             ( 1)   ( 1)    ( 0) ( 0)      ( 2)    ( 1) ( 1)      ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1)    ( 1)    ( 1)
Most important benchmark
Cash-on-cash multiple        52       59     50     67      59       54 51      55   49           61      54      41∗∗∗
                            ( 2)     ( 3)   ( 6)   ( 5)    ( 6)     ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3)         ( 4)    ( 4)    ( 4)
Net IRR                      32       26∗    36∗    23      25       32 29      31   34           26      32      37∗
                            ( 2)     ( 3)   ( 6)   ( 4)    ( 5)     ( 4) ( 4)  ( 3) ( 3)         ( 4)    ( 3)    ( 4)
Gross IRR                     6        4      6      4       7        1∗∗ 6∗∗    5    6            5       3       9∗∗
                            ( 1)     ( 1)   ( 3)   ( 2)    ( 3)     ( 1) ( 2)  ( 2) ( 1)         ( 2)    ( 1)    ( 2)
Perf. relative to S&P 500     1        2      3      0       0        2    3     1    2            0∗      3∗      1
                            ( 1)     ( 1)   ( 2)   ( 0)    ( 0)     ( 1) ( 2)  ( 1) ( 1)         ( 0)    ( 1)    ( 1)
Perf. relative to VC funds    8        9      5      5       8       10 11       7    9            7       7      11
                            ( 1)     ( 2)   ( 3)   ( 2)    ( 3)     ( 3) ( 3)  ( 2) ( 2)         ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 2)
Other                         1        1      0      0       1        1    1     0    1            1       1       1
                            ( 0)     ( 1)   ( 0)   ( 0)    ( 1)     ( 1) ( 1)  ( 0) ( 1)         ( 1)    ( 1)    ( 1)
Number of benchmarks          3        3      3      3∗∗     3∗∗      3    3     3∗   3∗           3       3       3∗
                            ( 0)     ( 0)   ( 0)   ( 0)    ( 0)     ( 0) ( 0)  ( 0) ( 0)         ( 0)    ( 0)    ( 0)
Number of responses        446      199      75     99      74     117 120    209 242           128     182     153



                                                      61
                      Table 34: Target Returns and Performance Expectations
   The first section reports the mean and median net IRR that respondents market to LPs as target.
   The second section reports the same statistics for net cash-on-cash multiple. The third and fourth
   section reports VCs expectations for their performance and the performance of the VC industry,
   both relative to the market.
                                   Stage            Industry    IPO Rate  Fund Size              Location
                             All Early Late         IT Health High Low Large Small           CA OthUS Fgn
IRR marketed to LPs           24   24    21          23     21   21   25     24   23          23      27   21
                             ( 2) ( 2) ( 1)         ( 1)   ( 1) ( 1) ( 4)   ( 3) ( 2)        ( 1)    ( 4) ( 1)
Median                        20   20    20          20     20   20   20     20   20          20      20   20
                             ( 0) ( 1) ( 0)         ( 1)   ( 0) ( 0) ( 0)   ( 0) ( 0)        ( 1)    ( 0) ( 0)
Number of responses         364 152      65          75     64 101    90   171 197            93    150 130

Multiple marketed to LPs     3.5    3.8∗∗ 2.8∗∗     3.5    3.3    3.4    3.5    3.5    3.6    3.5      3.5    3.6
                           ( 0.2) ( 0.3) ( 0.2) (   0.3) ( 0.3) ( 0.3) ( 0.3) ( 0.2) ( 0.2) ( 0.3)   ( 0.3) ( 0.4)
Median                       3.0    3.0∗∗∗ 2.5∗∗∗   3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0      3.0    3.0
                           ( 0.0) ( 0.0) ( 0.0) (   0.0) ( 0.1) ( 0.1) ( 0.1) ( 0.1) ( 0.0) ( 0.0)   ( 0.1) ( 0.1)
Number of responses         380 165         69       82     65 106        98   183 201 104            155 134

My investments will out-      93      93     96      97      92   91   93         94   93   97          93   91∗
perform the stock market     ( 1)    ( 2)   ( 2)    ( 2)    ( 3) ( 3) ( 2)       ( 2) ( 2) ( 2)        ( 2) ( 2)
Number of responses         433     192      72      97      73 120 115         202 236 127           178 144

VC overall will outper-       71      72     73      72      72   68   69         69   73   68          69   77∗
form the stock market        ( 2)    ( 3)   ( 5)    ( 4)    ( 5) ( 4) ( 4)       ( 3) ( 3) ( 4)        ( 3) ( 3)
Number of responses         438     195      72      99      74 120 115         203 239 129           180 145




                                                       62
              Table 35: Correlation Between Subsubsample Membership Indicators

   This table lists the correlation between indicator variables for subsample membership. In VS refers to
   VC firms in Dow Jones VentureSource. Correlations are taken only over the portion of the variables
   that are defined for both (IE: correlations involving VentureSource are taken only over the portion of
   the sample that is in VS, correlations over deciles are taken only for VCs that answer that question.)

            Stage           Industry        IPO Rate       Fund Size                Location
          Early   Late       IT Health High         Low Large      Small        CA OthUS       Fgn In VS
Early      100     -25∗∗∗    24∗∗∗    -5     -10∗∗    7∗    -11∗∗∗   20∗∗∗        3       2     -6     13∗∗∗
              ∗∗∗                                              ∗∗∗
Late       -25    100          1      -1      -2      0      10      -4          -1       1      0     -8∗∗
IT          24∗∗∗    1      100      -19∗∗∗   -3      1      -4       9∗∗        14∗∗∗
                                                                                         -6     -8∗∗
                                                                                                        0
                                ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗    ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗
Health      -5      -1      -19     100       21    -14      13      -8∗∗        -2       7∗∗   -6      4
High       -10∗∗    -2        -3      21∗∗∗
                                             100    -28∗∗∗
                                                             37∗∗∗
                                                                    -33∗∗∗       21∗∗∗   -4    -16∗∗∗
Low          7∗      0         1     -14∗∗∗
                                             -28∗∗∗
                                                    100      -5      10∗∗∗      -13∗∗∗
                                                                                          7∗
                                                                                                 6
Large      -11∗∗∗   10∗∗∗     -4      13∗∗∗
                                              37∗∗∗
                                                     -5    100      -85∗∗∗       15∗∗∗    0    -14∗∗∗  13∗∗∗
Small       20∗∗∗   -4         9∗∗
                                      -8∗∗
                                             -33∗∗∗
                                                     10∗∗∗
                                                            -85∗∗∗
                                                                    100         -15∗∗∗
                                                                                         -1     15∗∗∗
                                                                                                        3
CA           3      -1       14∗∗∗    -2      21∗∗∗ -13∗∗∗   15∗∗∗ -15∗∗∗       100     -51∗∗∗ -44∗∗∗   4
OthUS        2       1        -6       7∗∗    -4      7∗      0      -1         -51∗∗∗ 100     -55∗∗∗  -5
                                ∗∗              ∗∗∗
Fgn         -6       0        -8      -6     -16      6     -14∗∗∗   15∗∗∗      -44∗∗∗ -55∗∗∗ 100       1
In VS       13∗∗∗   -8∗∗       0       4                     13∗∗∗    3           4      -5      1    100




                                                     63
