                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                VOTER RESPONSE TO PEAK AND END TRANSFERS:
          EVIDENCE FROM A CONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFER EXPERIMENT

                                      Sebastian Galiani
                                         Nadya Hajj
                                     Patrick J. McEwan
                                       Pablo Ibarraran
                                    Nandita Krishnaswamy

                                      Working Paper 22588
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22588


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2016, Revised November 2018




Samantha Finn and Caroline Gallagher provided excellent research assistance in the collection
of voting data. Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Fiorella Benedetti, Kristin Butcher, Dan Fetter, Phil
Levine, Kyung Park, Akila Weerapana, seminar participants, and anonymous referees
provided helpful advice, without assuming responsibility for errors or interpretations. This is a
substantially updated and revised version of a paper circulated as “Electoral Reciprocity in
Programmatic Redistribution: Experimental Evidence.” The opinions expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Inter-American Development
Bank, its Board of Directors, the countries they represent, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Sebastian Galiani, Nadya Hajj, Patrick J. McEwan, Pablo Ibarraran, and Nandita
Krishnaswamy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Voter Response to Peak and End Transfers: Evidence from a Conditional Cash Transfer Experiment
Sebastian Galiani, Nadya Hajj, Patrick J. McEwan, Pablo Ibarraran, and Nandita Krishnaswamy
NBER Working Paper No. 22588
September 2016, Revised November 2018
JEL No. H3,I38

                                         ABSTRACT

In a Honduran field experiment, sequences of cash transfers to poor households varied in amount
of the largest (“peak”) and last (“end”) transfers. Larger peak-end transfers increased voter
turnout and the incumbent party’s vote share in the 2013 presidential election, independently of
cumulative transfers. A plausible explanation is that voters succumbed to a common cognitive
bias by applying peak-end heuristics. Another is that voters deliberately used peak-end transfers
to update beliefs about the incumbent party. In either case, the results provide experimental
evidence on the classic non-experimental finding that voters are especially sensitive to recent
economic activity.

Sebastian Galiani                               Pablo Ibarraran
Department of Economics                         Inter-American Development Bank
University of Maryland                          1300 New York Avenue
3105 Tydings Hall                               Stop B0700
College Park, MD 20742                          Washington, DC 20577
and NBER                                        and IZA
galiani@econ.umd.edu                            pibarraran@iadb.org

Nadya Hajj                                      Nandita Krishnaswamy
Department of Political Science                 Dana and David Dornsife College of Letters,
Wellesley College                               Arts, and Sciences
106 Central St.                                 Department of Economics
Wellesley MA 02481                              University of Southern California
nhajj@wellesley.edu                             Kaprielian (KAP) Hall, 364E
                                                3620 South Vermont Ave.
Patrick J. McEwan                               Los Angeles, CA 90089-025
Department of Economics                         nanditak@usc.edu
Wellesley College
106 Central St.
Wellesley, MA 02481
pmcewan@wellesley.edu
   Many countries implement variants of conditional cash transfers or CCTs
(Fiszbein and Schady 2009; Adato and Hoddinott 2010). The typical policy
objectively targets poor households and offers transfers in exchange for using
school and health services.1 CCTs are not explicitly conditioned on political
support, unlike vote-buying (Stokes 2005; Finan and Schechter 2012). Even so,
intrinsically-reciprocal voters might express their gratitude in the polling booth
(Sobel 2005; Finan and Schechter 2012; Lawson and Greene 2014). Alternatively,
transfer-recipients with imperfect information about the competence or
redistributive preferences of incumbents may update their beliefs and vote
accordingly (Rogoff 1990; Drazen and Eslava 2006, 2010; Manacorda, Miguel, and
Vigorito 2011; Healy and Malhotra 2013).
   An empirical literature finds mixed effects of transfers on voter preferences and
behavior in national elections. Quasi-experimental studies in Uruguay, Romania,
and Colombia find positive effects on incumbent political support,2 as does an
observational study in Brazil (Zucco 2013). However, a Ugandan experiment finds
counter-intuitively negative results,3 and there are conflicting findings in Mexico’s
well-known Progresa experiment. De La O (2013) reports positive effects on voter
turnout and incumbent vote share in the 2000 presidential elections, though a re-
analysis finds that results are sensitive to the model specification and data (Imai,




   1 A largely experimental literature finds that cash transfers increase the use of school and health services (Baird et al.
2014; Gaarder, Glassman, and Todd 2010), and reduce child labor on the intensive and extensive margins (de Hoop and
Rosati 2014)
   2 In Uruguay, recipients of monthly, unconditional transfers in the vicinity of an assignment cutoff were more likely to
favor the government even after the transfers ended (Manacorda, Miguel, and Vigorito 2011). In Romania, the recipients of
a one-time voucher for a computer purchase were more likely to support the incumbent governing coalition, also in the
vicinity of an assignment cutoff (Pop-Eleches and Pop-Eleches 2012). In Colombia, Conover et al. (Forthcoming) found that
bimonthly, conditional transfers affected turnout and incumbent vote share in the 2010 presidential election, especially
among women who were the direct recipients; they instrumented transfer participation with transfer eligibility, based on a
proxy means test. Nupia (2011) also finds incumbent vote share effects in Colombia using a different (but less plausibly
exogenous) source of variation in CCT exposure.
   3 Ugandan beneficiaries of a highly successful program to support skilled enterprises were more likely to support the
opposition, perhaps because of the empowering effects of financial independence, which diminished the need for patronage
(Blattman, Emeriau, and Fiala Forthcoming).




                                                                                                                           1
King, and Velasco Rivera 2017). Using discontinuous variation in the assignment
of communities to Progresa, Green (2006) reports no effects on voter behavior.
  This paper estimates the impact of a Honduran CCT—dubbed Bono 10,000—on
voter turnout and incumbent party vote share in the 2013 presidential election. It
does so with a three-arm randomized experiment that introduced variation in the
timing and the amount of cash transfers. In this regard, our paper resembles field
experiments in Colombia and Kenya that distributed lump-sum and evenly-spaced
transfers, although these experiments focused on consumption and human capital
investments rather than voter behavior (Barrera-Osorio et al. 2011; Haushofer and
Shapiro 2016; Barrera-Osorio, Linden, and Saavedra Forthcoming)
  The Honduran experiment included 816 villages, randomly assigned to CCT1
(150), CCT2 (150), and CCT3 (516). A government agency was responsible for the
distribution of transfers. CCT1 began receiving transfers in June 2012. CCT2 did
not receive transfers until June 2013, just after both groups participated in a follow-
up survey of consumption, education, and health, analyzed in a companion paper
(Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan 2016). CCT3 also began receiving transfers in
June 2012. The presidential election was held in November 2013.
  Poor households in the three groups of villages were supposed to receive
similarly-sized and evenly-distributed cash transfers, but there were substantial
deviations. In CCT1, poor households received large catch-up payments just before
the follow-up surveys began in March 2013. In CCT2, poor households also
received large catch-up payments, but just after the completion of the follow-up
surveys in June 2013. There were no similarly-timed spikes in the volume and size
of transfers in CCT3. In village-level regressions, we show that “peak” transfers
per registered voter (i.e., the largest transfer in a sequence) were higher in both
CCT1 and CCT2, on average, relative to CCT3. So too were “end” transfers per
registered voter (i.e., the final transfer in a sequence).




                                                                                     2
   Voter turnout was 2.5 and 2.3 percentage points higher in CCT1 and CCT2,
respectively, relative to CCT3. The incumbent party’s vote share was 2.4 and 1.9
percentage points higher than CCT3. In each case, the effects are statistically
distinguishable from zero at conventional levels, but not from each other. The
results provide a prima facie case that peak and end transfers—rather than total
transfers—affect voter behavior, because the cumulative transfers per registered
voter were similar in CCT2 and CCT3, and smaller than CCT1. To assess this, we
regress voting outcomes on two endogenous variables: total transfers per registered
voter and the peak-end transfer midpoint per registered voter.4 We instrument both
variables with CCT1 and CCT2. The coefficients on total transfers are close to zero.
However, the coefficients on the peak-end midpoint suggest that an increase of 100
lempiras per registered voter (about $5) increases voter turnout and the incumbent
party’s vote share by 0.6 and 0.5 percentage points, respectively.
   A literature in behavioral economics and psychology suggests that voters may
have succumbed to a common cognitive bias. When evaluating sequences of
hedonic episodes, individuals rely on peak and end heuristics. That is, they over-
weight the episode of greatest pleasure or displeasure as well as the final episode.5
Similar phenomena occur when subjects retrospectively evaluate sequences of
payments—such as cash transfers—despite a transparent rule for aggregating
payments over time. Subjects find it difficult to calculate a running sum of
payments due to distraction from other tasks (Langer, Sarin, and Weber 2005),
inattention (Huber, Hill, and Lenz 2012), or the sheer difficulty of doing so over a
lengthy sequence (Yu, Lagnado, and Chater 2008).




    4 In practice, the separate peak and end variables are highly collinear with each other because the final payment is
sometimes the largest, or there is only a single payment in a sequence (which is both largest and final). Thus, results are
robust to the use of either peak or end transfers as an endogenous variable (rather than the peak-end midpoint). However,
this precludes inferences about the relative salience of peak and end transfers.
    5 For reviews, see Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin (1997) and Healy and Lenz (2014).




                                                                                                                         3
  It is possible that voter response to peak and end transfers is not the result of
cognitive bias. Rational voters might intend to reward incumbents for the largest or
most recent transfer, perhaps because they view it as the best signal of unobserved
competence or redistributive preferences before an election (e.g., Rogoff 1990;
Drazen and Eslava 2006, 2010). We cannot directly test this, although Healey and
Lenz (2014) provide indirect evidence. In lab experiments, they found that subjects
over-weight the final year of economic growth when rating entire presidential
terms. (This is despite survey evidence that voters intend to weight years more
equally.) The effects disappear when subjects receive more transparent information
regarding cumulative growth over four years, suggesting that a reliance on election-
year economic growth depends, at least in part, on heuristics.
  We evaluate and discard alternate explanations for the results. Unlike voters in
CCT3, some in CCT1 and CCT2 were exposed to baseline and follow-up surveys.
It is possible that survey participation influenced voter perceptions of the
competence or redistributive preferences of the incumbent. However, not all
households participated in the survey, and we do not find that a proxy of survey
participation moderates treatment effects in the expected direction. One might also
hypothesize that the government surreptitiously allocated resources to CCT2
villages as a compensatory response to delayed transfers. However, households in
CCT1 and CCT2 did not report substantial differences in a wide range of benefits—
other than the cash transfers—received from public and private sources.
  The paper makes three main contributions. First, it provides causal evidence
outside a lab setting that voters respond to peak and end transfers. In so doing, the
paper contributes to the voluminous theoretical and empirical literature on political
budget and business cycles (Drazen 2008a, b). For example, a classic empirical
literature argues that voters are responsive to macroeconomic conditions, especially
in election years (Kramer 1971; Nordhaus 1975; Fair 1978; Markus 1988). These
studies face considerable challenges in identifying exogenous variation in




                                                                                   4
economic conditions (Manacorda, Miguel, and Vigorito 2011). Political scientists
have used lab experiments to confirm that subjects do a poor job of evaluating
sequences of individual payments (Huber, Hill, and Lenz 2012) and
macroeconomic outcomes (Healy and Lenz 2014). To our knowledge, ours is the
only field experiment to demonstrate that voters respond to the timing of economic
activity—specifically, cash transfers—just before a national election. While not
conclusive, the results are consistent with the well-documented use of peak-end
heuristics in varied lab settings (e.g., Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin 1997; Healy
and Lenz 2014).
   Second, the paper contributes to a growing literature in development economics
that demonstrates how the timing of cash transfers can moderate effects on
household consumption and human capital investment. In Colombia and Kenya,
experiments awarded some households lump-sum transfers in addition instead of
evenly-spaced transfers (Barrera-Osorio et al. 2011; Haushofer and Shapiro 2016;
Barrera-Osorio, Linden, and Saavedra Forthcoming).6 In Colombia, the
postponement of transfers increased effects on secondary and tertiary education
attainment. In Kenya, lump-sum transfers increased the value of nonland assets, but
did not affect many other outcomes. Both results suggest that lump-sum transfers
might relax a saving or borrowing constraint. Our experiment is the first to show
that lump-sum transfers may also have important political consequences.
   This may help understand mixed results in other evaluations. For example, Imai,
King, and Velasco Rivera (2017) show that Mexico’s Progresa had zero effects on
voter behavior. The treatment group received payments for 31-32 months before
the election, while the “control group”—much like CCT2 in this paper—received
payments for 3-8 months. The cumulative amount of transfers surely differed


   6 In Indonesia, quasi-experimental estimates suggest that ignoring the timing of unconditional cash transfers can lead to
underestimates, since delayed receipt reduces household expenditures, while timely receipt has no effects (Bazzi, Sumarto,
and Suryahadi 2015).




                                                                                                                          5
between groups, but the difference in voter behavior may have depended on the
relative size of peak and end transfers. Using administrative data, Skoufias (2005)
documented that transfers deviated from a bimonthly schedule, although it is not
clear whether this varied across treatment arms. There were “considerable delays
in the processing of forms necessary for payment authorization,” leading to larger-
than-expected payments in several months, “a consequence of Progresa’s efforts to
catch up….” (9). Nevertheless, Green (2006) still finds no effect on voter behavior
when comparing communities on either side of Progresa eligibility cutoffs. This
was a plausibly cleaner treatment-control comparison since controls did not receive
transfers (Imai, King, and Velasco Rivera 2017).
   Third, the paper provides a straightforward political explanation for common
shortcomings in program implementation. In Honduras and Mexico, the evidence
shows that some transfers were delayed and/or larger-than-prescribed. (This may
well occur elsewhere, but data on program compliance is sparse.) Even if politicians
are not directly responsible for weak implementation, our results suggest that
incumbent candidates and parties do not have strong incentives to improve the
regularity of payments. In a related example, education and health conditions—
such as school attendance—are sometimes imperfectly enforced (Baird et al. 2014).
Strong enforcement of onerous conditions may lead a subset of non-complier
households to decline transfers (Baird, McIntosh, and Özler 2011). Weaker
enforcement may lead some to accept the “conditional” cash transfer, with
attendant consequences for voter behavior. As above, politicians may face weak
incentives to improve implementation.7




    7 One might argue that politicians have strong incentives to signal a commitment to public education by strictly enforcing
attendance and enrollment conditions. However, Bursztyn (2016) shows that poor voters in Brazil have a stronger preference
for redistributive programs than for investments in public education.




                                                                                                                            6
               I. The Bono 10,000 Conditional Cash Transfer Program

                                            A. Program Design

  Since the early 1990s, the Family Allowance Program—known by its Spanish
acronym, PRAF—has administered variants of conditional cash transfer programs
(Moore 2008; Galiani and McEwan 2013). In 2010, PRAF began the nationwide
rollout of Bono 10,000, which continued after the 2013 presidential election.
Program guidelines dictated that poor households would receive up to 10,000
lempiras per year (about $500). Household poverty (and thus eligibility) were
determined via a proxy means tests. The methodology was not disclosed to
researchers or to the public, although it relied on wealth proxies obtained from a
household census (Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan 2016).
  Households received either an education or a health transfer. Households
received the education transfer (10,000 lempiras per year) if they enrolled at least
one child between 6 and 18 in grades 1 to 9. Households received the health transfer
(5,000 lempiras per year) if children under 6 and pregnant women attended health
center checkups (and if the household was not eligible for the larger education
transfer). Relative to other CCT programs, the conditions in Bono 10,000 were
weak (Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan 2016). In households with multiple
children, households received the full education transfer even if no more than one
child enrolled in school. Moreover, households were not obligated to comply with
health conditions if the presence of an older child qualified the household for the
education transfer. The great majority (83%) of transfer-eligible households
received the larger education transfer.8
  According to program guidelines, households were supposed to receive transfers
in no fewer than three installments per year. The first was a small, unconditional


  8 The estimate is based upon the administrative payment data analyzed below.




                                                                                  7
transfer equal to 1/12 of the annual total, received at the time of registration.
Thereafter, two equally-sized transfers were payable upon verification of
compliance with the conditions. The annual transfers were equal to 18% of the
median per-capita expenditure of poor households (Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and
McEwan 2016). This is comparable to Latin American cash transfer programs such
as Progresa/Oportunidades, and larger than earlier Honduran programs (Fiszbein
and Schady 2009; Galiani and McEwan 2013).

                                        B. Experimental Design

  The national rollout of Bono 10,000 began in 2010 and continued past the 2013
election. PRAF focused early implementation on villages with high poverty rates.9
The research team delayed the rollout in 816 villages with high poverty rates
(Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan 2016). On September 9, 2011, researchers
blindly drew 300 numbered balls from a receptacle containing 816. In alternating
order, villages were assigned to a treatment group of 150 and a control group of
150. We refer to the groups as CCT1 and CCT2, respectively.
  Baseline surveys were applied to a sample of poor households in CCT1 and CCT2
in the first half of 2012.10 Follow-up surveys were applied to the same sample
between March and June 2013 (but still more than four months before the
presidential election on November 23, 2013). Villages in CCT1 received transfers
from PRAF immediately, while villages in CCT2 received transfers immediately
after the completion of follow-up surveys. In a companion paper, Benedetti,
Ibarrarán, and McEwan (2016) used the survey data to estimate the impact of
transfers on poverty, education, and health outcomes. The remaining 516 villages—



   9 We empirically corroborate this, and other details of village and household targeting in online appendix A.
   10 A research firm—NORC at the University of Chicago—drew the sample from a list of eligible households that had
passed a proxy means test devised and applied by PRAF. NORC’s household sample drew a fixed number of 15 households
from each village, regardless of population size.




                                                                                                                 8
referred to as CCT3—did not participate in baseline or follow-up surveys, although
they received transfers at the discretion of PRAF.

                  C. Characterizing the Distribution of Transfers

  Household transfers were supposed to follow the aforementioned guidelines,
regardless of the treatment arm. In practice, PRAF deviated from the guidelines,
particularly in CCT1 and CCT2. The histogram in Figure 1 describes the weekly
volume of transfers in CCT1. There was a spike just before the application of the
follow-up surveys. Indeed, more than 20% of all transfers in CCT1 occurred in a
two-week period. The open circles show that average transfers in these weeks were
among the largest made to CCT1 households. At more than 5,000 lempiras, the
average transfers exceeded program guidelines. Anecdotally, PRAF rushed to
distribute catch-up payments before the application of follow-up surveys, so that
CCT1 households would receive the prescribed (cumulative) transfers. Similarly
large payments occurred just after baseline survey collection, although the volume
of such payments was much lower.

                                [Insert Figure 1 Here]

  In CCT2, there were almost no transfers before the completion of the follow-up
surveys (see Figure 2). This constraint was imposed by researchers, in order to
preserve the fidelity of the control group in the original impact evaluation
(Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan 2016). After the follow-up surveys, PRAF
rapidly increased the volume of catch-up transfers. Over an 11-week period, the
average size of these payments was nearly 5,000 lempiras. Many such transfers
were the final ones received by households before the presidential election
(illustrated by the darker bars in the histogram of Figure 2).

                                [Insert Figure 2 Here]




                                                                                9
   Transfers in CCT3 hewed more closely to program guidelines (see Figure 3).
There were fewer spikes in the volume and average size of transfers, relative to
CCT1 and CCT2. There were larger-than-prescribed transfers in a several weeks of
mid-2012 that mirrored CCT1. However, the larger transfers did not occur in weeks
of especially high volume. Overall, Figures 1, 2, and 3 provide suggestive evidence
that poor households in CCT1 and CCT2—relative to CCT3—were more likely to
receive specific transfers that exceeded program guidelines.

                                                [Insert Figure 3 Here]

                      D. The Potential Salience of Peak and End Transfers

   What are the implications for voter behavior? For the moment, assume that voters
intend to reward incumbents in proportion to the sum of transfers received by an
election date (we later revisit this assumption). This requires a retrospective
evaluation of the sequence of transfers on election day. A well-known literature in
behavioral economics and psychology suggests that individuals make predictable
errors when retrospectively evaluating sequences of hedonic episodes.11 Subjects
tend to overweight the peak episode—the moment of highest pleasure or worst
discomfort—as well as the final episode. Intuitively, individuals might commit
fewer errors when evaluating a sequence of economic outcomes, such as monetary
transfers. The rule for evaluation of a sequence—the sum—is more obvious and
universally-shared than rules for evaluating hedonic episodes (Langer, Sarin, and
Weber 2005).


   11 For reviews, see Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin (1997) and Healy and Lenz (2014). For example, Fredrickson and
Kahneman (1993) exposed subjects to a sequence of short film clips with pleasant or aversive content. The subjects rated the
instant utility of each clip as they were exposed to it, and also provided final evaluations of remembered utility at the end of
the sequence. The authors found that final evaluations were most influenced by the peak and end episodes, and that other
episodes had no influence at all. Evidence of a “peak-end rule” for retrospective evaluation has been found in other settings,
such as painful episodes (e.g., Redelmeier and Kahneman 1996). In subsequent studies, the end part of the rule has been
more robustly observed, perhaps suggesting that peak episodes are not as salient in varied contexts (e.g., Ariely 1998; Healy
and Lenz 2014).




                                                                                                                            10
   Nonetheless, lab experiments show that subjects perform badly in the
retrospective evaluation of economic outcomes, even with incentives or preferences
to do otherwise (Langer, Sarin, and Weber 2005; Huber, Hill, and Lenz 2012; Healy
and Lenz 2014; Yu, Lagnado, and Chater 2008). Instead of accurately calculating
sums, the experiments suggest that individuals are unduly swayed by the final
economic outcome in a sequence. Two experiments suggest that peak payments
also influenced the choice of payment sequences (Langer, Sarin, and Weber 2005;
Yu, Lagnado, and Chater 2008). The reliance on peak and end heuristics is most
evident when subjects are distracted by other tasks,12 inattentive,13 or simply unable
to calculate a running sum because of lengthy sequences or mathematical ability.14
   The Honduran setting is unlikely to diminish susceptibility to peak-end bias. The
field experiment occurred over nearly two years, and voters were distracted by
varied obligations in a high-poverty setting. They were plausibly inattentive to the
calculation of an accurate running sum, at least until the election increased the
salience of doing so. Finally, the formal schooling of poor adults is low. Their
ability to calculate a running sum—even without distraction or inattention—is



    12 In Langer, Sarin, and Weber (2005), participants viewed about 10 payments in one sequence, and a similar number of
payments in another. Participants were asked to choose a preferred sequence (and had an incentive to choose correctly, since
they received that amount). They showed no evidence of peak-end bias in their choice, and the authors inferred that the
participants—all business students—calculated running sums, precluding the need for retrospection. In another experiment,
however, the participants were distracted by a strenuous mental task. In this case, the participants were less likely to choose
the correct sequence, and their choices were swayed by the end of the sequence. There was some evidence that peaks
influenced choices, although the experiment did not include substantial peak variation.
    13 Huber, Hill, and Lenz (2012) assigned subjects an “allocator” that would offer 32 payments of tokens in successive
rounds, later convertible to cash. The size of each payment was subject to chance, although some “types” of allocators had
higher or lower average payouts across many rounds. The allocator’s type was not told to participants, although they could
infer it from the sequence of payments. The participants were allowed to draw a new allocator (with a potentially higher
mean payments) after 16 of 32 rounds. Not surprisingly, the average payment received over 16 rounds was positively
associated with the decision to retain an allocator. However, a random subset of participants only learned of this possibility
after round 12, while the others were informed before any payments were made. When participants were informed later, their
decisions leaned more heavily on payments in rounds 13 to 16.
    14 In Yu, Lagnado, and Chater (2008), participants played a slot machine for two sessions of 50 payouts each, preferring
those with higher peak-end midpoints despite lower total payouts. Healy and Lenz (2014) called upon participants to compare
and rate economic growth during the terms of hypothetical presidents. Each participant viewed two bar charts that described
four years of annual economic growth rates during a hypothetical presidency. Despite having access to all years of growth
data, participants evinced a preference for stronger growth in the fourth year, regardless of cumulative growth over the entire
term. This occurred in spite of voters’ stated desire to weight each year more equally in their overall decision. The authors
gave additional information to a random subset of participants, including a bar chart of cumulative growth rates. In this case,
participants’ behavior was aligned with their intention to weigh years more equally.




                                                                                                                           11
plausibly lower than university students in richer countries (Langer, Weber, and
Sarin 2008; Yu, Lagnado, and Chater 2008) or experimental subjects recruited
through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (Huber, Hill, and Lenz 2012; Healy and Lenz
2014).

                                                        II. Data

                                     A. The 2013 Presidential Election

   Before 2013, Honduran presidential elections were dominated by the National
and Liberal Parties. Neither party defended a strong ideological platform, and both
cultivated clientelist networks of supporters by distributing resources and jobs in
order to mobilize core supporters (Ruhl, 2010; Taylor-Robinson 2014).15 Two-
party dominance eroded after a 2009 coup d’etat. The Liberal president—Manuel
Zelaya—sought closer relations with Venezuela and the reversal of a ban on
reelection (Ruhl 2010). In June 2009, Zelaya was illegally removed from the
country by the military. The Liberal president of the congress assumed power until
the presidential elections—in November 2009—that were won by the National
Party candidate, Porfirio Lobo.
   The coup d’etat catalyzed the formation of new parties (Otero-Felipe 2014). The
most prominent included a left-leaning party known by its Spanish acronym,
LIBRE, and led by Zelaya’s spouse, Xiomara Castro. The right-leaning Anti-
Corruption Party (PAC) was headed by a television personality, Salvador Nasralla.
In the presidential election held on November 23, 2013, the incumbent National
Party candidate, Juan Orlando Hernandez, won with a plurality of 36.9% of votes.
He was followed by the candidates of LIBRE (28.8%), the Liberal Party (20.3%),



   15 In the 2009 election, for example, a list experiment found that 21% percent of voters reported receiving a gift or favor
during the campaign (González-Ocantos, Kiewiet de Jonge, and Nickerson 2015).




                                                                                                                          12
and PAC (13.4%). At 60.4% of registered voters, voter turnout was among the
highest recorded in a presidential election (Otero-Felipe 2014).

                                                  B. Village Samples

   The Tribunal Supremo Electoral (TSE) is responsible for conducting elections
and certifying results. Voters are assigned to a voting center, usually located in a
school. The voting center corresponds to a sector (or precinct). We scraped the 2013
election results for 5,433 domestic voting centers from a TSE website.16 The
scraped data did not include the numerical geographic codes of the villages in which
voting centers are located. As a labor-intensive alternative, we downloaded scanned
images of certified TSE vote tallies, which named the department, municipality,
and village (aldea) of the voting center.17 We hand-matched 99.7% of voting
centers to the geographic codes of their villages.18
   Of the 3,727 villages in Honduras, 82% had at least one voting center in the 2013
elections (see Table 1). The remaining, sparsely-populated villages were assigned
to voting centers in neighboring villages that we could not identify from publicly-
available data. Of 816 villages in the experimental sample, 677 had at least one
voting center. We further exclude one village that reported zero valid votes (the
mean and median villages have 873 and 569 registered voters, respectively). This
is plausibly due to manipulation, and so we conservatively exclude this outlier.
Because it is in CCT3, its inclusion slightly increases the magnitude of estimates
reported in subsequent tables. The main estimation sample includes 83% of all




   16 See http://siede.tse.hn/escrutinio/index.php. Honduran consulates in some U.S. cities are also used as voting centers.
   17 To be more specific, the certified vote tallies list either the aldea, barrio, or caserío. Barrios and caseríos are sub-units
of aldeas, which facilitated the identification of unlisted aldeas.
   18 We emphasize that simply matching village names would yield spurious matches, given many common village names
across municipalities. Thus, we verified that departments, municipalities and villages had matching names (and did so by
visual inspection to account for small discrepancies in spelling and diacritics).




                                                                                                                              13
experimental villages, and the proportion is similar across the treatment arms.19
This is expected, since treatment assignment was independent of village population.

                                                [Insert Table 1 Here]

   Villages in the main estimation sample may share a border with a sparsely-
populated village without a voting center. Therefore, a village’s voting centers
might include voters from outside the village. This introduces measurement error
in the dummy variables indicating treatment groups, since sparsely-populated
villages do not necessarily share the treatment status of villages in the main sample.
To assess the empirical relevance of this critique, we construct a restricted
estimation sample of 382 experimental villages that are circumscribed by villages
that also have at least one voting center. In the restricted sample, therefore, each
village’s voting center only includes registered voters that that village. We ignore
borders of neighboring villages when they are in different municipalities, since
sectors do not cross municipal borders (República de Honduras 2009). The
restricted sample is 47% of the original sample of 816, and the proportion is similar
across treatment arms.20

                               C. Dependent and Independent Variables

   We calculated the village-level turnout in the 2013 elections—aggregating up
from voting-center tallies—as the percent of registered voters who cast a valid vote
for any party. We further calculated village-level vote shares for the incumbent
National Party, the Liberal Party, LIBRE, and PAC. As with turnout, we calculated


    19 In a sample of 816 experimental villages, a dummy variable indicates whether the village is in the main estimation
sample. We regressed it on dummy variables indicating villages in CCT1 and CCT2, and tested the null hypothesis that
coefficients on CCT1 and CCT2 were jointly equal to zero. We were unable to reject the null, given a p-value of 0.37 on the
F-test.
    20 As before, in a sample of 816 experimental villages, a dummy variable indicates whether the village is in the restricted
estimation sample. We regressed it on dummy variables indicating villages in CCT1 and CCT2, and tested the null hypothesis
that coefficients on CCT1 and CCT2 were jointly equal to zero. We fail to reject the null, given a p-value of 0.58.




                                                                                                                           14
vote shares as percentages of registered voters. The number of voters registered in
the 2013 election is a good proxy for the population of voting-age adults.21 That is
because individuals 18 and older with a national identify card are automatically
registered to vote in the voting center nearest their residence.
   We constructed two groups of control variables. First, we scraped data from the
previous presidential election in 2009—carrying out a similar hand-matching of
village codes—and calculated village-level vote shares for the Liberal and National
parties (noting that LIBRE and PAC did not yet exist in 2009).22 In 2009, the TSE
did not report the number of registered voters, and so we calculated vote shares as
percentages of valid votes. Second, we used microdata from the 2001 census—the
only population data available before the 2013 election—to describe village-level
demographics and socioeconomic status among voting-age adults (see Table 2).
The variables include voters’ gender, age, ethnicity, schooling, and attributes of
dwellings that proxy income and wealth.

                                                [Insert Table 2 Here]

                                              D. Baseline Balance

   Table 2 reports means of the independent variables in the main estimation sample.
Across the three treatment arms—CCT1, CCT2, and CCT3—the average election
outcomes in 2009 were similar, as were the demographic and socioeconomic
variables in the population of voting-age adults in 2001. Beyond the inspection of
means, we regressed each baseline variable on CCT1 and CCT2, and tested the null
hypothesis that coefficients were jointly equal to zero. None were significantly



   21 We verified this by estimating the number of voting-age adults per village in 2013. We first calculated village-by-age
totals using 2001 census microdata. We then projected 2013 totals, accounting for mortality with a life table (United Nations
2013) and assuming no inter-village migration. In the main estimation sample, the correlation coefficient between voter
registration and the imperfect population projection is 0.95.
   22 http://consultas.tse.hn:1177/




                                                                                                                         15
different from zero at conventional levels. For each variable, we also report two p-
values from Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of the equality of distributions between
CCT3 and the other two treatment arms. We cannot reject equality of the
distributions at conventional significance levels. We repeated these analyses in the
restricted sample of villages, and there is similarly good balance across treatment
arms (see Table B1 in the online appendix).

                         III. Effects on Voting Outcomes

                            A. Reduced-Form Estimates

  Given randomized assignment, we estimate the reduced-form effect of
assignment to CCT1 and CCT2—relative to CCT3—with the regression

  (1) 𝑉𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝐶𝐶𝑇1𝑖 + 𝛽2 𝐶𝐶𝑇2𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖 ,


where 𝑉𝑖 is the voting outcome of village i, and the dummy independent variables
indicate villages in CCT1 and CCT2, relative to CCT3. Standard errors are adjusted
for arbitrary forms of heteroscedasticity, but clustering is unnecessary since the unit
of observation is the same as the unit of random assignment. We also report
estimates from regressions that control for the baseline variables in Table 2.
  Table 3 reports regression estimates for voter turnout and the incumbent party
vote share. In the main sample, the point estimates in all specifications are
consistent with positive effects on both dependent variables (see panel A).
However, the estimates are more precise when covariates are included. These
coefficients show that turnout in CCT1 and CCT2 villages is, respectively, 2.5 and
2.3 percentage points higher than CCT3. Both coefficients are statistically
significant at conventional levels, and we fail to reject the null that they are equal.




                                                                                    16
The magnitude of the effect represents a 3.8 to 4.1% increase over CCT3’s election
turnout of 61%.

                                                 [Insert Table 3 Here]

   The incumbent party’s vote share—also measured as a percent of registered
voters—increased by 2.4 and 1.9 percentage points in CCT1 and CCT2. Again,
both coefficients are statistically significant at conventional levels, though not
statistically different from one another. They represent increases of 7 to 8.8% over
CCT3’s incumbent vote share of 27%. Recall that turnout and vote share both are
calculated with the same denominator of registered voters. Thus, the similarity of
the point estimates on turnout and incumbent party vote share is suggestive that
assignment to the CCT1 and CCT2 primarily increased the turnout among the
National Party base, rather than encouraging vote-switching among those already
inclined to vote.23
   Panel B repeats these analyses in the restricted sample of villages, which reduces
the threat of measurement error in the treatment variables. Given the smaller
sample, standard errors are larger. However, the pattern of point estimates and
statistical significance reinforces the conclusion that turnout and incumbent party
vote share in CCT1 and CCT2 are larger—and by a similar magnitude—than
CCT3. In specifications with all control variables, all coefficients are larger than
2.2 for both turnout and for incumbent party vote share.
   Table 4 reports the same estimates for the other parties with substantial vote
shares: the Liberal Party, LIBRE, and PAC. In specifications with controls, the


   23 In this respect, the results seem consistent with the historically-entrenched nature of party identification in rural and
poor areas (in which National and Liberal parties employed clientelist strategies primarily to mobilize a political base). In
Bono 10,000, resources were distributed to poor households without regard for party affiliation. However, it seems plausible
that voters’ party identification and past experiences with clientelist redistribution mediate the degree to which intrinsically-
reciprocal voters (e.g., Finan and Schechter 2012) obtain pleasure from rewarding a political party. Alternatively, voters’
past experiences might affect whether they perceive transfers as a credible signal of party competence or redistributive
preferences (e.g., Manacorda, Miguel, and Vigorito 2011).




                                                                                                                             17
coefficients vary between -1 and 1 and none are statistically significant at
conventional levels (see panels A and B). There is some evidence that villages in
CCT2 were more likely to vote for PAC, relative to CCT3 and CCT1. However,
the point estimate is smaller and no longer significant at the 10% level in the
restricted sample.

                                                  [Insert Table 4 Here]

   Viewed alongside Figures 1 to 3, the reduced-form estimates are prima facie
evidence that voters in CCT1 and CCT2 responded to larger peak and/or end
transfers. However, this straightforward interpretation is muddied by three issues.
First, transfer-recipients in CCT2 receive fewer cumulative transfers, on average,
than households in CCT1 and CCT3.24 Second, 33% of villages in CCT3 received
no transfers at PRAF’s discretion, which did not occur in other groups. Third, some
registered voters within participating villages did not receive transfers, including
non-poor households that did not pass a proxy means test, and poor households that
did not comply with the conditions. However, both of the latter exclusions were
consistently applied across the treatment arms.

                                              B. First-Stage Estimates

   We therefore calculated the total transfers per registered voter in each village.25
Figure 4 illustrates averages of the village-level variable within the three treatment
arms. On the date of the presidential election, the total transfers per registered voter
are roughly similar in CCT2 and CCT3, but much larger in CCT1. This is
particularly influenced by the fraction of CCT3 villages that did not participate in


   24 Among transfer-recipients in each treatment arm, the average household in CCT1, CCT2, and CCT3 received a total
of 12,066; 6,029; and 11,527 lempiras, respectively.
   25 To calculate the total transfer per registered voter in a village, we divide the total transfers received by a particular date
(taken from administrative payment data) by the number of registered voters (taken from TSE voting data). In other words,
registered voters in excess of the recipients are assumed to have received zero payments.




                                                                                                                               18
the program before the election. In Table 5, the first two columns in Panel A report
analogous regression estimates. On average, the total transfers per registered voter
are 1,511 lempiras higher in CCT1 than in CCT3 (about $76), a difference that is
economically and statistically significant. In contrast, the coefficient on CCT2 is
slightly negative, but not statistically distinguishable from zero at conventional
levels. As Table 5 shows, these estimates are not sensitive to the exclusion of
baseline control variables, or to the use of the restricted estimation sample in Panel
B.

                                               [Insert Figure 4 Here]

                                                [Insert Table 5 Here]

   Figure 4 also corroborates the uneven distribution of transfers before the election.
The total transfers per registered voter increased sharply in CCT1 villages just
before the follow-up surveys, and in CCT2 villages just after the follow-up surveys.
Both patterns are consistent with the household-level data reported in Figures 1 and
2. To further examine these patterns, Table 5 reports estimates for three additional
dependent variables: the peak transfer per registered voter, the end transfer per
registered voter, and peak-end transfer midpoint per registered voter.26 For each
transfer recipient, the peak and end transfers (and the midpoint) were equal if: (1)
there was only a single payment in the sequence, or (2) the end transfer also
happened to be the largest. This was the case in 44% of households that received a
transfer. Not surprisingly, the peak and end variables are highly correlated with
each other (r=0.92), and more so with the midpoint variable.
   On average, the peak transfer per registered voter is 855 lempiras higher in CCT1
villages, relative to CCT3. It is 329 lempiras higher in CCT2 (see panel A). Both


   26 As with total transfers per registered voter, we simply assume that registered voters received peak and end transfers of
zero if they did not appear in administrative payment data.




                                                                                                                          19
estimates are statistically distinguishable from zero and from each other at
conventional levels. Neither is sensitive to the exclusion of baseline controls or to
the use of the restricted estimation sample in panel B. For the end transfer per
registered voter, the coefficients on CCT1 and CCT2 are closer in magnitude (360
and 391 lempiras, respectively) and statistically indistinguishable. When using the
peak-end midpoint variable, the coefficient on CCT1 is again somewhat larger than
that of CCT2.

                                 C. Two-Stage Least Squares Estimates

   The reduced-form estimates in Table 3 show that assignment to CCT1 or CCT2
increased turnout and incumbent party vote share by roughly the same magnitude,
relative to CCT3. The first-stage estimates in Table 5 imply that total transfers per
registered voter cannot easily explain this result, since CCT2 was, if anything,
slightly lower than CCT3. In contrast, the first-stage estimates showed that peak
and end transfers were higher in both CCT1 and CCT2, relative to CCT3.
   In Table 6, we empirically assess whether total transfers are less important than
peak-end transfers. In the first column of Panel A, we report estimates of second-
stage regressions that instrument total transfers per registered voter and the peak-
end transfer midpoint per registered voter with CCT1 and CCT2. (All first-stage
and second-stage regressions control for baseline variables.) The coefficient on
total transfers is negative (-0.08). Its 95% confidence interval allows us to rule out
effects on turnout that are larger than 0.14 (or 0.14 percentage points per 100
lempiras, or $5). On the other hand, a 100 lempira increase in the peak-end transfer
midpoint per registered voter increases turnout by 0.6 percentage points.27 We can



   27
      It is challenging to directly compare the magnitude of estimates to other settings with varied treatments, evaluation
designs, and measures of political preference, but it does not appear unreasonably high. In Uruguay, for example, poor
households at eligibility cutoff for a cash transfer were 11 percentage points more likely to support the current government;
there was full compliance with the treatment offer, or lack thereof. The monthly transfer—and therefore the peak and end




                                                                                                                         20
reject the null hypothesis at conventional levels that the coefficients are equal. The
results are similar for incumbent party vote share, and in the restricted estimation
sample in Panel B.

                                               [Insert Table 6 Here]

   Naturally, it would be preferable to include three endogenous variables that
measure total, peak, and end transfers. This is not possible because the number of
endogenous variables would exceed the number of instruments. In any case, peak
and end transfers are highly collinear.28 If we instead specify peak transfers or end
transfers as endogenous (see Table 6), the substantive results do not change. The
strongest conclusion to emerge from Table 6 is that voters are not responsive to the
total amount of transfers. On the other hand, they are responsive to larger payments
in a sequence.

                               D. Cognitive Bias vs. Rational Updating

   When voters respond to peak-end transfers, are they necessarily succumbing to a
cognitive bias? The answer hinges on understanding voters’ intentions. On the one
hand, they might intend to reward incumbents in proportion to the sum of transfers,
but a reliance on peak-end heuristics leads them astray. On the other hand, voters
may deliberately—and rationally—reward incumbents based on the amount of
recent transfers. We briefly consider the evidence for each view.
   Suppose that voters are intrinsically reciprocal (Finan and Schechter 2012;
Lawson and Greene 2014). Individuals who receive transfers may be inclined to



transfer—was $70, implying that $5 per household increased support by 0.8 percentage points. Some households also
received food cards worth $15 to $41 per month, although this was less well-implemented.
    28 As an additional exercise we included peak and end transfers in the second-stage regression—instrumenting both with
CCT1 and CCT2—and excluded total transfers. Not surprisingly, given the collinearity, the standard errors were considerably
larger. Given this, and the strong assumption that total transfers do not belong in the regression, we do not report these
estimates in Table 6.




                                                                                                                       21
vote for incumbents “because they experience pleasure in increasing the material
payoffs of the politician who has helped them” (Finan and Schechter, 864).29 In
such a model, voters’ intentions would be to reciprocate in proportion to the total
benefit received (i.e., the cumulative amount of transfers). This, in turn, would
require a retrospective evaluation of the cumulative amount. Unless voters can
easily recall the running sum, laboratory experiments suggest they would rely on
peak and end heuristics (Langer, Sarin, and Weber 2005; Huber, Hill, and Lenz
2012; Healy and Lenz 2014).
   Some evidence suggests that voting behavior in Latin America is—at least in
part—influenced by voters’ intrinsic reciprocity. In lower-income countries,
including Honduras and Paraguay, party brokers or middlemen routinely offer
favors to voters with the expectation that voters will return the favor on election
day (Finan and Schechter 2012; González-Ocantos, Kiewiet de Jonge, and
Nickerson 2015). Vote-buying might be sustained if the secret ballot is totally
compromised, allowing middlemen to directly monitor and sanction non-
complying voters (Stokes 2005). But unless voters are intrinsically reciprocal, it is
hard to explain the stubborn persistence of vote-buying even when ballot secrecy
precludes direct monitoring (Lawson and Greene 2014). As indirect evidence of
this, Finan and Schechter (2014) find that party middlemen in Paraguay
strategically target favors to more intrinsically-reciprocal voters, as a plausible
means of lessening the commitment problem.
   In other models, rational voters with imperfect information may infer the
unobserved competence of an incumbent through a retrospective assessment of her
performance (Rogoff 1990; Fearon 1999; Persson and Tabellini 2000; Duch and



   29 Reciprocal behavior could also be self-interested if parties and voters interact in a repeated game and voters wish to
“sustain a profitable long-term relationship” (Sobel 2005, 392), perhaps by ensuring that criteria for transfer eligibility do
not change. The two explanations are not mutually exclusive, since intrinsic reciprocity may enhance cooperation in a
repeated game between political parties and instrumentally-reciprocal voters (Sobel 2005; Finan and Schechter 2012).




                                                                                                                          22
Stevenson 2008).30 Prior to an election, for example, increased economic output
may signal a high-ability incumbent.31 In related models, rational voters may be
unaware of politicians’ redistributive preferences for individuals or groups, and the
retrospective assessment of payments allows voters to update their beliefs (Drazen
and Eslava 2006, 2010; Manacorda, Miguel, and Vigorito 2011). In these models,
it is plausible that voters believe that recent economic activity—such as election-
year economic growth or last month’s cash transfer—provides the most credible
signal of an incumbent’s competence or redistributive preferences (Healey and
Malhotra 2013). Therefore, voters’ reliance on recent activity may not be the result
of cognitive bias.
  To investigate this, Healy and Lenz (2014) surveyed potential voters about the
weights they intend to place on four years of economic growth when evaluating the
economy during a president’s term. The typical voter declared an intention to
weight years similarly (with a slight preference for later years). Even so, laboratory
experiments found that subjects’ judgments were consistently swayed by election-
year growth rates, even when presented with four years of growth data. Most
compellingly, they found that subjects’ over-weighting of election year growth
disappeared when subjects received clearer information about the cumulative
growth (or levels) of income over four years. Their evidence suggests that voters’
reliance on election-year outcomes is the unintended consequence of relying on end
heuristics. In a field experiment such as ours, one could randomly assign a fraction
of households in CCT1, CCT2, and CCT3 to receive a clear summary of cumulative
transfers just before an election. Better information might attenuate the influence
of peak-end transfers, to the extent that voters had used them as heuristics for
cumulative transfers.


   30 The discussion and citations draw on Healy and Malhotra (2013).
   31 See the review of Drazen (2008b) and the citations therein, including Persson and Tabellini (1990) and Lohmann
(1998).




                                                                                                                23
                           IV. Alternate Interpretations

  This section examines alternate interpretations of the voting effects. The first is
that survey exposure, rather than peak-end transfers, explains the similar voting
outcomes in CCT1 and CCT2. The second is that effects on CCT2 villages are
partly influenced by unmeasured benefits from other sources, assuming that
politicians wished to compensate for delays in cash transfers. The third is that
transfers to CCT1 and CCT2 improved non-voting outcomes relative to CCT3,
which in turn mediated the influence on voting outcomes. The fourth is that
transfers to CCT1 and CCT2 influenced the denominator of turnout and incumbent
vote share—the number of registered voters—via an effect on voters’ decisions to
consult and correct errors in the voter rolls.

                                 A. Survey Exposure

  Some households in CCT1 and CCT2 (but not in CCT3) participated in baseline
and follow-up surveys. The survey included questions on consumption, income,
education, and maternal and child health, among others (Bendetti, Ibarrarán, and
McEwan 2016). It was administered by non-government personnel affiliated with
Esa Consultores, a Honduran partner of NORC at the University of Chicago.
Survey participation might have influenced beliefs regarding the incumbent party’s
competence or redistributive preferences, independently of the transfers. Thus, it
might explain the similar point estimates in CCT1 and CCT2.
  All registered voters in CCT1 and CCT2 villages did not participate in the survey.
NORC randomly drew 15 households from each village’s roster of poor
households. Using the baseline survey data from Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan
(2016), we calculated that an average of 42 voting-age adults—or 7% of registered
voters—resided in the households of each village’s sample. A natural question is
whether the effects of treatment assignment are moderated by potential survey




                                                                                  24
exposure. To assess this, we control for Z—the within-sample z-score of the
number of registered voters in a village—and interact Z with CCT1 and CCT2.
Given the sample design, the percent of voters potentially exposed to the survey is
inversely related to Z (𝑟 = −0.57 in the sample of CCT1 and CCT2 villages). If
survey exposure positively affects voting outcomes, then we anticipate negative
signs on the interaction terms.
  The point estimates on CCT1 and CCT2—interpreted as effects at the sample
mean of registered voters—are consistent with the estimates from Table 5 (see
Table C1 in the online appendix). Only one interaction term is statistically
significant at conventional levels, and its sign is consistent with a larger effect on
National Party share in villages with more voters. A one standard deviation increase
in Z increases the coefficient on CCT1 by 1.8 to 2.2 percentage points, depending
on the estimation sample. The pattern of heterogeneity may also be due to the
correlation of Z with unobserved variables that also moderate the effects. However,
there is no evidence that survey exposure alone is responsible for the effects of
transfers.

                      B. Endogenous Responses of Politicians

  Transfers to CCT2 were delayed because it was a control group in the original
experiment (Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan 2016). Perhaps the National Party
was justifiably concerned about the electoral consequences of delaying transfers in
150 villages, and chose to compensate by targeting other resources to other villages
in CCT2. To assess this, we used the follow-up data from Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and
McEwan (2016). Households responded whether any member of the household had
received a variety of government benefits in the 12 months prior to the survey (see
Table C2 in the online appendix). As expected, 80% of CCT1 households but only
4% of CCT2 households had received a cash transfer from Bono 10,000. No more




                                                                                   25
than 2% of households had received cash transfers from other government
programs.
  The survey also asked whether anyone in the households had received generic
categories of benefits (e.g., a food donation) in the last 12 months, without
specifying that the benefit was provided by a public or private organization. The
most common benefit was a school lunch, and households in CCT1 were 4.7
percentage points more likely to have received it. This is consistent with the
magnitude of impacts on school enrollment (Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan
2016). The incidence of other benefits is small and differences are not statistically
significant.
  The exception is a health or vaccination campaign, which was 5 percentage points
more common in CCT2. One interpretation is that vaccination programs were
redirected from CCT1 villages, given the expectation that young children would
receive vaccinations in health centers as a consequence of the imposed health
conditions. In any case, Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan (2016) reported no
differences in the vaccination rates of young children across CCT1 and CCT2,
suggesting that CCT2 villages did not receive substantially different health inputs.
In summary, the clearest compensatory response in CCT2 was to swiftly disburse
transfers after the follow-up surveys.

                  C. Mediating Effects of Non-Voting Outcomes

  A small experimental literature tests whether non-voting outcomes—including
household consumption, education, and health—are influenced by lump-sum rather
than evenly-spaced transfers (Barrera-Osorio et al. 2011; Haushofer and Shapiro
2016; Barrera-Osorio, Linden, and Saavedra Forthcoming). Our concern is that the
putative effects of peak-end transfers on voting behavior are mediated by non-
voting outcomes. In Kenya, unconditional lump-sum transfers (instead of monthly




                                                                                  26
transfers) increased the value of nonland assets in households, but did not increase
other outcomes, including nondurable expenditures, psychological well-being,
education, or health (Haushofer and Shapiro 2016). In Colombia, the postponement
of conditional cash transfers increased their eventual effects on secondary and
tertiary education outcomes, relative to monthly distribution (Barrera-Osorio et al.
2011; Barrera-Osorio, Linden, and Saavedra Forthcoming). In both cases, lump-
sum transfers plausibly reduced saving or borrowing constraints.
  In Honduras, one might hypothesize that durable assets and ongoing school
investments were visible and constant reminders of the cumulative cash transfer
(which obviated the need to rely on peak-end heuristics). However, the importance
of this channel is not consistent with the Honduran results (recalling that CCT1 and
CCT1 had similar effects on voting outcomes, relative to CCT3). First, the Kenyan
experiment also showed that larger transfers—independently of timing—increased
the value of nonland assets. Yet, our experiment found that total transfers did not
affect voter behavior, suggesting durable asset accumulation cannot fully explain
the results.
  Second, children in CCT1 were 3.8 percentage points more likely to be enrolled
in school than CCT2, by the date of the follow-up survey (Bendetti, Ibarrarán, and
McEwan 2016). For school enrollment to plausibly explain voting effects in Table
3, we must assume that children in CCT2 closed the enrollment gap by the election
(and that CCT1 and CCT2 maintained their advantage relative to CCT3). It is a
generous assumption because CCT2 received approximately half the cumulative
transfers of CCT1. The Colombian experiment did not independently vary the total
transfer, although evidence from Mexico’s CCT suggests that larger total grants
improve education attainment (Araujo et al. 2018).
  Finally, some evidence suggests that adult health affects voter turnout (Mattila et
al. 2013). Bono 10,000 may have affected the health of voting-age adults via (1)
health-related conditions imposed on pregnant and nursing mothers, (2) spillovers




                                                                                  27
from healthier children to adults, and (3) health-related expenditures facilitated by
higher incomes. The first two were relatively unaffected by Bono 10,000
(Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan 2016). By the date of the follow-up surveys,
mothers in CCT1 were no more likely to use health services than mothers in CCT2
(Benedetti, Ibarrarán, and McEwan 2016). Moreover, there were no effects on the
health and nutritional outcomes of young children, including child hemoglobin,
parent-reported child illness, vaccination rates, and anthropometric variables. There
is no direct evidence on health-related expenditures, although household
consumption increased by 9% in CCT1 relative to CCT2, for both food and non-
food items. This gap likely narrowed before the election, but not entirely, given the
much larger cumulative transfers in CCT1. This is inconsistent with the similar
magnitude of voting outcomes in the two treatment arms.

                               D. Voter Registration

  Section II noted that the number of registered voters proxies the voting-age
population. That is because the TSE—the Honduran election agency—constructs
voter rolls prior to each election using data from the civil registry (República de
Honduras 2009). Even so, it is possible that the treatment affects voter registration.
The voter rolls are made available on a website before the election, and individuals
may consult their assigned voting center by entering a national identity number. If
individuals are not registered—or not assigned to a voting center near their home—
then individuals may request a correction up to 90 days before the election.
  We have assumed that transfers increased the numerators of the dependent
variables, which are calculated as a percent of registered voters. Instead let us
suppose that transfers increase the denominator by motivating individuals to
consult and correct errors in the voter rolls, in anticipation of voting on election
day. As a consequence, the estimates in Table 3 might understate the magnitude of




                                                                                   28
effects on turnout. To assess this, Table C3 in the online appendix reports
regressions with Z—the z-score of the number of registered voters—as a dependent
variable.32 In all specifications, the absolute values of coefficients are less than 7%
of a standard deviation. With baseline controls the absolute values are less than 4%
of a standard deviation. We conclude that the estimates in Tables 3 are consistent
with a causal effect of transfers on the turnout of previously-registered voters.

             V. Complementary Evidence from the PRAF-II experiment

  Cash transfers were smaller in the earlier PRAF-II experiment, implemented
before the 2001 presidential election (Glewwe and Olinto 2004; Morris et al. 2004;
Moore 2008; Galiani and McEwan 2013). This was by design, since the education
and health transfers were intended to compensate households for the costs of
complying with education and health conditions, but not to substantially increase
income and consumption. About 75% of the education transfer was meant to cover
out-of-pocket costs, while the remainder covered the opportunity costs of
schooling, or “about 9 days of [child] work during coffee harvest time” (IFPRI
2000, 9).
  In PRAF-II, households received up to three per-child transfers of 800 lempiras
for each child between ages 6 and 12 who enrolled in grades 1 to 4. Households
were also eligible for up to two per-child transfers of 644 lempiras for each child
under 3 years of age and pregnant or nursing mothers who attended health centers.
Given household structure, the average household was eligible for an annual
transfer of 1,127 lempiras per year, to be made in two installments of 564 lempiras
(Galiani and McEwan 2013). Inflating to 2013 prices, therefore, the average
household would have received peak and end payments of 1,245 lempiras. This is
smaller than the catch-up payments made to either CCT1 or CCT2 households.


  32 The results are similar if we use the natural log of registered voters as the dependent variable.




                                                                                                         29
   In the experiment, 40 of 70 municipalities—rather than villages, as in Bono
10,000—were randomly assigned to receive transfers, while 30 received no
treatment before the 2001 presidential elections.33 The first transfers to the
treatment group reportedly occurred in November 2000, with the second round in
May and June 2001 (Morris et al. 2004). A third set of transfers—kicking off the
second year of treatment—occurred just before the presidential elections on
November 25, 2001.
   We obtained 2001 election data, aggregated to the municipal level, from a TSE
website34 and merged it to variables indicating the treatment group and
experimental strata (Galiani and McEwan 2013). We calculated turnout and vote
shares for the incumbent Liberal Party and the National Party (noting that LIBRE
and PAC did not emerge until after the 2009 coup d’etat). As control variables, we
obtained municipal-level vote shares from the 1997 presidential elections (Tribunal
Nacional de Elecciones 1997). The tabulations did not report the number of
registered voters, and so we calculated vote shares as the percent of valid votes.
Finally, we use the same census controls described in Table 2, noting that the July
2001 census preceded the November elections. Table D1 in the online appendix
reports municipal-level means for the CCT treatment group and the control group;
it is consistent with good covariate balance for the baseline variables.
   Table D2 in the online appendix reports estimates from specifications like those
in Table 3. The point estimates are negative, regardless of the specification.35 Given
the smaller sample, the estimates in this experiment are less precise. However, the
95% confidence intervals on turnout and the incumbent Liberal Party’s vote share
allow us to rule out effects larger than 1.9 percentage points. Viewed alongside



   33 The 70 municipalities (of 298) were selected for inclusion because they had the highest rates of child stunting, a proxy
for municipal well-being. The randomization was conducted within 5 equally-sized strata defined by the stunting rate.
   34 http://www.tse.hn/web/estadisticas/procesos_electorales.html.
   35 Krishnaswamy (2012) also found no effects on turnout or vote share in the 2001 presidential election. Linos (2013)
found no effect on incumbent vote share, but estimated a pooled effect across 2001 and 2005 elections.




                                                                                                                          30
results from Bono 10,000, the results are consistent with the finding that voters’
responses are muted when peak and end transfers are smaller.
  There are two caveats. First, we do not have administrative data and cannot verify
the sequence of payments actually received by voters before the 2001 election.
Second, the context of the 2001 election, ultimately lost by the Liberal Party
candidate, was unique (Taylor-Robinson 2003). In late 1998, Hurricane Mitch
killed thousands and destroyed productive infrastructure throughout the country.
Voters tend to punish incumbents for weather events beyond their control (Cole,
Healy, and Werker 2012). In this context, it is possible that voters responded even
more favorably to PRAF-II transfers than in the absence of Mitch, perhaps because
the natural disaster increased the salience of poverty-relief as a signal of politician
competence. The opposite might be true if voters perceived the modest size of
PRAF-II transfers—against the backdrop of Mitch’s devastation—as evidence of
insufficient commitment to redistribution.

                                  VI. Conclusions

  This paper analyzed a Honduran cash transfer experiment with three treatment
arms: CCT1, CCT2, and CCT3. On average, the peak and end transfers per
registered voters were higher in CCT1 and CC2 villages, relative to CCT3. This
was also the case for voter turnout and the incumbent party’s vote share in the 2013
presidential election. Two-stage least squares regressions suggest that the
cumulative transfer per registered voter does not affect voting behavior, but that the
peak-end transfer midpoint has an economically and statistically significant effect.
Because of the collinearity of peak and end transfers, we cannot convincingly assess
whether one or both are relevant. We evaluate and rule out alternate explanations
for the results in CCT1 and CCT2, including the effects of survey exposure, the
compensatory behavior of politicians, and the mediating effects of non-voting




                                                                                    31
outcomes affected by peak-end transfers. The results are consistent with voters’
substitution of peak-end heuristics for the sum of payments (e.g., Langer, Sarin,
and Weber, 2005). They might also indicate that voters’ deliberately and rationally
respond to peak-end transfers as signals of party competence or preferences (Rogoff
1990; Drazen and Eslava 2006, 2010). However, the latter is not consistent with
voters’ stated intentions, or their behavior when given more information about
cumulative economic activity (Healy and Lenz 2014).
  Whatever voters’ intention, the results help explain classic (but non-
experimental) results in political economy that voters respond more strongly to
election-year economic activity (e.g., Kramer 1971; Nordhaus 1975; Fair 1978;
Markus 1988). In addition, a small literature shows that timing of cash transfers
affects non-voting outcomes, including consumption and human capital investment
(Barrera-Osorio et al. 2011; Haushofer and Shapiro 2016; Barrera-Osorio, Linden,
and Saavedra Forthcoming). This is the first paper to extend these results to voting
outcomes. Finally, the results provide a political explanation for common
shortcomings in the implementation of cash transfers, including delayed and larger-
than-expected catch-up payments. Even if politicians are not directly responsible
for deviations from nominal payment schedules, they have weak electoral
incentives to enforce a regular sequence of smaller payments.
  There are two obvious ways of building upon these results in subsequent field
experiments. First, the Honduran experiment varied peak and end transfers, but they
were highly collinear. In any case, there were too few instruments to separately
identify the effects of cumulative, peak, and end transfers. A future experiment
could systematically vary peak, end, and cumulative transfers. Second, the results
provide suggestive but not conclusive evidence that voter behavior is driven by the
use of peak-end heuristics. To obtain such evidence, one could systematically vary
the information about cumulative transfers available to voters just before elections.




                                                                                  32
If this attenuates voter response to peak-end transfers, all else equal, then it suggests
that peak-end heuristics are indeed important.

                                    REFERENCES

Adato, Michelle, and John Hoddinott, eds. 2011. Conditional Cash Transfers in
  Latin America. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
Araujo, M. Caridad, María Adelaida Martínez, Sebastian Martinez, Michelle Pérez,
  and Mario Sánchez. 2018. “Do Larger Grants Improve Educational Attainment?”
  Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper Series No. 864.
Ariely, Dan. 1998. “Combining Experiences Over Time: The Effects of Duration,
  Intensity Changes and On-Line Measurements on Retrospective Pain
  Evaluations.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 11(1): 19-45.
Baird, Sarah, Fernando H. G. Ferreira, Berk Özler, and Michael Woolcock. 2014.
  “Conditional, Unconditional and Everything in Between: A Systematic Review
  of the Effects of Cash Transfer Programmes on School Outcomes.” Journal of
  Development Effectiveness 6(1): 1-43.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler. 2011. “Cash or Condition? Evidence
  from a Cash Transfer Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4):
  1709-53.
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh L. Linden, and Francisco Perez-
  Calle. 2011. “Improving the Design of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs:
  Evidence from a Randomized Education Experiment in Colombia.” American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(2): 176-95.
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Leigh L. Linden, and Juan E. Saavedra. Forthcoming.
  “Medium- and Long-Term Educational Consequences of Alternative Conditional
  Cash Transfer Designs: Experimental Evidence from Colombia.” American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics.




                                                                                      33
Bazzi, Samuel, Sudarno Sumarto, and Asep Suryahadi. 2015. “It’s All in the
  Timing: Cash Transfers and Consumption Smoothing in a Developing Country.”
  Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 119: 267-88.
Benedetti, Fiorella, Pablo Ibarrarán, and Patrick J. McEwan. 2016. “Do Education
  and Health Conditions Matter in a Large Cash Transfer? Evidence from a
  Honduran Experiment.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 64(4):
  759-93.
Blattman, Christopher, Mathilde Emeriau, and Nathan Fiala. Forthcoming. “Do
  Anti-Poverty Programs Sway Voters? Experimental Evidence from Uganda.”
  Review of Economics and Statistics.
Bursztyn, Leonardo. 2016. “Poverty and the Political Economy of Public Education
  Spending: Evidence from Brazil.” Journal of the European Economic
  Association 14(5): 1101-28.
Cole, Shawn, Andrew Healy, and Eric Werker. 2012. “Do Voters Demand
  Responsive Governments? Evidence from Indian Disaster Relief.” Journal of
  Development Economics 97(2): 167-81.
Conover, Emily, Román A. Zárate, Adriana Camacho, and Javier E. Baez, J. E.
  Forthcoming. “Cash and Ballots: Conditional Transfers, Political Participation,
  and Voting Behavior.” Economic Development and Cultural Change.
de Hoop, Jacobus, and Furio C. Rosati. 2014. “Cash Transfers and Child Labor.”
  World Bank Research Observer 29(2): 202–34.
De La O, Ana L. 2013. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers Affect Electoral Behavior?
  Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Mexico.” American Journal of
  Political Science 57(1): 1-14.
Drazen, Allan. 2008a. “Political Budget Cycles.” In The New Palgrave Dictionary
  of Economics (2nd ed.), edited by Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume.
  London and New York: Macmillan Palgrave.
Drazen, Alan. 2008b. “Political Business Cycles.” In The New Palgrave Dictionary




                                                                              34
  of Economics (2nd ed.), edited by Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume.
  London and New York: Macmillan Palgrave.
Drazen, Alan, and Marcela Eslava, M. 2006. “Pork Barrel Cycles.” National Bureau
  of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12190.
Drazen, Alan, and Marcela Eslava. 2010. “Electoral Manipulation Via Voter-
  Friendly Spending: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Development Economics
  92(1): 39-52.
Duch, Raymond M., and Randolph T. Stevenson. 2008. The Economic Vote: How
  Political and Economic Institutions Condition Election Results. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
Fair, Ray C. 1978. “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President.” Review
  of Economics and Statistics 60(2): 159-73.
Fearon, James D. 1999. “Electoral Accountability and the Control of Politicians:
  Selecting Good Types Versus Sanctioning Poor Performance.” In Democracy,
  Accountability, and Representation, edited by Adam Przeworski, Susan C.
  Stokes, and Bernard Manin (55–97). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Finan, Frederico, and Laura Schechter. 2012. “Vote-Buying and Reciprocity.”
  Econometrica 80(2): 863-81.
Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing
  Present and Future Poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Fredrickson, Barbara L., and Daniel Kahneman. 1993. “Duration Neglect in
  Retrospective Evaluations of Affective Episodes.” Journal of Personality and
  Social Psychology 65(1): 45-55.
Gaarder, Marie M., Amanda Glassman, and Jessica E. Todd. 2010. Conditional
  Cash Transfers and Health: Unpacking the Causal Chain.” Journal of
  Development Effectiveness 2(1): 6–50.
Galiani, Sebastian, and Patrick J. McEwan. 2013. “The Heterogeneous Impact of
  Conditional Cash Transfers.” Journal of Public Economics 103: 85-96.




                                                                              35
Glewwe, Paul, and Pedro Olinto. 2004. “Evaluating the Impact of Conditional Cash
  Transfers on Schooling: An Experimental Analysis of Honduras’ PRAF
  Program.” http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADT588.pdf.
González-Ocantos, Ezequiel, Chad Kiewiet de Jonge, and David W. Nickerson.
  2015. “Legitimacy Buying: The Dynamics of Clientelism in the Face of
  Legitimacy Challenges.” Comparative Political Studies 48(9): 1-32.
Green, Tina R. 2006. “Essays on the Political Economy of Fiscal Policy in
  Developing Countries.” PhD diss., University of California, Berkeley.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. “The Short-Term Impact of
  Unconditional Cash Transfers to the Poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4): 1973-2042.
Healy, Andrew, and Gabriel S. Lenz. 2014. “Substituting the End for the Whole:
  Why Voters Respond Primarily to the Election-Year Economy.” American
  Journal of Political Science 58(1): 31-47.
Healy, Andrew, and Neil Malhotra. 2013. “Retrospective Voting Reconsidered.”
  Annual Review of Political Science 16: 285-306.
Huber, Gregory A., Seth J. Hill, and Gabriel S. Lenz. 2012. “Sources of Bias in
  Retrospective Decision Making: Experimental Evidence on Voters’ Limitations
  in Controlling Incumbents.” American Political Science Review 106(4): 720-41.
Imai, Kosuke, Gary King, and Carlos Velasco Rivera. 2017. “Do Nonpartisan
  Programmatic Policies Have Partisan Electoral Effects? Evidence from Two
  Large Scale Randomized Experiments.” Unpublished manuscript.
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). 2000. Second Report:
  Implementation Proposal for the PRAF/IDB Project—Phase II. International
  Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.
Kahneman, Daniel, Peter P. Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin. 1997. “Back to Bentham?
  Explorations of Experienced Utility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2):
  375-405.




                                                                             36
Kramer, Gerald H. 1971. “Short-Term Fluctuations in U.S. Voting Behavior, 1896-
  1964.” American Political Science Review 65(1): 131-43.
Krishnaswamy, Nandita. 2012. “The Effect of Conditional Cash Transfers on Voter
  Behavior: Evidence from Honduras.” BA thesis, Wellesley College.
Langer, Thomas, Rakesh Sarin, and Martin Weber. 2005. “The Retrospective
  Evaluation of Payment Sequences: Duration Neglect and Peak-and-End Effects.”
  Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 58(1): 157-75.
Lawson, Chappell, and Kenneth F. Greene. 2014. “Making Clientelism Work: How
  Norms of Reciprocity Increase Voter Compliance.” Comparative Politics 47(1):
  61-77.
Linos, Elizabeth. 2013. “Do Conditional Cash Transfer Programs Shift Votes?
  Evidence from the Honduran PRAF.” Electoral Studies 32(4): 864-74.
Lohmann, Susanne. 1998. “Rationalizing the Political Business Cycle: A
  Workhorse Model.” Economics and Politics 10(1): 1–17.
Manacorda, Marco, Edward Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito. 2011. “Government
  Transfers and Political Support. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics 3(3): 1-28.
Markus, Gregory B. 1988. “The Impact of Personal and National Economic
  Conditions on the Presidential Vote: A Pooled Cross-Sectional Analysis.”
  American Journal of Political Science 32(1): 137-54.
Mattila, Mikko, Peter Söderlund, Hanna Wass, and Lauri Rapeli. 2013. “Healthy
  Voting: The Effect of Self-Reported Health on Turnout in 30 Countries.”
  Electoral Studies 32(4): 886-91.
Moore, Charity. 2008. “Assessing Honduras’ CCT Programme PRAF, Programa
  de Asignación Familiar: Expected and Unexpected Realities.” International
  Poverty Center Country Study No. 15.
Morris, Saul S., Rafael Flores, Pedro Olinto, and Juan Manuel Medina. 2004.
  “Monetary Incentives in Primary Health Care and Effects on Use and Coverage




                                                                            37
  of Preventive Health Care Interventions in Rural Honduras: Cluster Randomized
  Trial.” Lancet 364(9450): 2030-7.
Nordhaus, William D. 1975. “The Political Business Cycle.” Review of Economic
  Studies 42(2): 169-90.
Nupia, Oskar. 2012. “Anti-Poverty Programs and Presidential Election Outcomes:
  Familias en Acción in Colombia.” Universidad de los Andes, Documentos CEDE
  14.
Otero-Felipe, Patricia. 2014. “The 2013 Honduran General Election.” Electoral
  Studies 35: 362-405.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 1990. Macroeconomic Policy, Credibility,
  and Politics. London: Harwood.
Persson Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics: Explaining
  Economic Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pop-Eleches, Cristian and Grigore Pop-Eleches. 2012. “Targeted Government
  Spending and Political Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 7(3):
  285-320.
Redelmeier, Donald A., and Daniel Kahneman. 1996. “Patients’ Memories of
  Painful Medical Treatments: Real-Time and Retrospective Evaluations of Two
  Minimally Invasive Procedures.” Pain 66(1): 3–8.
República de Honduras. 2009. Ley Electoral y de las Organizaciones Políticas y
  Sus Reformas. Tegucigalpa: OIM Editorial.
Rogoff,      Kenneth.      1990.   “Equilibrium    Political   Budget     Cycles.”
  American Economic Review 80(1): 21-36.
Ruhl, J. Mark. 2010. “Honduras Unravels.” Journal of Democracy 21(2): 93-107.
Skoufias, Emmanuel. 2005. “PROGRESA and Its Impacts on the Welfare of Rural
  Households in Mexico.” International Food Policy Research Institute, Research
  Report 139.
Sobel, Joel. 2005. “Interdependent Preferences and Reciprocity.” Journal of




                                                                                38
 Economic Literature 43(2): 392-436.
Stokes, Susan C. 2005. “Perverse Accountability: A Formal Model of Machine
 Politics with Evidence from Argentina.” American Political Science Review
 99(3): 315-25.
Taylor-Robinson, Michelle M. 2003. “The Elections in Honduras, November
 2001.” Electoral Studies 22(3): 553-9.
Taylor-Robinson, Michelle M. 2014. “Honduras.” In Handbook of Central
 American Governance, edited by Diego Sanchez-Ancochea and Salvador Martí i
 Puig (420-31). New York: Routledge.
Tribunal Nacional de Elecciones. 1997. Estadísticas Electorales de 1997.
 Tegucigalpa: Tribunal Nacional de Elecciones, Departamento de Computo.
United Nations. 2013. World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision. United
 Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
Yu, Erica C., David A. Lagnado, and Nick Chater. 2008. “Retrospective
 Evaluations of Gambling Wins: Evidence for a ‘Peak-End’ Rule.” In Proceedings
 of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, edited by B. C.
 Love, K. McRae, and V. M. Sloutsky (64-70). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
 Society.
Zucco Jr., Cesar. 2013. “When Payouts Pay Off: Conditional Cash Transfers and
 Voting Behavior in Brazil 2002-10.” American Journal of Political Science
 57(4): 810-22.




                                                                             39
              TABLE 1—NUMBER OF VILLAGES IN THE MAIN AND RESTRICTED ESTIMATION SAMPLES

                                                             All
                                                         treatment       CCT1          CCT2          CCT3
                                                            arms
 Total number of villages in experiment                      816          150           150           516

 Main estimation sample
 Villages with ≥1 voting center:
 Number                                                    676           120            129           427
 Percent of total                                          83%           80%            86%           83%

 Restricted estimation sample
 Villages with ≥1 voting center, and
 circumscribed by villages with ≥1 voting centers:
 Number                                                    382            76             69           237
 Percent of total                                          47%           51%            46%           46%
Notes: The main estimation sample includes experimental villages with at least one voting center in the 2013
presidential election. The restricted sample includes experimental villages with at least one voting center that are
also circumscribed by villages with at least one voting center. Both samples exclude one village in CCT3 that
reports zero valid votes.
Source: Author calculations.




                                                                                                                       40
              TABLE 2—BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS OF VILLAGES IN THE MAIN ESTIMATION SAMPLE

                                              Mean (standard deviation)              p-value     p-values
                                            CCT1       CCT2          CCT3            (jointly     (K-S)
                                                                                      equal)
 Panel A. Village-level vote share in 2009 Presidential elections
 National Party vote share                 56.99          57.26          57.28        0.98       0.31/0.81
                                          (15.98)        (15.11)        (15.15)
 Liberal Party vote share                  39.46          39.30          39.72        0.96       0.82/0.96
                                          (16.01)        (14.91)        (14.98)

 Panel B. Village-level variables from 2001 census; individuals 18 and older
 % female                                   0.482         0.486          0.488        0.23       0.59/0.67
                                            (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.04)
 Mean age                                   38.10         37.97          38.22        0.41       0.43/0.54
                                            (2.04)        (1.88)         (2.08)
 % Lenca (indigenous)                       0.055         0.056          0.067        0.65        0.33/34
                                            (0.14)        (0.15)         (0.16)
 Mean years of schooling                    2.931         3.088          3.052        0.19       0.13/0.72
                                            (0.74)        (0.71)         (0.68)
 % literate                                 0.653         0.670          0.668        0.33       0.33/0.96
                                            (0.11)        (0.10)         (0.10)
 % who worked week before census            0.498         0.499          0.496        0.96       0.06/0.99
                                            (0.08)        (0.09)         (0.08)
 % with dirt floor in dwelling              0.542         0.507          0.525        0.38       0.71/0.34
                                            (0.19)        (0.21)         (0.20)
 % with piped water in dwelling             0.720         0.697          0.695        0.61       0.73/0.32
                                            (0.24)        (0.26)         (0.24)
 % with electric light in dwelling          0.199         0.233          0.212        0.52       0.47/0.48
                                            (0.23)        (0.25)         (0.23)
 % with sewer/septic in dwelling            0.321         0.344          0.337        0.70       0.91/0.98
                                            (0.22)        (0.23)         (0.22)

 N of villages                               120           129            427
Notes: Each cell in the column titled “p-value (jointly equal)” reports the p-value from an F-test of the null
hypothesis that the means in the three groups are equal. Each cell in the column titled “p-values (K-S)” reports p-
values from two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of the equality of distributions of the baseline variables
(across CCT1/CCT3 and CCT2/CCT3, respectively).
Source: Author calculations.




                                                                                                                      41
   TABLE 3—EFFECTS ON TURNOUT AND INCUMBENT PARTY VOTE SHARE IN THE 2013 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

                                           Turnout                     National Party share
  Panel A. Main sample of villages
  CCT1                          2.50**               2.50**          2.62**           2.42***
                                  (1.16)             (1.14)          (1.20)            (0.93)
  CCT2                              1.76             2.31**           1.22             1.86**
                                  (1.23)             (1.06)          (1.07)            (0.80)

  Adjusted R2                      <0.01              0.21            0.01              0.45
  N of villages                     676               676             676               676
  CCT3 mean                        61.2               61.2            27.3              27.3
  p-value (CCT1=CCT2)              0.62               0.89            0.32              0.60

  Panel B. Restricted sample of villages
  CCT1                           2.30*               2.23*            1.69             2.37**
                                  (1.35)             (1.31)          (1.42)            (1.06)
  CCT2                              2.48             2.56*            2.70*            2.83**
                                  (1.56)             (1.34)          (1.46)            (1.20)

  Adjusted R2                       0.01              0.27            <0.01             0.47
  N of villages                     382               382              382              382
  CCT3 mean                         62.6              62.6            28.7              28.7
  p-value (CCT1=CCT2)               0.92              0.84            0.56              0.74

  Control variables?                 N                 Y                N                Y
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. See the notes to Table 1 for definitions of the main and restricted
samples. All regressions include a constant; additional controls in some specifications include the variables in
Table 2.
Source: Author calculations.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                                                        42
           TABLE 4—EFFECTS ON OTHER PARTIES’ VOTE SHARES IN THE 2013 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

                               Liberal Party share              LIBRE share                    PAC share
  Panel A. Main sample of villages

  CCT1                            -0.96        -0.36         1.29          0.83          -0.53          -0.48
                                 (0.98)       (0.80)        (1.26)       (1.15)         (0.34)         (0.31)
  CCT2                            -0.63        -0.15         0.21         -0.11          0.93*         0.71*
                                 (0.87)       (0.72)        (1.13)       (1.03)         (0.48)         (0.43)

  Adjusted R2                    <0.01          0.35        -0.00          0.17           0.01          0.18
  N of villages                   676           676          676           676            676           676
  CCT3 mean                       11.7          11.7         18.0          18.0            3.9           3.9
  p-value (CCT1=CCT2)             0.77          0.83         0.48          0.50          <0.01          0.01

  Panel B. Restricted sample of villages

  CCT1                            -0.74        -0.71         1.60          0.92          -0.37          -0.49
                                 (1.22)       (1.03)        (1.62)       (1.52)         (0.42)         (0.38)
  CCT2                            -1.26        -0.81         0.37         -0.09          0.67           0.61
                                 (1.21)       (1.10)        (1.59)       (1.42)         (0.55)         (0.56)

  Adjusted R2                    <0.01          0.28        -0.00          0.18          <0.01          0.12
  N of villages                   382           382          382           382            382           382
  CCT3 mean                       11.4          11.4         18.6          18.6            3.6           3.6
  p-value (CCT1=CCT2)             0.73          0.94         0.55          0.59           0.08          0.06

  Control variables?                N            Y            N             Y              N               Y
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. See the notes to Table 1 for definitions of the main and restricted
samples. All regressions include a constant; additional controls in some specifications include the variables in
Table 2.
Source: Author calculations.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                                                        43
            TABLE 5—EFFECTS ON TRANSFERS PER REGISTERED VOTER (HUNDREDS OF LEMPIRAS; 100 LEMPIRAS~5 USD) BY THE 2013 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

                                    Total transfer                      Peak transfer                        End transfer                  Peak-end transfer midpoint
                                 per registered voter                per registered voter                per registered voter                 per registered voter
  Panel A. Main sample of villages
  CCT1                        15.60***        15.11***            8.72***          8.55***           3.72***            3.60***            6.22***            6.07***
                                  (1.58)         (1.62)            (0.83)           (0.89)            (0.38)             (0.39)            (0.60)              (0.63)
  CCT2                            -1.44*          -1.18           3.24***          3.29***           3.88***            3.91***            3.56***            3.60***
                                  (0.83)         (0.85)            (0.42)           (0.40)            (0.32)             (0.31)            (0.37)              (0.35)

  Adjusted R2                      0.18            0.34             0.24             0.33              0.23               0.33               0.23               0.32
  N of villages                    676             676              676              676               676                676                676                676
  CCT3 mean                        12.2            12.2              4.9              4.9               3.0                3.0                4.0                4.0
  p-value (CCT1=CCT2)              0.00            0.00             0.00             0.00              0.71               0.50               0.00               0.00
  F (CCT1=CCT2=0)                   64              49               72               73               102                108                 85                 88

  Panel B. Restricted sample of villages
  CCT1                        15.96***          15.87***          8.99***          8.97***           3.78***            3.74***            6.38***            6.36***
                                  (2.10)         (2.09)            (1.15)           (1.19)            (0.50)             (0.51)            (0.82)              (0.84)
  CCT2                           -3.13***        -2.98**          2.95***          3.00***           3.88***            3.88***            3.42***            3.44***
                                  (1.16)         (1.20)            (0.56)           (0.55)            (0.43)             (0.41)            (0.49)              (0.48)

  Adjusted R  2
                                   0.18            0.36             0.23             0.31              0.23               0.32               0.22               0.31
  N of villages                    382             382              382              382               382                382                382                382
  CCT3 mean                        14.6            14.6              5.7              5.7               3.5                3.5                4.6                4.6
  p-value (CCT1=CCT2)              0.00            0.00             0.00             0.00              0.86               0.81               0.00               0.00
  F (CCT1=CCT2=0)                   48              42               37               35                57                 59                 45                 44

  Control variables?                N               Y                N                 Y                 N                 Y                  N                  Y
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. See the notes to Table 1 for definitions of the main and restricted samples. All regressions include a constant; additional
controls in some specifications include the variables in Table 2.
Source: Author calculations.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                44
 TABLE 6: TWO-STAGE LEAST SQUARES REGRESSIONS OF THE EFFECTS OF TRANSFERS (HUNDREDS OF LEMPIRAS;
 100 LEMPIRAS~5 USD) ON TURNOUT AND INCUMBENT PARTY VOTE SHARE IN THE 2013 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

                                                            Turnout                             National Party share
  Panel A. Main sample of villages
  Total transfer per registered voter            -0.08        -0.19        0.02         -0.04          -0.13           0.04
                                                (0.11)       (0.15)       (0.08)       (0.08)         (0.11)       (0.06)
  Peak-end transfer midpoint per                0.62**          --           --        0.50**            --             --
  registered voter
                                                (0.26)                                 (0.20)
  Peak transfer per registered voter               --        0.63**          --           --          0.52**            --
                                                             (0.26)                                   (0.20)
  End transfer per registered voter                --           --        0.60**          --             --        0.49**
                                                                          (0.25)                                   (0.19)
  N of villages                                  676          676          676           676           676             676
  p-value (jointly equal)                        0.04         0.04         0.05          0.04          0.03            0.05

  Panel B. Restricted sample of villages
  Total transfer per registered voter            -0.12        -0.22        -0.01        -0.13         -0.25*       -0.02
                                                (0.11)       (0.15)       (0.08)       (0.10)         (0.14)       (0.07)
  Peak-end transfer midpoint per                0.64**          --           --        0.71***           --             --
  registered voter
                                                (0.29)                                 (0.27)
  Peak transfer per registered voter               --        0.63**          --           --         0.70***            --
                                                             (0.29)                                   (0.27)
  End transfer per registered voter               --           --         0.65**          --            --        0.71***
                                                                          (0.30)                                   (0.27)
  N of villages                                  382          382          382           382           382             382
  p-value (jointly equal)                        0.05         0.05         0.05          0.02          0.02            0.02
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. See the notes to Table 1 for definitions of the main and restricted
samples. The two endogenous variables in each second-stage regression are instrumented with CCT1 and CCT2
(Table 5 reports the first-stage estimates). All regressions include a constant and the control variables in Table 2.
Each p-value corresponds to the F-test of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on the two endogenous variables
are equal.
Source: Author calculations.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                                                              45
                      FIGURE 1. THE WEEKLY VOLUME AND SIZE OF HOUSEHOLD TRANSFERS IN CCT1
Notes: Lighter bars indicate the weekly volume of transfers to any household in CCT1, expressed as a fraction of all transfers
in CCT1. Darker bars indicate the weekly volume of end transfers (i.e., transfers that are the final—or only— transfer in
sequences received by households in CCT1), also expressed as a fraction of all transfers in CCT1. Circles indicate the average
size of transfers made in a particular week. Vertical dotted lines indicate the dates of randomization (September 9, 2011), the
application of baseline surveys (January 2 to June 18, 2012), the application of follow-up surveys (March 1 to June 23, 2013),
and the presidential election (November 23, 2013).




                                                                                                                           46
                     FIGURE 2. THE WEEKLY VOLUME AND SIZE OF HOUSEHOLD TRANSFERS IN CCT2
Notes: Lighter bars indicate the weekly volume of transfers to any household in CCT2, expressed as a fraction of all transfers
in CCT2. Darker bars indicate the weekly volume of end transfers (i.e., transfers that are the final—or only— transfer in
sequences received by households in CCT2), also expressed as a fraction of all transfers in CCT2. Circles indicate the average
size of transfers made in a particular week. See Figure 1 for the dates corresponding to dotted lines.




                                                                                                                          47
                     FIGURE 3. THE WEEKLY VOLUME AND SIZE OF HOUSEHOLD TRANSFERS IN CCT3
Note: Lighter bars indicate the weekly volume of transfers to any household in CCT3, expressed as a fraction of all transfers
in CCT3. Darker bars indicate the weekly volume of end transfers (i.e., transfers that are the final—or only— transfer in
sequences received by households in CCT3), also expressed as a fraction of all transfers in CCT3. Circles indicate the average
size of transfers made in a particular week. See Figure 1 for the dates corresponding to dotted lines.




                                                                                                                          48
                 FIGURE 4. CUMULATIVE TRANSFERS PER REGISTERED VOTER IN CCT1, CCT2, AND CCT3
Notes: The sample includes 676 villages in the main estimation sample (120 in CCT1, 129 in CCT2, and 427 in CCT3). For
each village, we calculated village-by-week cumulative transfers, divided by the number of registered voters in the village.
The lines indicate averages of village-level observations in each week. See Figure 1 for the dates corresponding to dotted
lines.




                                                                                                                        49
