                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   BUYING REPUTATION AS A SIGNAL OF QUALITY:
                    EVIDENCE FROM AN ONLINE MARKETPLACE

                                       Lingfang (Ivy) Li
                                        Steven Tadelis
                                         Xiaolan Zhou

                                      Working Paper 22584
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22584


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




We thank Alibaba Group for providing us access to the data. We are grateful to to Mo Xiao,
Dimitriy Masterov, Hanghui Zhang, and Tom Blake for helpful discussions, and to participants at
several seminars for valuable feedback. Lingfang Li is grateful for support from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (grants #71402031, #71490721 and #71522007) and
Alibaba Huoshui Research Plan. Xiaolan Zhou is grateful for support from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (grant #71603159). This paper was previously presented under the
title “Does Money really talk? Evidences from Reward-for-Feedback Mechanism in Alibaba’s
C2C Platform”. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Lingfang (Ivy) Li, Steven Tadelis, and Xiaolan Zhou. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Buying Reputation as a Signal of Quality: Evidence from an Online Marketplace
Lingfang (Ivy) Li, Steven Tadelis, and Xiaolan Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 22584
September 2016
JEL No. D47,D82,L15,L86

                                          ABSTRACT

Reputation is critical to foster trust in online marketplaces, yet leaving feedback is a public good
that can be under-provided unless buyers are rewarded for it. Signaling theory implies that only
high quality sellers would reward buyers for truthful feedback. We explore this scope for
signaling using Taobao's "reward-for-feedback" mechanism and find that items with rewards
generate sales that are nearly 30%higher and are sold by higher quality sellers. The market design
implication is that marketplaces can benefit from allowing sellers to use rewards to build
reputations and signal their high quality in the process.


Lingfang (Ivy) Li                                Xiaolan Zhou
Fudan University                                 Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
School of Management                             xiaolan.z.zhou@gmail.com
Shanghai, China 200433
lingfangli@fudan.edu.cn

Steven Tadelis
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
stadelis@haas.berkeley.edu
1         Introduction
The growth of trade in online marketplaces such as eBay, Amazon Marketplace, Taobao, Etsy,
and others in the past two decades is remarkable not only because buyers are purchasing
items that they cannot inspect, but purchasing is from anonymous and far away sellers. It
has been argued time and again that reputation and feedback systems foster the trust needed
to make buyers feel comfortable purchasing in these large anonymous markets. Many studies
provided evidence that buyers indeed respond to a seller’s reputation in intuitive ways.1
        A challenge to user-generated feedback is that leaving feedback is time consuming, implying
that unless buyers enjoy the pro-social aspect of helping other future buyers, feedback is
a public good that is most likely under-provided (Lafky, 2014). Hence, buyers may need
to be incentivized to leave feedback. A market design question naturally arises: should
marketplaces offer rewards for feedback or should they encourage sellers to do this? And if
sellers offer rewards for feedback, how will this affect market outcomes?
        Established theory can shed some light on these questions. Online goods are a form of
“experience goods” for which quality can only be assessed after the purchase. Nelson (1974)
argued that sellers with high quality goods will advertise their goods as a signal of quality, an
idea that was formalized by Kihlstrom and Riordan (1984) and Milgrom and Roberts (1996).
Intuitively, sellers of high quality goods will be willing to spend on advertising because they
will benefit from repeat purchases by happy buyers, which is not the case for sellers with
poor quality goods. We argue that, in a similar way, only high quality sellers who expect to
receive positive feedback will be those who will pay buyers to leave feedback.
        In this paper we use a unique dataset to empirically investigate this idea and shed light
on several related questions. First, do sellers choose to signal their high quality by rewarding
buyers for leaving feedback? Second, do buyers seem to infer sellers’ quality from theirs
decision to offer rewards for feedback? And if so, what are the returns to sellers who reward
buyers for feedback in terms of sales and feedback?
    1
        For recent surveys of this literature see Cabral (2012) and Tadelis (2016).




                                                         1
       Our data were obtained from Taobao, the world’s largest online customer-to-customer
marketplace with nearly 500 million registered users. On March 1, 2012, Taobao introduced a
feedback reward mechanism called “Rebate-for-Feedback” (RFF).2 Sellers could set a rebate
amount for any given items they sold (in the form of cash-back or a store coupon) as a reward
for a buyer’s feedback for purchasing that item. If a seller chooses the RFF feature then
Taobao guarantees that the rebate is transferred from the seller’s account to a buyer who
leaves high-quality feedback. Feedback quality does not depend on whether it is favorable
but instead depends only on how informative it is, which is measured by a machine learning
algorithm that examines the content and length of the buyer’s detailed feedback and whether
key features of the item are mentioned.
       The RFF feature plays a dual role: first, it obviously can induce more feedback, and
second, it can offer sellers a way to signal their high quality. Therefore, before a high quality
seller accumulates sufficient positive feedback, the RFF feature allows him to send a signal
about his quality and intentions to satisfy buyers. In addition, however, because the RFF
encourages buyers to leave feedback, high quality sellers will gain in the long run from being
able to attract more buyers without having to reward them for feedback.3
       Our proprietary panel data set consists of 6,992,131 transactions purchased from 12,857
randomly selected sellers who sold at least one unit between September 2012 and February
2013 on Taobao.com in four distinct categories: cellphones, memory cards (referred to as “TF
cards”), cosmetic masks, and jeans. Our main findings are first, that RFF feature is chosen
by higher quality sellers, implying that it can serves as a signal of quality. Second, sales of an
item are about 30% higher when the seller chooses the rebate option, suggesting that buyers
   2
     Taobao.com, run by Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., is one of the world’s largest
shopping sites. Taobao sold RMB 1.173 trillion (US$190.6 billion) in gross merchandise volume (GMV) from
Q1 2013 to Q1 2014, which is more than 2.3 times eBay’s 2013 GMV. See http://www.techinasia.com/alibaba-
updates-ipo-filing-reveals-taobao-tmall-sales-figures-2014/ and http://www.marketwatch.com/story/ebay-inc-
reports-fourth-quarter-and-full-year2013-results-2014-01-22, (accessed on August 21, 2014).
   3
     The RFF feature implemented by Taobao is similar to the mechanism proposed in Li (2010)
and Li and Xiao (2014).          In fact, Li suggested the RFF mechanism to Alibaba Research to-
wards the end of 2011, and several months later, Taobao launched the RFF mechanism.                   See
http://www.aliresearch.com/blog/article/detail/id/20486.html (accessed on June 15, 2015).




                                                    2
understand the signaling effect of the RFF feature and act on it. Third, RFF induces buyers
to write more detailed feedback but does not bias the feedback toward positive feedback.4
       Our paper contributes to a growing literature that empirically studies the workings of
reputation systems in online markets with asymmetric information. Though reputation
systems seem to be critical to foster trust and online trade, a series of recent studies have
shown that because feedback is user generated, reputation scores can be biased (Dellarocas
and Wood, 2008; Nosko and Tadelis, 2015), inflated (Horton and Golden, 2015; Zervas
et al., 2015) and where anyone can leave feedback, reputations may be manipulated by
market players (Mayzlin et al., 2014). Our analysis suggests that RFF mechanisms can help
promote honest and informative feedback, while at the same time offering the added benefit
of a signaling mechanism that identifies high quality sellers. This further diminishes the
inefficiencies of adverse selection in markets with asymmetric information.
       Several papers have focused on the public good nature of feedback, proposing two ways
to incentivize buyers to leave more feedback. One is that the online marketplace provide
incentives to buyers to leave feedback (Miller et al., 2005; Fradkin et al., 2015), and another
is that sellers provide the incentives (Li, 2010). The RFF mechanism implemented on Taobao
follows the second approach. Li (2010) proposes and theoretically analyzes an unbiased RFF
mechanism in an online auction market. She finds that, in equilibrium, both good and bad
sellers choose to offer rebates as long as they care about future gains, and buyers avoid
sellers who do not choose the rebate option and incorporate the rebate amount into their
bids. Li and Xiao (2014) extend this idea to listed-price online markets and test the rebate
mechanism in lab experiments. They find evidence consistent with the theoretical prediction
in Li (2010). Cabral and Li (2015) run a series of controlled field experiments on eBay where
sellers propose monetary rewards for providing (any) feedback, and find that buyers grant
these sellers with more frequent and more favorable feedback, but the price of goods does not
change with the rebate. The results from lab and field experiments provide mixed answers to
   4
   Some sellers offer monetary rewards only for “positive” feedback using an ad in the delivered packages.
There even exist sites that provide a service to “buy” positive feedback. See Xu et al. (2015).




                                                    3
whether rebate mechanism can lead to more feedback and more sales as well as whether such
rebates will bias feedback.
        Our paper offers three contributions to the literature. First, we believe we are the first
to empirically analyze a novel feedback enhancing mechanism in a large online marketplace,
and show that it provides both signaling and public good provision benefits. This helps
solve the classic problem of asymmetric information in online markets. Second, we provide
compelling empirical evidences on the role of signaling in online markets, showing that sellers
send credible signals and that buyers respond rationally.5 This in turn results in matching
consumers with better sellers or with higher quality goods, providing support to the isights
of Nelson (1974). Last but not least, we contribute to the growing market design literature
with respect to managing asymmetric information in online markets. Unlike Nosko and
Tadelis (2015) and Masterov et al. (2015), who emphasize how marketplaces can manage the
asymmetric information problem by inferring seller quality and intervening themselves, RFF
mechanisms allow the marketplace to leverage the signaling abilities of high quality sellers.
        The paper proceeds as the follows. In Section 2 we describe Taobao’s RFF mechanism.
In section 3 we lay out our hypotheses and describe our empirical identification approach. In
section 4 we describe the data and present our analyses and results, which include a series of
robustness checks. In Section 5 we conclude and discuss some limitations of our analysis.



2         The Taobao Reward-for-Feedback Mechanism
Launched in 2003, Taobao Marketplace (www.taobao.com) is the most popular consumer-to-
consumer (C2C) online marketplace in China with nearly 500 million registered users.6 On
an average day, more than 60 million visitors have access to more than 800 million product
listings, and an average of 48 thousand products are sold every minute.
    5
     Two recent studies that use online marketplaces to provide evidence of signing equilibria are Backus et al.
(2015) and Kawai et al. (2013).
   6
     These are not unique registered users. The number of Chinese online-shoppers was estimated to be 187
million in 2011, with a forecast of 363 million by 2015.




                                                       4
       An “item” on Taobao refers to a product-seller combination and any product sold by a
seller is assigned a unique item ID. If another seller sells the same product, it will be assigned
a different item ID. This is unlike the definition of an item in other marketplaces such as
eBay, in which an item refers to a product and not a product-seller pair. A “transaction” on
Taobao refers to a product-seller-buyer combination and represents a buyer’s purchase (one
or multiple units) of an item from a seller. After a transaction is completed, the buyer will
receive a reminder to leave a rating for the item in her Taobao account page. The buyer
can choose not to leave any rating, choose to rate positive/neutral/negative without leaving
comments, or can choose to rate positive/neutral/negative and write comments.
       Taobao’s feedback system is similar to eBay’s. After a transaction is completed, buyers
and sellers can leave each other positive, neutral, or negative feedback, as well as detailed
comments. Taobao’s and eBay’s feedback systems differ in three ways. First, Taobao
separately reports a user’s rating score as a seller and as a buyer, whereas on eBay a user’s
total rating score is aggregated for sales and purchases. Second, if a buyer does not leave any
feedback after the seller confirms that she received the item, the the system will leave an
automatic positive rating for the seller and display “This is an automatic feedback left by
the system on behalf of the buyer” (18 Chinese characters in the message) in the comment
area for the transaction.7 Third, an item’s feedback history is recorded separately and can be
easily seen when browsing the item. When a buyer leaves feedback for an item, the feedback
is recored in the item’s rating profile as well as in the seller’s feedback profile. When a future
buyer searches for a product, without browsing the seller’s feedback profile, she can easily see
all the ratings (including comments) for the item on the item’s information page.
       On March 1, 2012, Taobao launched a “Rebate-for-Feedback” (RFF) feature for sellers.
A seller has an option to set a rebate value for any item he sells (in the form of cash-back
or a store coupon) as a reward for a buyer’s feedback. If a seller chooses this option then
Taobao guarantees that the rebate is transferred from the seller’s account to a buyer who
leaves high-quality feedback. Feedback quality only depends on how informative it is, rather
   7
    Sellers always leave feedback for a buyer in order to get an automatic positive feedback in case the buyer
leaves none. Fan et al. (2016) also provide an introduction to Taobao’s feedback system.


                                                      5
than whether the feedback is positive or negative. Taobao measures the quality of feedback
with a machine learning algorithm that examines the comment’s content and length, finds
out whether key features of the item are mentioned, etc.
        Figure 1 describes Taobao’s announcement of the new online service (our translation).
Some notes are in order. One of the announced goals is to “increase the ratio of non-automatic
ratings for sellers.” Second, the goal of increasing “the quality of buyers’ comments” is
related to Taobao’s use of a machine learning algorithm to judge feedback quality. Finally,
with respect to Taobao’s role in helping the seller offer a rebate, the seller deposits a certain
amount for a chosen period and Taobao freezes the deposit until the end of the rebate period
so that funds are guaranteed for buyers who meet the rebate criterion.
        According to a Taobao survey (published in March, 2012), 64.8% of buyers believe that
they will be more willing to buy items that have the RFF feature, and 84.2% of buyers
believe that the RFF option will make them more likely to write detailed comments.8 Figure
2 shows a Taobao.com page with the RFF feature.9 The box just below the 4.9 score includes
a feedback reminder, that reads “Dear customer, you will have a chance to get 0.50 RMB
reward, if you leave feedback conscientiously on the product from April 19–27, 2012.” The
box on the lower right corner, in turn, includes a notice that this buyer has been awarded
0.50 RMB rebate for her feedback and reads, “This comment is informative, so it is rewarded
with 0.50 RMB.”



3         Hypotheses and identification

3.1         Hypotheses

To study the effect of the RFF mechanism on sales and feedback, we are interested in
investigating the following two questions: First, do sellers choose RFF as a signal of high
quality transactions in lieu of having an established good reputation? Second, how do sellers
    8
        http://bbs.taobao.com/catalog/thread/513886-256229600.htm, accessed June 24, 2012.
    9
        http://bbs.taobao.com/catalog/thread/513886-256229600.htm, accessed March 29, 2012.




                                                     6
benefit from RFF in terms of sales and feedback? To answer these questions we propose five
hypotheses as described in detail below.

   S1: A seller is more likely to choose RFF when he is inexperienced. (Reputation Building
Hypothesis)

   The theoretical literature suggests that building a reputation is more valuable in earlier
stages of a seller’s career (Bar-Isaac and Tadelis, 2008). Similarly, the advertising literature
suggests that a firm will “burn money” to promote brand awareness in its early stages
(Milgrom and Roberts, 1996; Bagwell, 2007). Therefore, a seller will choose RFF as a signal to
attract buyers when he or she is inexperienced, which will also be an investment in reputation.
After accumulating more sales and building a higher reputation score, the seller will become
less likely to choose RFF because, at the margin, more feedback becomes less valuable.

   S2: A seller who provides a high quality transaction is more likely to choose RFF. (Seller
Signaling Hypothesis)

   As explained earlier in the introduction, the advertising literature (Nelson, 1974; Kihlstrom
and Riordan, 1984; Milgrom and Roberts, 1996) implies that only a high quality seller who is
confident enough that they will receive positive feedback will commit to reward feedback,
assuming that consumers express their experiences truthfully. Therefore, a seller who plans
to provide high quality transactions is more likely to choose RFF than a seller who plans to
provide low quality transactions.

   B1: Choosing RFF increases an item’s sales. (Buyer Belief Hypothesis - A)

   Choosing RFF may have both short run and long run effects on sales. In the short run,
RFF acts as a signal because, as described above, choosing RFF shows a seller’s confidence
in his or her performance, and serves as a signal for high-quality. This is because a rebate is
rewarded if it is informative, no matter whether it is positive or negative. As RFF attracts




                                               7
more buyers in the short run, it will increase the number of sales and detailed feedback,
which, if positive, will attract more buyers in the long run.10

       B2: Choosing RFF increases an item’s number of zero-word ratings. (Buyer Belief
Hypothesis - B)

       If buyers infer that an item with the RFF feature has higher quality, then its sales will
increase (hypothesis B1) but buyers for whom the cost of leaving feedback is high will ignore
the rebate itself for its monetary value and only care about its signaling value. Because the
requirement for a rebate to be given is an informative enough feedback, a buyer will not
get the rebate if she only rates positive/neutral/negative and doesn’t write any comments.
If an item’s number of zero-word ratings increase when the RFF feature is chosen, then it
suggests that buyers are attracted by the signal of quality and not by the rebate. Hence,
if buyers understand the signaling effect of RFF, then the RFF feature should increase an
item’s number of zero-word ratings.

       B3: Choosing RFF increases the average length of an item’s ratings (Long Ratings
Hypothesis).

       This hypothesis is quite trivial because informativeness is highly correlated with length,
and Taobao’s automatic algorithm offers the reward only for what they deem informative.
Hence, any buyer who is interested in receiving a rebate must leave longer feedback.


3.2       Identification

To test hypotheses S1 and S2, we run logit regressions where the left-hand side variable is
whether or not a seller adopts the RFF feature and test whether adopting RFF is associated
with a seller’s experience and performance. The regressions include item fixed effects so that
  10
   RFF can be regarded as a kind of price promotion conditional on leaving informative feedback. If the
nominal price does not increase during the period of the rebate, then getting a rebate for feedback is, for
buyers who leave feedback, a price discount. As we show below, the magnitude of the discount is very small
compared to the sale price, implying that a serious “sales” effect is unlikely to be behind the results.



                                                    8
the decision to adopt RFF is identified within sellers-products. We also run the regressions
without item-fixed effects to compare adoption across different sellers.
       To test the four hypothesis regarding buyers’ responses (B1-B4), we regress the variables
of interests on rebate variables including item fixed effects, which control for product and
seller characteristics. Recall that an item is a product-seller pair, and Taobao assigns a
unique item ID to each item. The dataset represents a six month panel, which allows us to
use item fixed effect to control for unobserved product and seller characteristics. During this
period, a seller may vary his adoption of a rebate for a product. Since the rebate has two
types, coupon and cash, controlling for item fixed effects allows us to use the variation in
rebate type to examine not only the effect of adopting the RFF feature, but also to measure
the potentially differential effect of the type of RFF.
       The tests for hypotheses B1 (Buyer Belief Hypothesis - A) and B3 are straightforward
by testing whether item sales and the ratio of long ratings are significantly higher when the
RFF feature is adopted. To test for hypotheses B2 (Buyer Belief Hypothesis - B), we test
whether the number of ratings with zero Chinese characters is significantly increased with
RFF adoption. In the main body of the paper, we use our entire sample data.


3.3       Endogeneity Concerns

There are two sources of endogeneity in seller decisions: prices and RFF adoption. To address
the potential problem of price endogeneity, we use an instrumental variables approach in our
analysis. Commonly adopted instrumental variables for prices include cost variables, observed
exogenous product characteristics, and the number of products in the same market.11 In our
study, cost information is absent, and many product characteristics such as size and color of
a cellphone are not observed in our data. Instead, we use the number of items in the same
market as an instrument. To define the market we first classify items by prices into four
  11
     Berry et al. (1995) suggest using observed exogenous product characteristics such as the horsepower of a
car, the sums of the values of the same characteristics of other products offered by that firm, and the sums of
the values of the same characteristics of products offered by other firms.




                                                      9
quantiles, and then select items with non-zero sales in the same product category, same price
quantile, and the same province.12
       Turning to the seller’s choice of adopting the RFF feature, this is our endogenous (strategic)
variable of interest. Our empirical analysis is geared towards testing whether it is adopted as
a signal of high quality, and whether buyers respond to it as an informative signal of quality.
As mentioned above, we run the regressions of buyer behavior with item fixed effects. This
means that changes in behavior as a response to the RFF is identified off of variation within
seller and within product by the definition of the item ID. This is akin to a variant of the
kind of “quasi-experimental” approach first used by Elfenbein et al. (2012) who study how
sellers on eBay use charity as a substitute for reputation.13 Hence, if product characteristics
may drive some results, then our use of item fixed effects within our panel structure should
alleviate any such concerns.14



4        Data Description
Our data consist of 6,992,131 transactions purchased from 12,857 randomly selected sellers
who sold at least one unit in our four chosen categories (cellphones, TF cards, cosmetic
masks, and jeans) between September 2012 and February 2013 on Taobao. Theses categories
represent both search goods and experience goods in various price ranges. Cellphones and
TF cards are search goods because product quality is readily observable prior to purchase (as
  12
      We use the whole sample period as the window to select non-zero sales items, instead of using a single
month as the window, to better include all competitive items in the same market. We use the same province
because many buyers sort search outcomes by the province in which sellers are located and purchase from
sellers nearby to reduce shipping time and costs.
   13
      They identify a “quasi-experiment” as a situation where a seller posted multiple items with the same
title, subtitle, and starting price that differ in other listing attributes such as committing a fraction of the
sale to charity. Einav et al. (2014) similarly use “matched listings” with the same title and subtitle, and rely
on variation within matched listings to investigate various sale strategies in eBay.
   14
      The only remaining endogeneity problem with the rebate strategy may be due to some unobserved
time-varying characteristics associated with an item. For example, a seller may change an item’s picture in
different months together with the choice of rebates, which may cause some correlated responses. Because we
have controlled for many item observed characteristics, such as product and seller characteristics, we don’t
believe that unobserved time-varying item characteristics cause a serious endogeneity problem. Again, this is
basically the same approach taken by Elfenbein et al. (2012).



                                                      10
long as the seller provides authentic products.) Only the service quality, such as the shipping
speed and return policy, may vary across sellers. Cosmetic masks and jeans are experience
goods because their true quality or value can only be truly determined by using them. In
the data set, there are 107,620 items in the four categories with positive sales in the sample
period.15 Among the 12,857 sellers, 60.82% used a rebate at least once during the six months
for some product (not necessarily in the four chosen categories).
       Because an item refers to a product-seller combination, the same product sold by different
sellers will be assigned different item IDs. For each item, our dataset contains all transactions
during the sample period. A transaction is defined as a sale of an item between a buyer and
a seller (one or multiple units). For each transaction, our data contain transaction ID, item
ID, category ID that the item belongs to, buyer ID, seller ID, quantity sold, total transaction
price (including shipping fees), time stamp (e.g., 2013-01-08 23:15:49), and the corresponding
rating information if it has been rated. The rating information includes whether it is positive,
neutral, or negative, its length (number of Chinese characters), time stamp, and whether it is
a first- or second-time rating.16 Table 2 provides summary statistics of item attributes at the
item-month level. This is restricted to include only observations with positive sales of an item
in a month because zero sales may mean that an item is out of stock or is not on sale at all.
       We define an “effective rating” as a rating that includes real information from the buyer
who left it. These exclude automatic Taobao ratings as described in Section 2 (with 18
Chinese characters) as well as ratings with no comments (zero Chinese characters). By
excluding ratings with 18 characters we are discarding some ratings that are from genuine
buyers but these are no more than one percent of ratings (see Figure 4). We define a “long
rating” to be a rating with at least 24 Chinese characters. We pick this threshold because it
is the 75 percentile of all the ratings that exclude 18 character ratings.
       For each seller our dataset contains information about his location (province), his service
promises (e.g., whether he accepts any returns in 7 days after the sale, etc.) and reputation
  15
    The number of transactions includes all sales by sellers in our sample, not limited to the four categories.
  16
    For each transaction, a buyer is allowed to leave feedback more than once because for some products
quality cannot fully be determined until it is used for a while.



                                                      11
data at a daily level, including his seller rating score, his corresponding seller rating grade
(see table 1), and the ratio of positive ratings.17
       We define a period as a month because information about an item on Taobao is reported
in terms of the last 30 days. For example, when a potential buyer searches for a product
and sorts the search outcomes by items’ sales, the results are ranked based on items’ sales
in the last 30 days. A seller’s ratio of positive ratings is reported for the last month and
last six months. For each item, we summarize its product characteristics as monthly sales,
monthly average price, monthly number of positive, neutral, negative, and long ratings. For
each seller, we use the seller rating grade at the beginning of each month, and the ratio of
seller positive ratings at the monthly level as seller characteristics. As a robustness test we
used other time frams as the period duration, and the main findings still hold.
       There are two types of rebates, depending on whether a seller chooses a rebate in the
form of cash or coupon.18 For all transactions with the RFF feature we know whether the
buyer received a cash or coupon rebate. About 20.11% of rebates are in the form of cash
and the average value of cash rebates is RMB 1.411. Since the conditions of using a coupon
are missing in the data, we only use the value of cash rebates. Also, since the start time of
a rebate is recorded in our data but not its ending time, we define a rebate-month dummy
that takes the value of 1 if either a seller initiated at least one rebate for a given item in a
given month, or some buyer gets a rebate from a transaction from the given item in the given
month. Since some sellers changed an item’s rebate form (cash or coupon) within a month,
we define the rebate form as a cash rebate if a cash rebate has been chosen at least 50% of
the times in the month, otherwise it is defined as a coupon rebate.
       Figure 4 shows the distribution of the length of ratings in Chinese characters with and
without a rebate, and how the ratio of these two distributions changes over time. For any
rating length there are more with rebates than without rebates, and the ratio between the
  17
     We have the sellers’ reputation information on March 3rd, 2013, and we combine it with transactions
data to calculate each item and seller’s daily reputation during the sample period.
  18
     The seller can also choose whether only the first rater will receive the rebate or whether any rater who
writes something informative gets a rebate. In our dataset, only 1.4% of rebates are chosen to reward only
the first rater. Therefore, for simplicity, we classify rebates into two types: coupon and cash.



                                                     12
two rises as the rating length increases. This suggests that rebates play a role in motivating
people on the extensive margin to write more comments and on the intensive margin to write
longer comments. Figure 5 provides a first glance of the relationship between rebates and
sales, as well as the relation between rebates and ratings. The average monthly sales of an
item with a rebate is much higher than without a rebate. The same applies to the average
monthly ratings of zero Chinese characters. The average monthly ratio of effective ratings
of an item with a rebate is higher than without a rebate, the same applies to long ratings,
however, positive ratings of an item with a rebate are almost the same as without a rebate.
    The raw data suggests that the sale of items, the length of ratings and effective ratings
are positively correlated with offering a rebate. To further investigate the sellers’ rebate
choices and the buyers’ responses, we conduct a more nuanced empirical analysis.



5     Empirical analysis

5.1     Rebate Adoption

To study a seller’s strategic decision to signal his quality and build a reputation we start with
investigating a seller’s adoption of a rebate on a particular item. To identify the factors that
may affect a seller’s adoption decision, as well as whether the RFF acts as a signal of quality,
we estimate the following panel regression:


    yi,s,t = α + π · P roducti,s,t−1 + γ · Sellers,t−1 + βP ositive Ratios,t + δi + µt + εi,s,t ,   (1)


where yi,s,t ∈ {0, 1} is an indicator equal to 1 if item i of seller s in period t offers a rebate;
P roducti,s,t−1 is a vector of product characteristics of item i in period t − 1, including the
logarithm of the following variables: sales, number of negative and neutral ratings, number of
positive long ratings, and number of negative and neutral long ratings; Sellers,t−1 is a vector
of seller characteristics, including seller rating grade in period t − 1; P ositive Ratios,t refers
to the seller’s ratio of positive ratings in period t, which is the number of positive ratings


                                                  13
divided by the number of all ratings in month t. Unlike the analysis of the impact of a rebate
in the next subsection, we use the ratio of seller positive ratings in period t instead of period
t − 1 to test whether a seller uses a rebate as a signal. Since a seller’s quality, especially
service quality, may change over time, only the ratio of seller positive ratings in period t,
instead of period t − 1, reflects a seller’s quality in period t.19 δi and µt are item and month
fixed effects to control for unobserved attributions of items and months.
       Table 3 shows the results of the regression in equation (1). Column 1 uses item fixed
effects and identifies the effects within seller-product pairs, while column 2 shows the results
excluding item fixed effects in order to compare behavior across different products and sellers.
       As column 1 shows, a seller tends to choose RFF for an item when his rating grade is low,
which confirms the Reputation Building Hypothesis (S1). The higher a seller rating grade, the
                                                                                             Pr{rebate}
lower the probability of adopting a rebate. To interpret the results, let R =               Pr{no rebate}
                                                                                                            denote
the ratio of the probability of choosing a rebate to the probability of not choosing a rebate.
The estimated coefficient for “seller rating grade, t − 1” is −0.1787, so if the seller’s rating
grade last month is one level higher, then R changes by a factor of exp{−0.1787} = 0.836.
Hence, the likelihood of choosing a rebate declines if the seller gets a higher rating grade
(identified by within-seller changes in ratings.) Similarly, the estimated coefficient for “Ratio
of seller positive ratings, t” is 3.9279 means that a 1% increase in the seller’s ratio of positive
ratings this month implies that R changes by a factor of exp{0.0393} = 1.04, and the
likelihood of choosing a rebate increases. We consider the seller’s ratio of positive ratings in
month t as a proxy for the quality of his transactions in month t. The positive coefficient on
this variable suggests that sellers use the RFF feature as a signal of quality. This confirms
the Seller Signaling Hypothesis (S2).
       Column 2 identifies effects across items and sellers. Compared to Product characteristics
in column 1, the coefficient on the number of negative/neutral ratings in the past month
  19
     We have used the period t − 1 ratio as a robustness test, and the results are almost identical. Also, we do
not include the item’s ratio of positive ratings for two reasons. First, it is highly correlated with other product
characteristics, such as sales, and number of negative and neutral ratings. Second, it tends to fluctuate a lot
if there are few ratings. One single negative rating from a deliberate buyer can damage the item’s ratio of
positive ratings significantly.



                                                        14
becomes significantly negative and the coefficient on the number of positive long ratings
in the last month for an item becomes significantly positive. These results suggest that
an item with better reviews is more likely to be chosen to offer rebates than an item with
worse reviews, which adds an interesting and intuitive insight related to the signaling story.
Namely, sellers choose their best items to further guarantee a higher likelihood of making
their customer happy so that she leaves a positive review.
       Like in column 1, column 2 shows that the coefficient on a seller’s ratio of positive ratings
in the same month is still significantly positive. However, the coefficient on a seller’s past
rating grade reverses sign and becomes significantly positive. As explained above, the within
seller-item regression of column 1 suggests that sellers use the RFF feature to signal their
quality and improve their reputation, while the result in column 2 suggests that sellers with
a higher seller rating grade may be more savvy about using this feature. Intuitively, sellers
with higher grades invest more time on Taobao, are more experienced, and are more familiar
with new tools on Taobao than sellers with low seller rating grades.
       Turning to item categories, the excluded category is jeans and all item coefficients are
negative and significant, and of these, the least negative on is for cosmetic masks. All
else equal, the likelihood of RFF adoption from largest to smallest is jeans, cosmetic mask,
cellphone and memory cards, respectively. This suggests that a seller is more likely to choose
the RFF feature for experience goods and expensive goods. This further provides support for
the signaling hypothesis in the spirit of the original insights in Nelson (1974).20


5.2       The Impact of Rebates on Sales and Ratings

To examine the response of buyers to items that offer RFF we estimate the impact of a rebate
on an item’s sales and on the ratings it receives using the following panel regression model,


           yi,s,t = α + β · Rebatei,s,t + π · P roducti,s,t−1 + γ · Sellers,t−1 + δi + µt + εi,s,t ,        (2)
  20
    As mentioned earlier, we have used the period t − 1 ratio of positive ratings as a measure of seller quality
as a robustness test, and the results are almost identical as shown in columns 3 and 4.




                                                      15
where yi,s,t is the dependent variables of interest; Rebatei,s,t is a vector that indicates the
rebate status of item i sold by seller s in period t, which includes an indicator that takes the
value of 1 if item i of seller s offers any rebate in period t, an indicator that takes the value
of 1 if the rebate is in the form of cash, and the average value of a cash rebate that month;
As before, P roducti,s,t−1 includes product characteristics of item i, Sellers,t−1 includes seller
characteristics, and δi and µt are item and month fixed effects.
       For product and seller characteristics, we select the variables that are observable to buyers
who view an item page. A buyer can choose to sort searched items by Taobao’s default
ranking, popularity, sales (in the past 30 days), ratio of positive ratings, province, or price.
An item page shows its price, whether shipping is free, number of past sales, number in
stock, all ratings (positive, neutral, or negative) with comments for the item, including both
first and second time ratings, the seller’s name, and the seller’s rating. A customer can also
choose to see all ratings, including ratings with no comments or automatic positive ratings.
We pool an item’s neutral and negative ratings together because a lot of buyers tend to give
a neutral rating rather than a negative rating in order to avoid retaliation even if a buyer has
an unhappy shopping experience.21
       Because long ratings are more informative than short ratings for buyers to make decisions,
we also include the number of positive long ratings (at least 24 characters) and the number
of negative and neutral long ratings of an item in product characteristics. For seller char-
acteristics, we include seller rating grade and ratio of seller positive ratings in the previous
month because only the lagged value is observed by buyers.


5.2.1      Buyer Responses to Rebates

Table 4 uses ln(sales) as the dependent variable in equation (2) above. Column 1 does not
use instruments for prices, while columns 2 through 5 do. Comparing columns 1 and 2, when
using instruments for prices, the coefficient on ln(price) changes from an inelastic (−0.4059)
  21
     On Taobao, a seller knows the buyer’s contact information including cell phone, so some sellers would
call buyers and repeatedly ask them to change negative feedback.




                                                   16
to an elastic (−3.1802) demand. Given the large amount of competition on the Taobao site,
this confirms that the IV strategy we chose for prices was effective.
       The estimated coefficient on the rebate dummy is large and significant, showing that a
rebate increases the quantity sold of an item by 28.73% on average. This supports the Buyer
Belief Hypothesis - A (B1). We also estimated the effects of different types of rebates and
different values of a cash rebate. Column 3 shows that on average, a coupon rebate increases
the quantity sold of an item by 31.34% while a cash rebate increases the quantity sold by
21.42%. We conjecture that this is probably because a coupon usually has a higher value
compared to the average value of a cash rebate.22 Column 4 shows that sales increase in the
value of a cash rebate. A cash increase of RMB 1 increases the quantity sold by 31.48%.
       Most of the coefficients on product and seller characteristics are as we expect them to be
and they do not vary much across specifications. Lower price, higher number of previous sales,
fewer number of negative/neutral ratings, larger number of positive long ratings, and a higher
ratio of seller positive ratings, all attract more sales. It is curious that in all specifications we
find that a higher seller rating grade is associated with fewer sales. Our conjecture is that
sellers with a higher seller rating grade are too busy and impersonal, which may slightly deter
Taobao buyers. The upshot is that the effect of a rebate on sales is large. Using the estimates
of column 2 we find that offering a rebate is, on average, as effective as (1) reducing price by
about 9% (calculated by dividing the coefficients, 0.2873/3.1802 = 0.0903); (2) increasing last
month’s sales by 389.30% (0.2873/0.0738 = 3.8930); or (3) increasing the number of positive
long ratings in the last month by 705.90% (0.2873/0.0407 = 7.0590).
       Table 5 has the number of ratings with zero characters as the dependent variable in
equation (2). By the nature of the RFF feature, buyers whose ratings contain no Chinese
characters can never obtain the rebate according to Taobao’s conditions. Hence, as we explain
in Section 3.1, buyers who understand the signaling value of rebates but are uninterested
in obtaining the rebate may still flock to sellers who offer rebates because of their signaling
content. Column 2 of Table 5 (instrumenting for prices) shows that rebates increase ratings
  22
   Sellers are probably more generous with coupons because can be used only against a future sale form the
same seller whereas a cash rebate is paid out regardless of buyer’s future purchases.


                                                   17
with zero Chinese characters by 14.24%. Column 3 shows that a coupon rebate generates
more ratings with zero Chinese characters than a cash rebate (16% versus 9.2%.) Like for
sales, a coupon rebate seems more effective than a cash rebate as a signal. Column 4 shows
that increasing a cash rebate by RMB 1 raises the number of ratings with zero Chinese
characters by 15.76%. These results confirm the Buyer Belief Hypothesis - B (B2).
   We further consider the heterogeneous effect of rebates across product categories. Column
5 in tables 4 and 5 reports estimates from dummies for each product category. We find that a
rebate has the largest effect on cellphones and jeans, and the lowest on SD cards. For example,
in table 4, the estimated coefficient for a rebate on cell phones is 0.3992, and for jeans is
0.3931, while for masks is only 0.1326, and for SD cards is 0.0667. The same differences
appear in column 5 in table 5. This is consistent with the signaling story, which suggests that
signaling is more important when the buyer is more concerned about asymmetric information,
which is the case when the product is either more expensive (e.g., cell phone), or when it is
an experienced good (e.g., jeans, masks).


5.2.2   Effect of Rebates on Ratings

Tables 6 and 7 use a variety of rating measures as the dependent variable in equation (2). We
define the ratio of effective ratings as the number of effective ratings divided by the number
of all transactions. Columns 1 and 2 in Table 6 show that offering a rebate raises an item’s
ratio of effective ratings by 6.11%, and that coupon rebates have a larger effect that cash
rebates (6.82% versus 4.09%). As column 3 shows, the effects are strongest for jeans and
cellphones, weaker for masks, and nonexistent for SD cards, similar to previous patterns.
   We define the ratio of long ratings as the number of long ratings divided by the number
of all transactions. Columns 4 and 5 in Table 6 show that offering a rebate raises an item’s
ratio of long ratings by 7.35%, and that coupon rebates have a larger effect that cash rebates
(8.02% versus 5.42%). This confirms the obvious Long Ratings Hypothesis (B3). Again, as
column 6 shows, the effects are strongest for jeans and cellphones, weaker for masks, and




                                              18
nonexistent for SD cards. Columns 7-9 in Table 6 consider the log of the number of long
ratings and show very similar results.
       Columns 1-6 in Table 7 explore whether rebates change the likelihood of receiving positive
feedback. Because columns 1-3 use item fixed effects, the quality of sellers should be the same
with and without rebates, and as such we don’t expect to see a positive effect of feedback on
the ratio of positive ratings. One may be concerned that offering rebates causes buyers to feel
a need to reciprocate and offer more positive feedback than the seller deserves.23 As columns
1-3 show, offering a rebate is not associated with more positive feedback. In fact, the ratio of
positive feedback slightly declines, but the magnitude, though significant, is very small.
       Columns 4-6 of Table 7 drop item fixed effects, allowing the quality of sellers to vary with
and without rebates. As the results in columns 4-6 show, all but one of the coefficients (on
masks in column 6) are positive, implying a positive correlation between the ratio of positive
ratings and the use of RFF. This is consistent with the results in Table 3 and further confirms
the Seller Signaling Hypothesis (S2).
       Interestingly, as columns 7-9 in table 7 show, offering a rebate gives the seller earlier
ratings, shortening the time to rating by 6.08%. A coupon shortens the period by 7.02%
while a cash rebate shortens it by 4.10%. This benefits a seller in two ways: he will get money
transferred from Alipay faster and it reduces the likelihood of a dispute. Again, the effects
are strongest for jeans and cellphones, weaker for masks, and nonexistent for SD cards


5.3       Robustness Checks

5.3.1      Product category

In sections 5.1 and 5.2, we report the estimated impact of rebates averaged across our four
categories. Because detailed comments of other buyers are more important for good with
more risk involved in the purchase, like experience goods and more expensive goods, we
  23
    Cabral and Li (2015) find some support for reciprocal behavior in that a buyer’s feedback is positively
biased if a rebate is offered by the seller in a field experiment on eBay. Unlike in our study, in Cabral and Li
(2015) there is no enforcement by the marketplace to pay the rebate so buyers may believe that they will not
get the rebate if they leave negative feedback. Our study is similar to the experimental setup as in Li and
Xiao (2014) where the experimenter enforces the payment of rebates.


                                                      19
estimate the average impact of a rebate for each category as a robustness check. We divide
our data into four categories: cellphones, TF cards, masks, and jeans, and run the panel
regressions within each category of sellers and items again.
       Using sellers’ fixed effects as controls, we find that a seller tends to adopt a rebate
when its rating grade is low, except for sellers of jeans, which supports the Reputation
Building Hypothesis S1. Dropping seller fixed effects, we find that sellers with a high ratio of
positive ratings are more likely to adopt a rebate in each category, which proves the Signaling
Hypothesis S2.
       Similarly to our findings with the full sample of goods, we find for each category that
rebates increase sales, the ratio of long ratings, and the number of long ratings, while they
shorten the days between transaction and rating. A rebate is usually accompanied with
a price reduction for masks and jeans. A rebate has almost no effect on a seller’s ratio
of positive ratings for each category. Figure 6 shows the 95% confidence intervals of the
estimates of changes in our main variables of interest. The effect of a rebate on sales from the
highest to the lowest are cellphones, Jeans, TF cards, and mask. A rebate increases sales of
cellphones, TF cards, masks, and jeans by 33.89%, 3.02%, 27.96%, and 32.25% respectively.24
The effect of a rebate on the ratio of long ratings from the highest to the lowest are masks,
jeans, TF cards, and cellphones. A rebate increases the ratio of long ratings of cellphones,
TF cards, masks, and jeans by 7.14%, 2.99%, 7.99%, and 7.74% respectively.25


5.3.2      Alternative Period Windows

Recall that we only observe when the RFF offering started and do not observe when it ended.
In the analysis in section 5.2 and section 5.3, we use “month” as a period window and user
item-month as the observation measurement. One concern is that if an item’s rebate period
  24
     All the results for for these regressions, as well as for differing time periods described below, are omitted
for space considerations and available upon request.
  25
     The coefficient on TF cards is not statistically significant. The sample size of TF cards is 5,442 in the
regressions for sales, which is much smaller than other products (22,673 cellphones, 86,135 masks, and 99,830
jeans). Also, the sales of TF cards are affected by factors not included in our model and have large variations,
because a TF card is usually purchased together with a cellphone rather than independently.




                                                       20
is less than a month, our results may be biased. To address this concern we used two-week
blocks instead of one month for the period window as a robustness check.
    For each two-week period t, the explanatory variables for t − 1 are created using data
from the 30 days prior to t because when a buyer considers an item for purchase, she can see
the information about the item for the past 30 days, such as sales, seller’s ratings, etc. For
example, ln(sales, t − 1) means the log sales of the item in the 30 days prior to the two-week
period t. The regression results of table 4-6 are similar to the results obtained by using
two-weeks as a period.
    Another concern may be that the periods are adjacent, implying that the first days of
period t are a lot close to the last days in period t − 1 then they are to most days in period
t. To address this concern we conducted another set of robustness tests in which a period
includes the first 15-days of each month from the 6 months we have. This gap creates periods
for which each day in the period is closer to other days in that same period than to days in
any other period. The main results are robust to this change.



6     Conclusion
Te burgeoning growth of online marketplaces, and the increased access to data from them,
offers new and exciting opportunities to empirically test how markets work in practice. We
use a unique data set from Taobao’s online marketplace to examine the effects of a RFF
mechanism. Our empirical evidence suggests that higher quality sellers use RFF to send
signals, and that buyers respond to these signals rationally, which in turn alleviates some of
the adverse selection problems in anonymous online marketplaces. Our results shed light on
the strategic interaction between buyers and sellers in online marketplaces, which in turn
offers insights into the design of online markets.
    Specifically, we find that a seller is more likely to choose the RFF option in earlier stages
of selling, when others signals like accumulated feedback are not yet established. Upon
choosing a RFF, a seller is more likely to provide a high quality transaction, suggesting the
signaling content of RFF. We also show that buyers respond to the RFF signal in ways

                                               21
that are consistent with our signaling story. We find that sales of an item are about 30%
higher when the seller chooses a RFF. It is as effective as increasing last month’s sales by
four times, or increasing the number of positive long ratings in the last month by nine times.
Furthermore, the use of RFF do not create bias in feedback, and they afford the seller the
opportunity to build up a good reputation faster, creating a sort of “flywheel.” That is,
the signaling content of the RFF encourages both more sales and more feedback, the latter
rapidly increasing the seller’s reputation, which in turn attracts more buyers and generates
more sales.
   Turning to market design consequences of our study, the results of our analyses suggest
that marketplaces can help reduce the asymmetric information problem by letting sellers
engage in RFF signaling practices. This suggests that online marketplaces can rely on the
strategic sophistication of both sellers and buyers to manage the asymmetric information
problem by leveraging the signaling abilities of high quality sellers. This last point offers
insights into the question of whether marketplaces need to be regulated to improve quality. It
is in the interest of marketplaces to reduce the asymmetric information problem, and we show
that established market mechanisms such as signaling can be used to enhance a marketplace’s
quality, relaxing some of the need for external forms of regulation.




                                             22
References
Backus, M., Blake, T., and Tadelis, S. (2015). Cheap talk, round numbers, and the economics of negotiation.
  NBER working paper w21285.

Bagwell, K. (2007). The economic analysis of advertising. In Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 3,
  pages 1701—1844.

Bar-Isaac, H. and Tadelis, S. (2008). Seller reputation. Foundations and Trends R in Microeconomics,
  4(4):273–351.

Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., and Pakes, A. (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica,
  63(4):841–890.

Cabral, L. (2012). Reputation on the internet. In Peitz, M. and Waldfogel, J., editors, The Oxford Handbook
  of the Digital Economy. Oxford University Press.

Cabral, L. and Li, L. I. (2015). A dollar for your thoughts: Feedback-conditional rebates on ebay. Management
  Science, 61(9):2052–2063.

Dellarocas, C. and Wood, C. A. (2008). The sound of silence in online feedback: Estimating trading risks in
  the presence of reporting bias. Management Science, 54(3):460–476.

Einav, L., Kuchler, T., Levin, J., and Sundaresan, N. (2014). Assessing sale strategies in online markets using
  matched listings. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7(2):215–247.

Elfenbein, D., Fisman, R., and McManus, B. (2012). Charity as a substitute for reputation: Evidence from
   an online marketplace. Review of Economic Studies, 79(4):1441–1468.

Fan, Y., Ju, J., and Xiao, M. (2016). Reputation premium and reputation management: Evidence from
  china’s largest e-commerce platform. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 46(1):63–76.

Fradkin, A., Grewal, E., Holtz, D., and M., P. (2015). Bias and reciprocity in online reviews: Evidence from
  experiments on airbnb. 16th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, June 2015, (EC 2015), page 641.

Horton, J. and Golden, J. (2015). Reputation inflation: Evidence from an online labor market. Working
  paper, New York University.

Kawai, K., Onishi, K., and Uetake, K. (2013). Signaling in online credit markets. Working Paper.

Kihlstrom, R. E. and Riordan, M. H. (1984). Advertising as a signal. Journal of Political Economy,
  3(92):427–450.

Lafky, J. (2014). Why do people rate? theory and evidence on online ratings. Games and Economic Behavior,
  19(2):554–570.

Li, L. I. (2010). Reputation, trust, and rebates: How online auction markets can improve their feedback
   mechanisms. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 19(2):303–331.

Li, L. I. and Xiao, E. (2014). Money talks: Rebate mechanisms in reputation system design. Management
   Science, 60(8):2054–2072.

Masterov, D. V., Mayer, U. F., and Tadelis, S. (2015). Canary in the e-commerce coal mine: Detecting
 and predicting poor experiences using buyer-to-seller messages. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM
 Conference on Economics and Computation, EC ’15, pages 81–93, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

                                                      23
Mayzlin, D., Dover, Y., and Chevalier, J. (2014). Promotional reviews: An empirical investigation of online
  review manipulation. American Economic Review, 104(8):2421–55.

Milgrom, P. and Roberts, J. (1996). Price and advertising signals of product quality. Journal of Political
  Economy, 4(94):796–821.

Miller, N., Resnick, P., and Zeckhauser, R. (2005). Eliciting honest feedback: The peer prediction method.
  Management Science, 51(9):1359–1373.

Nelson, P. (1974). Advertising as information. Journal of Political Economy, 4(82):729–754.

Nosko, C. and Tadelis, S. (2015). The limits of reputation in platform markets: An empirical analysis and
  field experiment. NBER Working paper, (No. w20830).

Tadelis, S. (2016). Reputation and feedback systems in online platform markets. Annual Review of Economics,
  8.

Xu, H., Liu, D., Wang, H., and Stavrou, A. (2015). E-commerce reputation manipulation: The emergence of
  reputation-escalation-as-a-service. Proceedings of 24th World Wide Web Conference, (WWW 2015):1296–
  1306.

Zervas, G., Proserpio, D., and John, B. (2015). A first look at online reputation on airbnb, where every stay
  is above average. Working paper, Boston University.




                                                     24
               Table 1: Seller rating grade

Seller rating score    Seller rating grade   Seller rating category
Below 4 points                  0                      none
4-10                            1                    1 heart
11-41                           2                    2 hearts
41-90                           3                    3 hearts
91-150                          4                    4 hearts
151-250                         5                    5 hearts

251-5000                       6                  1 diamond
501-1,000                      7                  2 diamonds
1,001-2,000                     8                 3 diamonds
2,001-5,000                     9                 4 diamonds
5,001-10,000                   10                 5 diamonds

10,001-20,000                  11                  1 crown
20,001-50,000                  12                  2 crowns
50,001-100,000                 13                  3 crowns
100,001-200,000                14                  4 crowns
200,001-500,000                15                  5 crowns

500,001-1,000,000              16               1 gold crown
1,000,001-2,000,000            17               2 gold crowns
2,000,000-5,000.000            18               3 gold crowns
5,000,001-10,000,000           19               4 gold crowns
Above 10,000.000               20               5 gold crowns




                               25
                      Table 2: Summary of Statistics (item-month)

                                                                 Obs.     Mean      Std.    25%     Median    75%.
Dummy if a rebate                                              268,245     0.184    0.388      0       0        0
Dummy if a coupon rebate                                       268,245     0.139    0.345      0        0        0
Dummy if a cash rebate                                         268,245    0.0457   0.209       0       0        0
Amount of cash rebate (RMB) conditional on a cash rebate         6,255     1.411    2.235     0.5       1      1.1
Monthly sales (quantity)                                       268,245     41.09    709.6      1        3       11
Monthly sales (RMB)                                            268,245     4,377   78,930     75      198      746
Average transaction price (RMB)                                268,245     172.6    899.4    28.4      68     116.6
Average transaction price: Cellphone                            28,281     963.6    2229    226.5     510     1150
Average transaction price: TF card                               6,789     133.3    1898      28     40.47    79.55
Average transaction price: Mask                                105,823     47.84    504.7     5.6    16.92    55.24
Average transaction price: Jeans                               127,352    102.61    199.7   60.39      80      114
Number of ratings with zero Chinese characters                 268,245     5.998    149.5      0        1        2
Number of positive ratings                                     268,245     18.29    434.7      1        2        5
Number of negative and neutral ratings                         268,245     0.304    17.02      0        0        0
Number of positive long ratings                                268,245     4.003    99.54      0        0        1
Number of neutral and negative long ratings                    268,245     0.146    9.962      0        0       0
Ratio of effective ratings                                     223,122     0.558    0.378    0.25    0.571      1
Ratio of positive ratings                                      223,122     0.989    0.077      1        1        1
Average number of days before leaving ratings                  225,068     9.786    6.141      5     8.429    13.67
Ratio of long feedback                                         223,122     0.208    0.305      0        0     0.333
Number of long ratings                                         268,245     4.149    105.3      0        0        1
Seller rating grade∗                                           258,129     9.866    3.505      8       10       12
Ratio of seller positive ratings∗                              267,588     0.990   0.0193   0.988    0.995      1
Note: The observations are at the item-month level.
An item in a month is excluded if the sales is zero.
A long rating is an evaluation with the number of Chinese characters no less than 24.
An effective rating is an evaluation with the number of Chinese characters not equal to 0 nor 18.
* These two statistics are calculated including sales made by the seller that are not used in our analyses.




                                                   26
                      Table 3: Adoption of a rebate for an item

                     Dependent variable: Logit indicator = 1 if   adopting a rebate
                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)
Seller characteristics
Seller rating grade, t − 1                        -0.1787***      0.0585***    -0.1828***   0.0646***
                                                    (0.0125)       (0.0015)     (0.0128)     (0.0015)
Ratio of seller positive ratings, t                3.9279***      5.8356***
                                                    (0.5839)       (0.3446)
Ratio of seller positive ratings, t − 1                                         4.7729***   5.6680***
                                                                                 (0.6413)    (0.3764)

Product characteristics
ln(sales, t − 1)                                    0.2941***      0.2389***    0.3018***    0.2409***
                                                     (0.0103)       (0.0052)     (0.0103)     (0.0052)
ln(number of negative & neutral ratings, t − 1)       -0.0777     -0.2424***      -0.0517   -0.2283***
                                                     (0.0564)       (0.0364)     (0.0568)     (0.0367)
ln(number of positive long ratings, t − 1)         -0.1005***      0.4710***   -0.1068***   0.4669***
                                                     (0.0179)       (0.0101)     (0.0180)     (0.0102)
ln(number of negative and neutral long                0.0942         0.0564        0.0917      0.0537
 ratings, t − 1)                                     (0.0745)       (0.0485)     (0.0748)     (0.0487)

Item category
Dummy if cellphone                                                -0.5034***                -0.5154***
                                                                   (0.0192)                  (0.0193)
Dummy if TF card                                                  -1.2403***                -1.2542***
                                                                   (0.0516)                  (0.0522)
Dummy if mask                                                     -0.2964***                -0.3007***
                                                                   (0.0116)                  (0.0117)

Item fixed effect                                       Yes           No            Yes        No
Month fixed effect                                      Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes
Observations (item-month)                             136,932       502,289       135,937    505,467
Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses.
Asterisks indicate significance at 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***).
t refers to a variable in month t, and t − 1 refers to a variable in month t − 1.




                                                  27
                       Table 4: Impact of rebate on sales of an item

                                      Dependent variable: ln(sales (quantity), t)
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)
Rebate
Dummy if a rebate, t                           0.3145***    0.2873***
                                                (0.0069)     (0.0091)
Dummy if a coupon rebate, t                                              0.3134***    0.3125***
                                                                          (0.0102)     (0.0105)
Dummy if a cash rebate, t                                                0.2142***
                                                                          (0.0166)
Value of a cash rebate, t                                                             0.3148***
                                                                                       (0.0168)
Dummy if a rebate for cellphone, t                                                                     0.3992***
                                                                                                        (0.0289)
Dummy if a rebate for TF card, t                                                                         0.0667
                                                                                                        (0.0825)
Dummy if a rebatene for mask, t                                                                        0.1326***
                                                                                                        (0.0139)
Dummy if a rebatene for jeans, t                                                                       0.3931***
                                                                                                        (0.0114)
Product characteristics
ln(price, t)                                  -0.4059***   -3.1802***   -3.1638***    -3.3367***      -2.8623***
                                                (0.0102)    (0.2436)      (0.2428)      (0.2586)        (0.2300)
ln(sales, t − 1)                               0.0718***   0.0738***    0.0738***      0.0739***       0.0730***
                                                (0.0026)    (0.0033)      (0.0033)      (0.0034)        (0.0032)
ln(no. of ngtv & ntrl ratings, t − 1)         -0.0659***   -0.0675***   -0.0678***    -0.0686***      -0.0684***
                                                (0.0145)    (0.0183)      (0.0182)      (0.0189)        (0.0175)
ln(no. of pstv long ratings, t − 1)           0.0407***    0.0374***     0.0371***     0.0402***      0.0375***
                                                (0.0046)    (0.0058)      (0.0058)      (0.0060)        (0.0056)
ln(no. of ngtv & ntrl long ratings, t − 1)       -0.0060     -0.0079       -0.0081       -0.0099         -0.0062
                                                (0.0186)    (0.0236)      (0.0235)      (0.0243)       (0.0226)
Seller characteristics
Seller rating grade, t − 1                     -0.0315*** -0.0150**       -0.0160**    -0.0149**      -0.0168***
                                                 (0.0039)     (0.0052)     (0.0051)     (0.0054)        (0.0049)
Ratio of seller positive ratings, t − 1         0.9880***    1.2406***   1.2497***     1.1968***       1.1831***
                                                 (0.1692)     (0.2153)     (0.2148)     (0.2244)        (0.2061)
IVs                                                 No          Yes          Yes          Yes              No
Item fixed effect                                  Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
Month fixed effect                                 Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
Observations (item-month)                        214,080      214,080      214,080      209,846         214,080
Note: Standard deviations are in the parentheses and are clustered on seller in models without IVs
Asterisks indicate significance at 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***).
F-statistics of the 1st stage regressions for ln(prices) and amount of cash rebate are 56.78 and 11,474 respectively.
We add 1 to all the number of ratings in order to avoid28 ln(0).
        Table 5: Impact of rebate on ratings with zero Chinese characters

                       Dependent variable: ln(ratings with zero Chinese characters, t)
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)
Rebate
Dummy if a rebate, t                         0.1643***    0.1424***
                                              (0.0094)     (0.0073)
Dummy if a coupon rebate, t                                            0.1604***    0.1595***
                                                                        (0.0082)     (0.0084)
Dummy if a cash rebate, t                                              0.0920***
                                                                        (0.0134)
Value of a cash rebate, t                                                           0.1576***
                                                                                     (0.0134)
Dummy if a rebate for cellphone, t                                                               0.1861***
                                                                                                  (0.0236)
Dummy if a rebate for TF card, t                                                                   0.0263
                                                                                                  (0.0673)
Dummy if a rebatene for mask, t                                                                  0.0544***
                                                                                                  (0.0113)
Dummy if a rebatene for jeans, t                                                                 0.2055***
                                                                                                  (0.0093)
Product characteristics
ln(price, t)                                 -0.1718***   -2.4079***   -2.3966***   -2.4886***   -2.2176***
                                               (0.0207)     (0.1964)     (0.1958)     (0.2065)     (0.1875)
ln(sales, t-1)                                0.1771***   0.1787***     0.1787***    0.1792***   0.1782***
                                               (0.0040)     (0.0027)     (0.0026)     (0.0027)     (0.0026)
ln(no. of ngtv & ntrl ratings, t − 1)         -0.0381**    -0.0394**    -0.0396**    -0.0389**    -0.0399**
                                               (0.0157)     (0.0147)     (0.0147)     (0.0151)     (0.0143)
ln(no. of positive long ratings, t − 1)       0.0569***    0.0543***   0.0540***     0.0559***    0.0543***
                                               (0.0068)     (0.0047)     (0.0047)     (0.0048)     (0.0045)
ln(no. of ngtv & ntrl long ratings, t − 1)     0.0359*      0.0344*      0.0342*       0.0318      0.0353*
                                               (0.0212)     (0.0190)     (0.0190)     (0.0194)    (0.0184)
Seller characteristics
Seller rating grade, t − 1                   -0.0201**     -0.0068     -0.0075*     -0.0076*     -0.0078*
                                              (0.0067)    (0.0042)     (0.0042)     (0.0043)     (0.0040)
Ratio of seller positive ratings, t − 1        0.2884     0.4920**     0.4983**     0.4510**     0.4606**
                                              (0.1868)    (0.1735)     (0.1732)     (0.1792)     (0.1680)

IVs                                             No          Yes          Yes          Yes           No
Item fixed effect                               Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Month fixed effect                              Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Observations (item-month)                     214,080     214,080     214,080       209,846      214,080
Note: Standard deviations are in the parentheses and are clustered on seller in models without IVs.
Asterisks indicate significance at 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***).
                                                    29
                                 Table 6: Impact of rebate on effectiveness and length of ratings



     Dependent variable                        Ratio of effective ratings, t           Ratio of long ratings, t          ln(number of long ratings, t)
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)        (7)        (8)          (9)
     Rebate
     Dummy if a rebate, t                 0.0611***                              0.0735***                             0.2898***
                                           (0.0036)                               (0.0027)                              (0.0072)
     Dummy if a coupon rebate, t                       0.0682***                             0.0802***                             0.3167***
                                                        (0.0041)                              (0.0030)                              (0.0081)
     Dummy if a cash rebate, t                         0.0409***                             0.0542***                             0.2145***
                                                        (0.0067)                              (0.0050)                              (0.0132)
     Dummy if a rebate for cellphone, t                              0.0652***                             0.0790***                           0.3803***
                                                                      (0.0119)                              (0.0090)                            (0.0223)
     Dummy if a rebate for TF card, t                                  0.0182                                0.0305                              0.0974




30
                                                                      (0.0350)                              (0.0264)                            (0.0636)
     Dummy if a rebatene for mask, t                                 0.0392***                             0.0596***                           0.1679***
                                                                      (0.0056)                              (0.0042)                            (0.0107)
     Dummy if a rebatene for jeans, t                                0.0795***                             0.0853***                           0.3759***
                                                                      (0.0047)                              (0.0036)                            (0.0088)

     IVs                                      Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
     Item fixed effect                        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
     Month fixed effect                       Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
     Observations (item-month)              177,411      177,411     177,411     177,411      177,411       177,411     214,080     214,080     214,080
     Note: Standard deviations are in the parentheses.
     Asterisks indicate significance at 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***).
     Standard deviations are clustered on seller in models without IVs.
     We add 1 to all the number of ratings in order to avoid ln0.
     All models include product and seller characteristics (same as models in table 4) as control variables.
                                      Table 7: Impact of rebate on bias and time of ratings



     Dependent variable                                                  Ratio of                                        ln(average number of days
                                                                    positive ratings, t                                     between transaction
                                                                                                                               and rating, t)
                                              (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)         (9)
     Rebate
     Dummy if a rebate, t                 -0.0016**                           0.0139***                             -0.0608***
                                           (0.0007)                             (0.0028)                             (0.0051)
     Dummy if a coupon rebate, t                      -0.0014*                              0.0054**                             -0.0702***
                                                      (0.0008)                               (0.0018)                             (0.0057)
     Dummy if a cash rebate, t                        -0.0022*                             0.0409***                             -0.0343***
                                                      (0.0013)                               (0.0076)                             (0.0093)
     Dummy if a rebate for cellphone, t                             -0.0028                              0.5628**                             -0.0800***
                                                                   (0.0024)                              (0.1733)                               (0.0167)




31
     Dummy if a rebate for TF card, t                               -0.0004                              0.1103**                                -0.0593
                                                                   (0.0069)                              (0.0392)                               (0.0482)
     Dummy if a rebate for mask, t                                  -0.0009                             -0.1867**                              -0.0259**
                                                                   (0.0011)                              (0.0586)                               (0.0079)
     Dummy if a rebate for jeans, t                               -0.0019**                              0.0793**                             -0.0864***
                                                                   (0.0009)                              (0.0252)                               (0.0066)

     IVs                                      Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
     Item fixed effect                        Yes         Yes        Yes         No           No            No         Yes          Yes          Yes
     Month fixed effect                       Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
     Observations (item-month)              177,411     177,411    177,411     177,411      177,411      177,411     180,359      180,359      180,359
     Note: Standard deviations are in the parentheses.
     Asterisks indicate significance at 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***).
     Standard deviations are clustered on seller in models without IVs.
     We add 1 to all the number of ratings in order to avoid ln0.
     All models include product and seller characteristics (same as models in table 4) as control variables.
    Figure 1: Taobao’s announcement of a new feedback reward system


The purpose of the “rebate for feedback” scheme is to:

    • Increase the ratio of non-automatic to automatic seller ratings.
    • Increase the quality of buyers’ comments.
    • Increase feedback for new products and thus reduce buyers’ hesitation to purchase.

Benefits for buyers:

    • Receive cash or a coupon as a reward for feedback.
    • Become opinion leader as the display of their feedback is prioritized over others’ feedback.

Benefits for sellers:

    • Increase ratio of non-automatic to automatic ratings, thus attracting more future buyers.
    • Increase buyer incentives to write detailed comments, thus increasing word-of-mouth marketing
      power.

Sellers can set:

    • Reward for 1st high-quality feedback on newly listed products.
    • Reward for any products, conditional on feedback being of high quality (and regardless of whether
      it is positive or negative).

Alternative form of rewards:

    • Cash rewards.
    • Discount coupon.




                                               32
   Figure 2: Taobao.com page with feedback reward scheme




              Figure 3: Four Item Categories in our Data




                           Memory Cards




Cell Phones




                             Cosmetic Masks                Jeans




                                     33
                                         Figure 4: Ratings with and without a rebate




                                         Distribution of rating length with and without a rebate

        0.06


        0.05


        0.04
Share




        0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                     share if no rebate
                                                                                                                                                                                                     share if a rebate
        0.02


        0.01


          0
                 0      3    6   9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81 84 87 90 93 96 99
                                     Rating length (shares of rating length of 0 and 18 should be 5 times as the figure shows)




                                                       Rating length with / rating length without a rebate
                       1.8

                       1.6

                       1.4

                       1.2

                        1
               Ratio




                       0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ratio of rating length
                       0.6

                       0.4

                       0.2

                        0
                             0
                                 3
                                     6
                                         9
                                             12
                                                  15
                                                       18
                                                            21
                                                                 24
                                                                      27
                                                                           30
                                                                                33
                                                                                     36
                                                                                          39
                                                                                               42
                                                                                                    45
                                                                                                         48
                                                                                                              51
                                                                                                                   54
                                                                                                                        57
                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                  63
                                                                                                                                       66
                                                                                                                                            69
                                                                                                                                                 72
                                                                                                                                                      75
                                                                                                                                                           78
                                                                                                                                                                81
                                                                                                                                                                     84
                                                                                                                                                                          87
                                                                                                                                                                               90
                                                                                                                                                                                    93
                                                                                                                                                                                         96
                                                                                                                                                                                              99




                                                                                                    Rating length




                                                                                                              34
     Figure 5: Sales and ratings with and without a rebate




                                   Sales, and number of ratings

               Average monthly sales with a rebate


                                  without a rebate




Average monthly ratings of zero Chinese characters
                 with a rebate

                                  without a rebate


                                                     0         5         10         15     20    25   30   35




                         Ratio of effective, long and positive ratings

Average monthly ratio of effective ratings with a rebate

                                       without a rebate



    Average monthly ratio of long ratings with a rebate

                                       without a rebate



Average monthly ratio of positive ratings with a rebate

                                       without a rebate

                                                           0       0.2        0.4        0.6    0.8   1    1.2



                                                     35
Figure 6: 95% confidence interval of estimates of change in main variables of
interest



                                 95%!CI!of!change!in!sales!
                                        (quantity)
                    2

                    1

                    0
                              Cellphone      TFcard    Mask   Jeans
                    1

                    2




                               95%!CI!of!change!in!ratio!of!
                                      long!ratings
                        0.2
                     0.15
                        0.1
                     0.05
                          0
                     0.05        Cellphone    TFcard   Mask   Jeans

                        0.1




                               95%!CI!of!change!in!ratio!of!
                                    positive!ratings
                    0.15
                        0.1
                    0.05
                         0
                    0.05        Cellphone     TFcard   Mask   Jeans

                        0.1
                                                 36
                    0.15
