NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A LESSON FROM THE GREAT DEPRESSION THAT THE FED MIGHT HAVE LEARNED:
A COMPARISON OF THE 1932 OPEN MARKET PURCHASES WITH QUANTITATIVE EASING
Michael Bordo
Arunima Sinha
Working Paper 22581
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22581

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

We are grateful to our discussants Annette Vissing-Jorgensen and Vasco Cúrdia for very helpful
insights. We also thank Vasco for providing us access to his codes. Comments from audiences at
the NBER DAE meeting, UCLA, Warwick University, the London School of Economics, Bank
of International Settlements, Fed System Conference on Economic and Financial History (FRB
Richmond), Conference of the Society for Computational Economics (Bordeaux), International
Association of Applied Econometrics (Milan), Conference on Fixed Income Markets (Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco and Bank of Canada), Expectations in Dynamic Macroeconomic
Models (Eugene), the Econometric Society World Congress (Montreal) and European Economic
Association (Mannheim) meetings are gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Andrew Jalil,
Kris Mitchener, Eugene White and Michael Woodford for comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Michael Bordo and Arunima Sinha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

A Lesson from the Great Depression that the Fed Might have Learned: A Comparison of the
1932 Open Market Purchases with Quantitative Easing
Michael Bordo and Arunima Sinha
NBER Working Paper No. 22581
August 2016
JEL No. E5,N1
ABSTRACT
We examine the first QE program through the lens of an open-market operation under taken by
the Federal Reserve in 1932, at the height of the Great Depression. This program entailed large
purchases of medium- and long-term securities over a four-month period. There were no prior
announcements about the size or composition of the operation, how long it would be put in place,
and the program ended abruptly. We use the narrative record to conduct an event study analysis
of the operation using the weekly-level Treasury holdings of the Federal Reserve in 1932, and the
daily term structure of yields obtained from newspaper quotes. The event study indicates that the
1932 program dramatically lowered medium- and long-term Treasury yields; the declines in
Treasury Notes and Bonds around the start of the operation were as large as 114 and 42 basis
points respectively. We then use a segmented markets model to analyze the channel through
which the open-market purchases affected the economy, namely the portfolio composition and
signaling effects. Quarterly data from 1920-32 is used to estimate the model with Bayesian
methods. We find that the significant degree of financial market segmentation in this period made
the historical open market purchase operation more effective than QE in stimulating output
growth. Had the Federal Reserve continued its operations and used the announcement strategy of
the QE operation, the Great Contraction could have been attenuated earlier.

Michael Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Arunima Sinha
Fordham University
Department of Economics
asinha3@fordham.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22581

1

Introduction

How e¤ective are targeted open market purchases in invigorating the economy during a severe
downturn? If they have stimulatory e¤ects, can a credible central bank boost their impact
by using forward guidance, an unconventional tool of monetary policy? During the …nancial
crisis of 2007-09 in the United States, and the continuing recessionary trends in Europe and
Japan, one of the key strategies of central banks has been to purchase speci…c maturities of
government debt. For instance, in the …rst Quantitative Easing (QE) program, the Federal
Reserve purchased $300 billion in long-term Treasury securities, and this purchase program
was expanded in the successive QE programs. However, there has been considerable debate
about the e¤ect of these purchases on the economy. To examine the impact of the QE
purchase programs, the most prominent approach has been to estimate the e¤ect of the
programs on the term structure of di¤erent types of yields; an expanding literature has
examined the e¤ect on Treasury yields2 . In these analyses, there are two main challenges
in estimating the e¤ects of the QE purchases: …rst, the decline in the state of the economy
during the …nancial crisis period was unprecedented, and the e¤ects of the monetary policy
intervention were complicated by the freezing up of credit markets; and second, there were
several unconventional monetary policy tools deployed in the QE program: forward guidance
which provided guidelines about the size and length of the programs, the presence of the
zero-lower bound and the payment of interest rate on excess reserves.
In this paper, we provide a new perspective on examining our motivating questions above,
by comparing the size and e¤ectiveness of the purchase program under QE1 to another policy
initiative of the Federal Reserve, undertaken during the Great Depression of 1929 to 1933.
After three years of severe recession, in the face of Congressional pressure, the Federal
Reserve undertook a signi…cant open market purchase operation between April and August
1932, in which it bought $1 billion dollars of medium and long term securities ($16 billion
in today’s prices or 2% of 1932 GNP). The New York Times noted, "By entering upon a
policy of controlled credit expansion, designed to turn the de‡ation in bank credit and to
stimulate a rise in prices, the Federal Reserve System has undertaken the boldest of all central
bank e¤orts to combat the depression."3 The size of the intervention was comparable to the
2

Swanson (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011).

3

The New York Times, quoted in the Commerical and Financial Chronicle, April 16, 1932, p. 2774.

3

…rst QE program, conducted by the Federal Reserve between November 2008 and March
2009. The states of the economy during the 1932 operation, and the …rst QE program
were very similar in terms of key macroeconomic and …nancial terms. At the time of both
operations, the Congress and the public were desperate for active intervention by the central
bank. Therefore, we propose to use the 1932 operation as a natural experiment to examine
the e¤ectiveness of the QE program, and the importance of using tools such as forward
guidance. In this analysis, we will only consider the …rst QE program, as the successive
programs were anticipated to some degree by …nancial market participants.
We note that while the environment in which these programs were conducted was similar,
there were also some important di¤erences. In 1932, there was no announcement by the
Federal Reserve of its intention to conduct these open-market operations, nor any indication
of how long they would last or what the size would be. The portfolio of the Federal Reserve
in 1932 contained a larger proportion of medium-term Treasury notes relative to bonds in
1932, and it did not pay an interest rate on excess reserves. Finally, unlike the QE period,
the 1932 operation was a pure open-market operation, i.e., it did not buy any other types of
assets. We discuss the implications of these di¤erences in detail below.
Despite these di¤erences, and the fact that the 1932 purchase operation was signi…cantly
shorter in duration4 , we …nd that it had large impact e¤ects on the economy. We …rst
analyze the e¤ect of the operation on the cross section of Treasury yields using an event
study methodology. Since there were no announcements, we construct a narrative record
of the period preceding and during the operation. Around the dates identi…ed from the
narrative record, there were signi…cant changes in the yields on Treasury securities. For
instance, the cumulative e¤ect from the daily changes on Treasury Bills was a decline of 90
basis points (b.p.); Certi…cates and Notes yields fell by 114 b.p. and the yields on Bonds
fell by 42 b.p. Therefore, even though the purchase program was motivated by the economic
and political conditions of a very di¤erent era, the program had important e¤ects on the
term structure of Treasury yields.
We then use quarterly data from 1920-32 to estimate the e¤ects of the open-market operation in a general equilibrium model with segmented markets. Anecdotal evidence suggests
that there was a signi…cant degree of market segmentation in the 1930s as the non bank
public had limited access to the government securities markets which was dominated by a
4

The balance sheet of the Federal Reserve was also much smaller.

4

few investment banks (Garbade, 2012; Perkins, 1999). As we show below, the denomination
of Bonds issued may have precluded large sections of households from accessing them5 .
The main hypothesis of the model is that there are two types of …nancial market participants: the households can hold both long- and short-term Treasury securities; however, they
are required to pay a transactions cost to hold the long bonds. The institutional investors,
on the other hand, only hold long-term assets, without paying any costs. Since private domestic households had limited access to long-term bonds during the 1920s and 1930s, we
…nd this to be a plausible way to model their holdings of Treasury securities. Using data to
estimate the degree of segmentation, we …nd that it was much higher for 1920-32 than for
2008-2009; thus, agents were not able to substitute between the di¤erent types of Treasury
securities (as they would have without any frictions). The purchases of long-term securities
by the central bank in this model then a¤ects the long-term yield, and consequently, the
savings and consumption decisions of households. Thus, the open market operation in 1932
was e¤ective in lowering Treasury yields and boosting output growth, even though it lasted
less than two quarters. In our counterfactual simulation, we ask the following question: if
the Federal Reserve had carried out the operation for a longer duration, and announced the
full length of the program, what would the e¤ects be? Our results indicate that the impact
on output growth and long-term yields could have been signi…cantly larger. This supports
the Friedman and Schwartz (1963) hypothesis that if the Federal Reserve had continued its
operation, the continued decline in the economy could have been attenuated much faster.
The …ndings also suggest that since segmentation is substantially lower in modern …nancial
markets, agents are better able to balance their portfolios, and therefore, the Federal Reserve
had to utilize unconventional tools of monetary policy such as forward guidance in order to
a¤ect the real economy during the 2008 crisis.
The paper is organized as follows: section 2 contextualizes our analysis in the literature,
5
Additionally, as reported by Banking and Monetary Statistics (1914-1941), discount rates of di¤erent
Federal Reserve districts varied for the same time period, providing further evidence of market segmentation.
The disparity was as much as between 50 and 150 basis points (for example, in December 1930, the discount
rate reported in New York was 2%, and San Francisco it was 3.5%; Banking and Monetary Statistics of the
Federal Reserve, 1914-1941, Table 115, pp. 441). The di¤erence in rates was also evident in other types of
loans. For instance, in December 1930, the rate charged on commercial loans by banks was 3.82% in New
York, 4.38% in seven other Northeastern cities and 5.01% in eleven Southern and Western cities (Banking
and Monetary Statistics of the Federal Reserve, 1914-1941, Table 125, pp. 464). We thank Gary Richardson
for pointing this out.

5

and the 1932 and QE1 operations are discussed in section 3. Section 4 analyzes the main
channels through which asset purchase programs will a¤ect the economy. Narrative evidence
and the event study methodology is discussed in section 5. Section 6 presents the model and
the results, and section 7 concludes.

2

Context in the Literature

The …rst part of this paper analyzes the 1932 and QE1 operations using an event study
methodology. The strategy is similar to the analyses of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2011) and Swanson (2011) for the QE1 period: we estimate the changes in Treasury yields
around announcements by the Federal Reserve. In the case of the 1932 operation, no public
announcements were made by the Federal Reserve regarding these purchases. Therefore, we
construct the narrative record of the period preceding and during the purchase operations
from the New York Times. The results of the event study methodology suggest that the
1932 operation had a signi…cant e¤ect on yields, as discussed in section 4 below.
In terms of the channels through which the purchase operation a¤ected yields, we …nd
evidence for both the signaling and portfolio composition channels in 1932. The size of the
latter channel has been estimated by Bauer and Rudebusch (2014) for the Federal Reserve’s
purchase operations during the 2008 …nancial crisis. The authors …nd that the purchases
lowered future expected short term rates. Additionally, D’Amico and King (2013) quantify
the magnitudes of the scarcity and duration risk channels. McLaren, Banerjee and Latto
(2014) also estimate the supply e¤ects of QE in England, by considering the e¤ects of the
Bank of England’s announcements on the remaining stock of gilts in the market. In section
4, we discuss the relative importance of the di¤erent channels during the 1932 operation.
Some of the institutional background and consequences of the 1932 open market operation
for the economy have been explored elsewhere in the literature. Meltzer (2003) discusses the
economic and political context of the operation. Hsieh and Romer (2006) examine the e¤ects
of the operation on expectations of devaluation, and whether the Fed could have continued
the operation without a loss of credibility and commitment to the gold standard. Bordo,
Choudhri and Schwartz (2002) argue that since the United States was a large open economy
in 1932, and has vast gold reserves, the expansionary open market operations would not have
caused an out‡ow of gold, even under the extreme assumption of perfect capital mobility.
6

However, to our knowledge, this is the …rst paper to analyze e¤ects of the purchase operation
using data on the cross-section of Treasury securities bought by the Federal Reserve (in
contrast to a increase in total debt), and the full term structure of daily yields. We also
provide estimates of the e¤ects on equities, using corporate bond prices.
The second part of our analysis focuses on exploring the channel through which the
purchase programs a¤ected real variables in the economy. Since segmentation was a common
feature of …nancial markets in the 1920s and 1930s, to model the e¤ects of the asset purchase
programs on the economy, we use a segmented markets framework. This is based on the
models of Andrés, López-Salido and Nelson (2004) and Chen, Cúrdia and Ferrero (2012).
The approach of using segmented markets as a channel for analyzing the e¤ects of openmarket operations have been widely used in the literature. Occhino (2004) develops a model
in which households are permanently excluded from the market in government securities, and
he is able to replicate the persistent decrease in money growth and increase in real interest
rates following an unexpected increase in the nominal interest rate. Alvarez, Atkeson and
Kehoe (2002) introduce endogenous market segmentation by introducing a …xed cost which
agents must pay to exchange bonds and money. The DSGE model in the present paper
allows us to estimate the degree of segmentation in the economy, as well as the importance
of the signaling versus the portfolio composition channel.
Our analysis of the open market operation in 1932 is conducted in an economic enviornment with very low policy interest rates. A number of other papers have also analyzed the
transmission e¤ects of such operations in economies with low interest rates. Bernanke and
Reinhart (2004) present an overview of strategies that can be used to stimulate economic
activity when interest rates are very low: managing interest rate expectations, changing the
composition of the central bank’s securities portfolio and expanding the size of the bank’s
balance sheet. Grossman and Weiss (1983) use a transactions cost based framework to show
that open market purchases of bonds lower nominal and real interest rates and lead to a
positive response of prices. In the context of Japan, Auerbach and Obstfeld (2005) show
how these bond purchases can generate substantial welfare e¤ects by reducing the real value
of public debt, and are able to counter de‡ationary price paths.

7

3

Comparing the Institutional Setup of the 1932 Operation and QE1

3.1

General Economic Conditions and Announcement of the Programs

In order to compare the e¤ects of the purchase programs of the Federal Reserve during
these two periods, we …rst provide evidence to show the remarkable similarities between the
economies during the two episodes. The unemployment rate in April 1932 was 21.03%, and
it had risen to 25.02% in August 1932. In the 2008-09 episode, the unemployment numbers
were also rising, from 6.8% in November 2008 to 8.7% in March 2009. Real GDP had declined
by more than 20% in 1932 since the start of the Great Depression, and in December 2008,
real GDP in the U.S. had fallen by approximately 4% since December 2007. Table 1 shows
the comparison between the periods on two dimensions - the states of the economy, as well
as the size of the Federal Reserve programs.
Other than the depressed states of output and employment, Treasury yields were at
historically low levels in 1932, as they were in 2008. Cecchetti (1988) estimates the term
structure of Treasury yields from 1929 to 1949 using raw data on the prices of Treasury
securities outstanding reported in the New York Times. Using the Nelson and Siegel (1985)
methodology, Cecchetti shows that between May and October 1932 (at the time of the
Federal Reserve operation), the three-month yields were between 10 and 25 basis points.6
3.1.1

The 1932 Operation

The Federal Reserve began its massive (for the time) open market purchases in April 1932.
This was after two and a half years of recession in which the Fed had followed a very passive
policy. It did not prevent three banking panics. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) attribute
the Fed’s failure to act to serious ‡aws in the organization of the System which impeded
coordination between the Reserve banks and the Federal Reserve Board in Washington DC,
especially after the death of Benjamin Strong in 1928. Meltzer (2003) largely attributes it
to adherence to a ‡awed policy doctrine - the Burgess Rie- er Strong doctrine (a variant of
6

The three-month yield remained in this approximate range in the remaining period of Cecchetti’s study.

8

the real bills doctrine) that relied on nominal interest rates and the level of discount window
borrowing as policy guides. Others attribute it to adherence to the gold standard and the
absence of a clear lender of last resort policy (Bordo and Wheelock 2013).
According to Friedman and Schwartz,7 the Fed, under the leadership of Governor Harrison
of the New York Federal Reserve voted to begin purchases of government securities on April
13, 1932 in the amount of $100 million per week for 5 weeks. Then on May 17, another $500
million was voted on.
Friedman and Schwartz argue that the Fed adopted this dramatic change in policy to
forestall several radical pieces of legislation in the Congress including the Thomas bill which
would have created $2.4 billion dollars in greenbacks and a veterans bonus. Meltzer (pp.
360) posits that the open market purchases would have been consistent with the Burgess
Rie- er Strong doctrine since member bank borrowing was high as were short-term interest
rates. He also states that the passage of the Glass Steagall Act of 1932 and the beginning of
Reconstruction Finance lending to troubled banks in February encouraged the Fed to act.
The policy was short lived. By July 1932 mounting opposition within the Federal Reserve
System to continued purchases overwhelmed Harrison’s pleas to continue. Many Fed o¢ cials,
following real bills thinking, were worried that continued purchases would be in‡ationary and
would stimulate an asset boom. They believed that the purchases had not encouraged the
banks to lend as intended but instead they were just accumulating as excess reserves (Hetzel
2012 p.31).8 Others worried that further purchases would severely reduce the System’s
holding of free gold and threaten the U.S. adherence to the gold standard. When the Congress
recessed for the summer in July the Fed stopped the program.
Both Friedman and Schwartz and Meltzer provide evidence that the expansionary policy
led to a turnaround in the economy9 . They posit that had the Fed continued the policy that
the Great Depression would have ended signi…cantly earlier than it did.
7

See pps 385-389.
Starting in February 1932, banks began reducing their borrowed reserves and increasing their excess
reserves which grew from $44 million to $526 million in December 1932. Given that the banks had just
experienced two years of liquidity panics, the build up of excess reserves was understandable (Hetzel 2012 p
31.).
9
M2 stopped declining and ‡attened out; Federal Reserve Credit picked up as did bank credit. Industrial
production and real GDP began expanding after a lag. Interest rates reversed their rise and dropped
precipitously. See Bordo 2013.
8

9

3.1.2

Quantitative Easing in 2008-09

The 2007 …nancial crisis was the largest shock to global …nancial markets since the Depression. Bank were hit hard by enormous liquidity pressures, and as demands for cash
from di¤erent sources peaked (counterparties, existing borrowers and short-term creditors),
credit fell, and these markets froze.10 By the third quarter of 2007, international …nancial
institutions were reporting concerns with valuation and liquidations of US mortgage related
assets, leading to sharp increases in the LIBOR rate. As tight credit conditions carried on
into 2008, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed under conservatorships and the Fed expanded existing liquidity programs, and introduced new ones, such as the Commercial Paper
Funding Facility.11 Concerns about the weakening state of the economy began to appear in
the minutes and statements of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings in
August 2007, and the …rst cut in the federal funds rate was implemented in September 2007
(from 5.25% to 4.75%). Successive statements continued to lower the federal funds rate,
and the communications of the Federal Reserve noted, with increasing emphasis, that the
strains in …nancial markets were increasing, consumer and business spending were softening
and the housing market correction was intensifying. In March 2008, along with a further
reduction in the federal funds rate, the FOMC also announced the Term Securities Lending
Facility (TSLF) to promote liquidity in …nancial markets, and foster their functioning. The
statements of September and October 2008 (which included a joint statement by the Federal
Reserve, Bank of England, Bank of Canada, the Sveriges Riksbank, the Swiss National Bank
and the ECB) continued to lower the federal funds rate, and the December 2008 statement
…nally reduced the rate to the zero-lower bound.
The timeline for the …rst QE program included several important dates, and these have
been identi…ed by Gagnon, Raskin, Remache and Sack (2011):
1. On November 25, 2008, the Federal Reserve announced creation of the Term-Asset
Backed Securities Loan Facility "to support the markets for asset-backed securities
collateralized by student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, and loans guaranteed by
the Small Business Administration. The facility, developed jointly with the Treasury,
was expected to be operational by February 2009, [...]." It also announced a program
10
11

Strahan (2012)
Lopez (2009)

10

to purchase "up to $100 billion in direct obligations of housing-related governmentsponsored enterprises and up to $500 billion in MBS backed by Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac and Ginnie Mae." This was undertaken to reduce the cost and increase availability
of residential mortgage credit.
2. On December 1, 2008, Chairman Bernanke, in a speech at the Greater Austin Chamber of Commerce, Austin, Texas announced that "...although conventional interest rate
policy is constrained by the fact that nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero, the
second arrow in the Federal Reserve’s quiver–the provision of liquidity–remains effective. Indeed, there are several means by which the Fed could in‡uence …nancial
conditions through the use of its balance sheet, beyond expanding our lending to …nancial institutions. First, the Fed could purchase longer-term Treasury or agency
securities on the open market in substantial quantities. This approach might in‡uence
the yields on these securities, thus helping to spur aggregate demand [...]."
3. The FOMC statement on December 16, 2008, reiterated the Federal Reserve’s commitment to purchase large quantities of agency debt and MBS. It further noted "...it [the
Federal Reserve] stands ready to expand its purchases of agency debt and mortgagebacked securities as conditions warrant. The Committee is also evaluating the potential
bene…ts of purchasing longer-term Treasury securities."
4. The January 28, 2009 statement noted the Federal Reserve’s commitment to expand
the quantity of purchases and the duration of the purchase program for agency debt
and mortgage-backed securities, as conditions warrant.
5. The statement on March 18, 2009, announced the increase in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet by purchasing up to an additional $750 billion of agency
mortgage-backed securities. This bought the total purchases of these securities to up
to $1.25 trillion. It further increased its purchases of agency debt to a total of up to
$200 billion. The Committee also decided to purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term
Treasury securities over the next six months.
The subsequent FOMC statements in August, September and November 2009 announced
gradual slowing down of these purchases.
11

3.2

Institutional Comparisons of the Operations

Our main hypothesis is that the 1932 operation provides a natural experiment in monetary
policy, and it can be used to analyze the …rst Quantitative Easing program. To support
this claim, we identify the key similarities between the two episodes, as well as discuss the
implications of the main di¤erences in the institutional setups.
Both episodes were conducted in the midst of severely depressed economic activity. These
were large scale open market operations, and the magnitude of the bond purchase programs
were unprecedented relative to the past bond purchase programs in both cases. The programs
were initiated to boost the economy, and were not planned to continue inde…nitely.
The key institutional di¤erences between the implementation of the two programs were:
(a) the operation of the Gold Standard in 1932 instead of a ‡oating exchange rate, (b) the
announcement of the size and duration of the program during the …rst QE episode in 20082009 and (c) the use of other unconventional policy tools in 2008-2009. While these aspects
were important, we hypothesize that they do not make the comparison between the 1932
and 2008-2009 operations invalid.
The U.S. remained on the Gold Standard throughout the operation of the bond buying
program, but there was considerable concern among Federal Reserve o¢ cials that the bond
purchases would a¤ect the commitment of the Fed to the Gold Standard. However, the
program did not threaten the credibility of the Federal Reserve or cause expectations of
a devaluation. According to Bordo, Choudhri and Schwartz (2002), since the U.S. was a
large open economy, with vast gold reserves, the expansionary monetary program would not
cause markets to question the Federal Reserve’s commitment to the Gold Standard. Hsieh
and Romer (2006) …nd that there were no signi…cant expectations of devaluation of the
U.S. dollar (as measured by forward and spot exchange rates) in the spring of 1932. Thus,
although there was disagreement among the Federal Reserve o¢ cials about the conduct of
the program, it did not cause the Fed to lose any credibility in terms of its commitment to
the Gold Standard.
The second di¤erence between the programs is the provision of forward guidance in
2008-2009. While the size of the bond purchases were discussed in the Open Market Policy
Conference (the precursor of the Federal Open Markets Committee), these discussions were
not made public. Thus, the size and duration of program was not publicly announced.
However, it did not go completely unnoticed. We construct a narrative record using reports
12

from the New York Times (section 5) which indicates that …nancial markets were aware of
the program, as well as its potential implications for liquidity in the system and the economy.
Hsieh and Romer (2006) also discuss narrative accounts from di¤erent news sources, which
reported the weekly balance sheet of the Federal Reserve. They …nd that business analysts
were able to discern that the Federal Reserve was buying bonds at an accelerated pace, and
that this program could help in stemming the de‡ationary spiral. Thus, …nancial markets
understood that the program was ongoing in the second quarter of 1932.
Finally, the QE operation included the purchase of other assets (mortgage-backed securities). The Federal Reserve was also transitioning to the payment of an interest rate on
excess reserves held by banks in 2008. Neither of these aspects were present during the Fed’s
1932 operation. We will, therefore, only be comparing the Treasury bond-buying purchase
programs of the Fed between 1932 and 2008-2009, and the e¤ects of these operations on the
economy.

4

Analyzing Channels for the E¤ects of the Purchase
Programs

Before analyzing the two programs, we discuss the channels through which these asset purchase programs are hypothesized to a¤ect yields. The portfolio balance and signaling channels have been primarily used to explain the e¤ects of the expansionary programs of the
Federal Reserve. Here, we discuss the e¤ects of the operations of 1932 and 2008-2009 on the
nominal yield curve and its slope for U.S. Treasuries. In our analysis below, we focus on
the Federal Reserve purchases of U.S. Treasury bonds of di¤erent maturities; although the
2008-2009 operation was signi…cantly larger in the scope of securities that were involved, the
1932 operation was primarily concerned with medium-term Treasury securities.

4.1

Portfolio Balance Channel

The main thesis of the portfolio balance channel is that assets of di¤erent maturities are not
perfect substitutes. As Gagnon et. al. (2011) and Bauer and Rudebusch (2014) note, the
purchases of medium- and long-term securities by the Federal Reserve altered the supply of
these bonds available to these private investors. As the holdings of the risk-free short-term
13

bank reserves by the private investors increased, the yields on the bonds being purchased
by the Federal Reserve would fall, to ensure that private investors are willing to make an
adjustment in their holdings. Thus, the term premia (the largest component of risk premia)
will be lowered, as the assets of longer duration are removed from the supply available to
private investors. In contrast, in a frictionless asset pricing model, a change in the supply
of long-term or short-term bonds will not have an e¤ect on Treasury bond yields. In this
case, the term premia will be a function of the riskiness of the bonds, and the risk aversion
of investors. Both these characteristics are una¤ected by changes in the supply of bonds.
In order to examine the operation of the portfolio balance channel in these episodes, we
…rst analyze the holdings of U.S. Treasury bills, notes and bonds by the Federal Reserve, as a
fraction of its total holdings. As …gure 1 shows, the fraction of the Federal Reserve’s holdings
of U.S. Treasury Notes increased from 10% of total holdings to more than 20%, between April
and August 1932. The fraction of Bill holdings stayed fairly constant, ‡uctuating between
54% and 63%, and the fraction of Bond holdings decreased from 36% to 23%. Therefore, the
largest change in the Federal Reserve’s portfolio during this operation was an increase in the
fraction of Note holdings. In contrast, during the 2008-2009 episode, the Federal Reserve’s
holdings of Notes (with 1 to 5 years to maturity) increased from 36% to 39% approximately,
and the fraction of Bond holdings (with maturity 15 years or more) increased from 20%
to 21% between July 2008 and March 2009. Thus, the operation by the Federal Reserve in
1932 was more signi…cant on the medium-term securities, relative to the long-term operation,
unlike the more recent 2008 operation. Both operations caused a compositional di¤erence in
the Bank’s portfolio of securities.
To analyze the changes in the overall supply of these Treasury securities to the rest of
the economy, and evaluate the contraction of supply e¤ect, it is also useful to consider the
holdings of the Federal Reserve as a fraction of the total marketable debt outstanding from
the Treasury. In the 1932 operation, the Bank’s holdings of Treasury Notes averaged 13%
of the total marketable debt issued in Notes, and Bond holdings were approximately 7% of
the total debt issued in Bonds. We also …nd that the Treasury was issuing more debt than
before in the Great Depression: between December 1930 and December 1932, the issuances
of notes and bonds increased by approximately 41% and 17.5% respectively.12 In contrast,
12

These numbers are based on the bills, notes and bonds issued as public debt, recorded in the Monthly
Statement of Public Debt. The archived records are obtained from Treasury Direct.

14

in the 2008-09 episode, Fed’s holdings of Notes and Bonds were 6% and 33% of the total.
Thus, the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Bonds during the latter episode were more than four
times its holdings in the 1932 operation.

4.2

Signaling Channel

Following the Expectations Hypothesis, the long yields can be expressed as a function of
average expected short yields and the risk premium. The signaling channel focuses on the
e¤ect of the expansionary programs on the expectations of the short yields: the large-scale
purchases of Treasury securities may be interpreted by the private economy as a signal
that the Federal Reserve expects economic conditions to remain weak, and this would lower
the expectations of future short-term yields. Bauer and Rudebusch (2014) argue that the
signaling channel not only a¤ected the expectations of investors about future short term
rates, but it also lowered the term premium. Using DTSM with risk correction models, the
authors …nd that over a set of eight announcements that introduced and implemented the
LSAP programs, the ten-year yield dropped by 89 b.p, and the …ve-year yield declined by 97
b.p. For the ten-year yield, the range of the signaling e¤ect is estimated to be between 30%
and 35%; for the …ve-year yield, signaling contributes between 32% and 45% of the total
decline observed in the actual level of yields. The remaining is attributed to the change in the
term premia. This decomposition between the change in expectations and term premia can
be heuristically thought of as the relative importance of the signaling and portfolio balance
channel.13 Additionally, Swanson and Williams (2014) …nd that between 2008 and 2011,
while the federal funds rate was at the zero-lower bound, the Federal Reserve was able to
in‡uence interest rates for medium and long-term Treasury securities by managing policy
expectations of investors and conducting large scale purchases of assets. The authors do
not distinguish between the importance of these two channels, but …nd that sensitivity of
the medium and long-term yields to news between 2008 and 2011 was very similar to the
responses of these yields to surprise macroeconomic news between 2004 and 2006. This is
attributed to the ability of the Federal Reserve to in‡uence expectations for upto the twoyear horizon through its communications and implementation of the purchase programs.
Finally, Woodford (2012) …nds that there was strong model-free evidence of the signaling
13

Bauer and Rudebusch (2013) point out the cases in which this decomposition may not be fully applicable.

15

channel during the purchase programs, as do Campbell et al. (2012).
In the absence of overnight swaps and other instruments for the 1932 episode, we use the
narrative record presented below, to identify "announcement" e¤ects of the operations on
Treasury yields and corporate bond prices.

4.3

Additional Channels

There are other channels through which the Federal Reserve’s operation would have an
e¤ect on the term structure of yields. Most of these channels focus on the changes in the
relative supply of safe and risky securities: during the 2008-09 operation, the Bank was also
purchasing other agency debt, such as Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS).
According to the Duration Risk channel14 , if the investors have a preference for an asset
of speci…c duration (irrespective of whether it is the U.S. Treasury or a corporate bond of the
same maturity), then the purchase program will lead to a reduction in asset yields. During
the 1932 operation, the purchases of the Federal Reserve were concentrated on Treasury
securities, and there were no signi…cant assets of comparable duration and security that
were available to investors. Thus, we hypothesize that any e¤ects of this channel will be
di¢ cult to quantify for the 1932 episode.
The Liquidity channel implies that the expansionary operation by the Federal Reserve
involves increasing the holdings of medium- and long-term bonds, while paying for the operation by increasing reserve balances. The higher reserve balances act as extra liquidity
in the hands of the investors, and will increase yields. According to Vissing-Jorgensen and
Krishnamurthy (2011), the e¤ect of the Liquidity channel during the QE period was not
to increase yields on Treasury debt. However, the authors note that the decrease in yields
on Treasury securities was smaller than the decrease in yields on less liquid assets, such as
agency debt. During the 1932 operation, we observe a cumulative decline in the di¤erent
Treasury yields, and this yield decline was larger than the fall in yields on corporate bonds.
The Safety channel is a special case of the preferred habitat channel, but only in the space
of safe bonds and assets. Within the set of the safest assets available to private investors in
the economy, as the Federal Reserve’s holdings of the long-term Treasury securities increases,
it lowers the yield on the ultra safe or investment grade securities, relative to less safe assets
14

This is similar to Vayanos and Vila’s (2009) preferred habitat model.

16

in which the operation is conducted. We use daily 1932 data on corporate bonds below to
estimate the strength of the safety channel.

5

Evidence from the Narrative Record and Event Study

To examine the e¤ects of the 1932 operation on changes in yields following the increase in
the holdings of the Federal Reserve, we present evidence from the narrative record. These
are reports from the New York Times, in the section "Topics in Wall Street: News, Comment
and Incidents on the Stock Exchange and in the Financial Markets".
Even before the Federal Reserve began its operations, the media began to note a change
in the inclinations of …nancial markets and the Federal Reserve towards conducting open
market operations. On February 17, 1932, the Times reported:
There is much conjecture in Wall Street whether the Federal Reserve authorities
will utilize the excess reserves, to be liberated by the Glass-Steagall bill making
United States Government securities eligible as collateral behind Federal Reserve
notes, to increase their holdings of "governments."
About two weeks later, on February 28, 1932, the Times noted the willingness of the
Federal Reserve to carry out a credit expansion program, which was initiated by a change
in the bank rate:
Now that the Federal Reserve has given unmistakable signs, by the reduction of
the New York bank rate of its intentions to relax credit, the chief interest of the
…nancial community is centered upon speculating as to how far the central banking system is likely to go. When the …rst steps were taken last month, through
the reduction of the Reserve’s bill-buying rate to levels under the open market,
it was the general opinion that the system would follow through with purchases
of “governments" as well as a cut in the bank rate. Thus far, the buying of
United States Government securities has failed to materialize, although the bank
rate reduction has …nally been made. Under present conditions, open market
buying of government securities appears to be the only e¤ective means whereby
the Federal Reserve can pump out credit. Up to now it has been compelled to go
17

slowly in this direction. because of its dwindling supplies of free gold. With the
Glass-Steagall bill in e¤ect, however, that handicap at least has been removed.
On March 11, 1932, the …rst inklings of a purchase operation by the Federal Reserve were
observed, and it was considered to be encouraging news for …nancial markets:
This week’s Federal Reserve statements present some extremely interesting developments, all of which are likely to make pleasant reading for the banking community. The open market operations to expand credit, begun a week ago, were
pursued with increased vigor. Holdings of United States Government securities
rose $25,168,000 and bill holdings were up $21,944,000.
By April 1, 1932, the increases in the Federal Reserve holdings of government securities
were noted to be the highest on record,
The week’s bank report displayed the same trend in evidence since the end of
February. Holdings of United States Government securities rose $36,620,000 to
$871,618,000, the largest on record.
and on April 8, 1932, the Times reported that
The weekly Federal Reserve statement shows no let-up in the open-market purchases of government securities [...]. The Reserve System has been adding to
its holdings of United States securities at the rate of $25,000,000 a week since
the end of February. Member bank discounts increased $2,019,000 and money
in circulation rose $19,000,000, two developments which also re‡ected the …rstof-the-month demands. The rise in money in circulation was the …rst since the
week ended on February 3.
Despite the purchases being conducted by the Federal Reserve, there was a growing
momentum among …nancial markets that a larger open market operation was needed, as
noted on April 13, 1932:
The Federal Reserve system has been engaged since the …nal week in February in
an easy-money campaign carried out through the medium of purchases of United
18

States Government securities in the amount of $25,000,000 a week. This policy
has already resulted in a marked reduction in member bank borrowings and a
relaxation of bank credit so considerable as to cause a drop of 1-1/3% per cent
in open market bill rates during the period. The e¤orts of the Reserve have
been greatly aided , however, by the return movement of currency to the banks
and by a rise in monetary gold stocks. The second of these factors has now
ceased to operate, and last week, at any rate, the …rst was inoperative. The
question has arisen, accordingly, whether the time is not now ripe for the Federal
Reserve to enlarge its campaign by stepping up the rate of weekly purchases of
"governments" to say $75,000,000.
On April 14, 1932, the Times noted the rise in projected purchases of the Federal Reserve,
[T]here was evident in banking circles yesterday marked hopefulness for the outcome of the e¤ort newly undertaken by the Federal Reserve System. The present
campaign is evidently to be no half-hearted a¤air. The Federal Reserve’s projected purchases of "governments" at a rate as high as $100,000,000 a week are
calculated to pile up surplus reserves in a fashion that will bring tremendous
pressure upon the banks to …nd an outlet for their funds. Moreover, the move
comes at a time when commercial bankers everywhere are heartily sick of the recent competitive struggle for liquidity and when the connection between declining
bank deposits and falling bank loans and investments has come to be generally
recognized.
and on April 15, 1932, the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve was noted to rise to a
high record:
Interest in the weekly bank statement converged upon the single item of United
States Government securities which showed a rise of $100,010,000, lifting the
system’s holdings to a high record at $985,024,000.
While there were concerns about "...whether the banks, under the pressure of mounting
excess reserves, can be persuaded to forego their passion for liquidity above all else"15 , the
15

April 16, 1932, New York Times.

19

change in loans and investments was considered encouraging. On April 22, 1932, the Times
reported:
Loans and investments, which had been falling sharply, went up $148,000,000, the
rise in loans amounting to $64,000,000 and that in investments to $84,000,000.
In the remaining weeks of April 1932, and in early May 1932, the …nancial markets were
reported to fully support the purchase operation. On May 3, 1932, the Times noted:
The Federal Reserve is engaged in the most determined e¤ort to bring about a
rise in the price level ever undertaken by any central bank. It is attempting to
do this through controlled, orderly means [...].
On May 20 and May 27, 1932, the Times reported that the Federal Reserve was continuing
to follow its "easy money campaign", and that:
Recent open-market purchases of "governments” have succeeded in building up
member bank reserves to a point where they are now about $250,000,000 in excess
of requirements. For the future. it is expected, the e¤orts of the Reserve will be
directed toward maintaining this excess of reserves.
Starting in the second week of June 1932, …nancial markets begin to note the slackening
in the Federal Reserve’s purchases. For example, the Times reported on June 17, 1932:
Purchase of "governments" amounted to only $47,640,000, indicating that the
Reserve is …nding it possible to maintain excess reserves without continuing the
heavy pace of open-market operations carried on during the period when these
excess reserves were being built up.
On July 19, 1932, the easy-money policy of the Federal Reserve was perceived to be
coming to an end:
The adjournment of Congress has recalled the prediction in some quarters that
when this event occurred the Federal Reserve System would terminate its policy of
keeping money easy through the purchase of United States Government securities.
20

There are indications that this may prove to be the case. It is generally admitted
that it has been rather di¢ cult to persuade bankers outside of large money centres
that any great bene…t can accrue from such a policy. Since early in April the
System has increased its holdings of government securities by $936,000,000, of
which $310,444,000 has been bought by the New York Reserve Bank and the
remainder by the eleven other regional banks.
By August 13, 1932, the Times reported:
With gold returning to the country and currency coming back from circulation,
there appears to be no further need for continued purchases of United States
Government securities by the Federal Reserve Banks.
and on August 19, 1932, the purchase operation was considered to be at an end:
Open market purchases of United States Government securities by the Federal Reserve Banks, which had been an uninterrupted weekly occurrence since
Feb. 24, came to the expected end this week. [...] The current holdings’ of
$1,851,000,000 are $1,110,000,000 above where they stood when the passage of
the Glass Steagall bill gave the signal for the start of the credit expansion program.
The narrative record indicates that even though there were no speci…c announcement
e¤ects, …nancial markets were aware of the purchase program being conducted. The markets
also perceived (to some degree) that the program was being used by the Federal Reserve to
deal with de‡ation.
Given the above discussion, we identify eight dates from the narrative record, regarding
the start of the open market operation in 1932: February 17th and 28th , March 11th , April
1st , 8th , 13th , 14th and 15th . The event study methodology below uses these dates to estimate
the e¤ects of the operation on the term structure of yields.

5.1

E¤ects of the 1932 and QE1 Operations: Event Study Methodology

We use the event study methodology to examine the e¤ects of the Federal Reserve operations
on the term structure of Treasury yields and corporate bond prices. To our knowledge, the
21

1932 operation has not been analyzed from this perspective before. We conduct the analysis
at a daily frequency. Studies such as Gagnon et al. (2011) and Swanson (2011) determine
key dates on which the Federal Reserve announcements were made, and examine the e¤ect
on yields in one- and two-day windows around the announcements These dates corresponds
to announcements about the size of the program, and explicit indications about the Federal
Reserve’s expectations about how long the operation would continue. However, in the 1932
episode, there was no equivalent forward guidance about the program, its size or the duration
from the Federal Reserve. Therefore, to analyze the e¤ects of the operation, we use the dates
from the narrative record about the purchase operation.

5.2

Yields and Holdings during the 1932 Operation

For the daily analysis, we construct the series on yields on Treasury bills, notes and certi…cates and bonds reported in daily newspapers. The …rst two series are obtained from the
Wall Street Journal, and the bonds are taken from the New York Times. One-day changes
in these yields around the dates from the narrative record identi…ed above are presented in
tables 2, 3 and 4. These changes are the di¤erences between the closing yields reported for
the respective securities the trading day before the news report, and the day of the report.
The cumulative decline in Treasury Bills ranges from 20 to 90 basis points16 . For Treasury
Certi…cates and Notes, the decline in yields ranges from 79 to 114 basis points. In April
1932, the average term left to maturity for these Certi…cates and Notes is approximately
seven months. For Treasury bonds, with an average maturity of approximately 18 years17 ,
the cumulative decline in yields ranges from 19 to 42 basis points. For all securities, the
majority of the changes in yields are concentrated around the April dates.
We also investigate whether there was a change in corporate bond prices around the
dates identi…ed from the narrative record. The time series for daily changes in corporate
bond prices is constructed for two types of securities: the average of the 40-Bond prices, and
the closing prices of railroad bonds. Both these prices are also reported in the Wall Street
Journal. The results are shown in table 5. Between April 13 and 16th, cumulative change
in the 40-Bond price is an increase in of 2.74 points18 , and railroad bond prices increased by
16

For the Bills for which a majority of yields were reported in the newspaper.
To the last year of redemption.
18
If the average maturity of the bonds is 10 years, this would imply a yield decline of 28 b.p.
17

22

0.63 points. These changes imply that reports of the Federal Reserve’s purchase operation
in‡uenced private investment decisions. It is noteworthy that in the initial week of the
increase in the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Bonds (week of April 20th), the average prices
of the 40-bonds increased by 1.62 points relative to the week before, implying a reduction in
the corresponding yields.
The evidence above suggests that both the signaling and portfolio composition channels
were operating during the 1932 episode. The reduction in supply of medium term securities
to the domestic economy, as the holdings of the Bank increased, lowered yields in successive
weeks. For the majority of the Certi…cates and Notes, the cumulative decline in these yields
exceeded the decline in the Bill yields. Similarly, the substantial decline in Bond yields
suggest that the signaling channel was operating. The changes in corporate bond prices are
indicative of the e¤ects of the portfolio composition channel.

5.3

Yields and Holdings during QE1

Using the announcement dates discussed in section 3.1.2 above, the daily changes in the
yields for Bonds and Notes around the events are reported in table 6 from two analyses:
Vissing-Jorgensen and Krishnamurthy (2011) and Gagnon et al. (2011). The ten-year bond
yields experience the largest cumulative declines around the announcement dates.
The portfolio balance and signaling channels are both important during this episode. The
explicit forward guidance by the Federal Reserve communicated its strategy about the size
and implementation of the program, and had signi…cant consequences for the expectations
of …nancial markets. The QE1 announcement on March 18, 2009 was especially signi…cant.
According to Campbell et al. (2012), on this day, although the ten-year yield fell by 51
b.p. in a one-day window around the announcement, there was an opposite reaction in the
expectations of …nancial markets. The authors decompose the change in the ten-year yield
into a factor attributed to a change in the target federal funds rate, and a factor associated
with a change in the path of the rate. This latter factor increased by 32 b.p. around
the QE1 announcement, indicating that the markets interpreted the FOMC statement as
implying that the economy would recover faster than previously expected. This implies that
the federal funds rate lift-o¤ was expected to be earlier than anticipated19 . Thus, the QE1
19

In contrast, for the QE2 announcement, the signaling e¤ect of the FOMC statement was that markets

23

announcement was distinctly di¤erent from the successive announcements in the manner in
which it a¤ected …nancial market expectations.

6

Consequences for the Real Economies in 1932 and
2008-09

The event study methodology above presents evidence that the two purchase operations had
signi…cant e¤ects on Treasury yields. In the present section, we are interested in estimating
the e¤ects of the purchase operation on the real economy. To do this, we use a segmented
markets model, based on the frameworks of Andrés, López-Salido and Nelson (2004) and
Chen, Cúrdia and Ferrero (2012). In our view, this is a plausible way to model the …nancial
markets of the Depression era since several features of the data suggest signi…cant segmentation in these markets. As shown in table 7, the modal denominations of Liberty Bonds was
$1000, which was large relative to per capita income. Goldsmith and Lipsey (1963) construct
the asset portfolios for di¤erent investors in the economy. Non-farm households held very
little debt (short- or long-term), and it was held largely by the Finance sector (table 8).
These households also had much smaller holdings of bonds relative to the Finance sector,
but they were more heavily invested in stocks. This suggests that a large percentage of the
long-term debt was bought, and held by, wealthy investors. In the model below, these will
be modeled using institutional investors.
We augment a New-Keynesian general equilibrium framework with two types of investors:
the households who can trade in an unrestricted way in long and short bonds, and the
institutional investors, who only trade in long-term bonds. The unrestricted households are
required to pay a transaction cost for every long bond purchased. This transaction cost for
long bonds gives rise to a risk premium, which has two components: the …rst arises because
the households face a portfolio adjustment cost (this is modeled as a function of the relative
quantity of the short and long bonds). The second component is an exogenous error. We
…rst present the optimization decisions and policy rules of the households, …rms, central bank
and the government. Following a brief description of the numerical estimation strategy, we
expected the federal funds rate to remain low (and the path factor was positively correlated with the change
in the actual yields)

24

analyze the e¤ects of the purchase operation on the economy.

6.1
6.1.1

Model
Households

A continuum of investors i 2 [0; 1] have access to long and short-term bonds. Financial
market segmentation is introduced by assuming there are two types of investors: the households can participate in long and short-term bond markets; the institutional investors only
buy long-term bonds. Both types of investors derive utility from consumption, and disutility
from labor. There are identical in all respects, other than their access to …nancial markets.
The utility function of investor i 2 fu; rg is:
Et

1
P

j=0

j i
i bt+j

"

1
1

i

i
Ct+j
Zt+j

i
Ct+j
h
Zt+j

1
1
1

i

'it+j Lit+j (k)
1+

1+

#

:

(1)

Here ji is the discount factor of type i; bit is the preference shock, i is the coe¢ cient of
relative risk aversion, Cti is the consumption, h is the habit formation parameter, 'it is the
labor supply shock and is the inverse of the labor supply elasticity. For example, u is the
discount factor of the household, and r is for the institutional investor.
The budget constraint of the household is:
u
Pt Ctu + BS;t
+ (1 +

u
t ) PL;t BL;t

u
RS;t 1 BS;t

1+

1
P

j=1

j 1

u
BL;t

u
j + Wt

(k) Lut (k) + Pt

Ttu : (2)

u
Here Pt is the price of the consumption good, BS;t
are the holdings of the one-period (short)
bond, t is the transaction cost paid by the unrestricted household to purchase the long
u
bond, PL;t and BL;t
are the price and holdings of the long-term bond respectively, is the
rate of exponential decay of the long-term bond, Wtu is the wage paid by …rm k, Pt is the
sum of pro…ts accruing to the household from ownership of …nal, intermediate and capital
producers. The household pays lumpsum taxes Ttu : The constraint of the household does
not include the transaction cost t for the purchase of long-term bonds, along with their
corresponding choices of consumption, bond holdings, labor supply and tax burden.
The households optimally choose consumption, holdings of long and short-term bonds

25

and labor supply. The Euler equations are central to the e¤ects of the …nancial market
segmentation, and are shown here. The remaining optimizing conditions are shown in the
online appendix.
For the short-term bond, the Euler equation is:
1=

u Et

u
M Ut+1
RS;t
e
u
M Ut
t+1

zt+1

(3)

;

zt+1
accounts for growth in
where M Utu is the marginal utility of consumption, and e
productivity. Finally, t+1 = Pt+1 =Pt . For the long bond, the presence of transaction costs
for the unrestricted households modi…es the Euler equation to:

1+

t

=

u Et

u
M Ut+1
RL;t PL;t+1
e
u
M Ut
t+1 PL;t

zt+1

:

(4)

Finally, the pricing equation for the institutional investors is given by:
1=

r
M Ut+1
RL;t PL;t+1
e
M Utr t+1 PL;t

r Et

zt+1

:

(5)

Following Chen, Cúrdia and Ferrero (2012), the transaction cost is modeled as a function of
the ratio of long and short-term debt held by the public, and an exogenous error term:

t

=

PL;t BL;t
;"
BS;t

;t

:

(6)

Assuming that the function and its …rst derivative are positive, a reduction in the outstanding debt held by the public will result in a fall in the yield on long-term bonds. This is the
mechanism through which asset purchases by the central bank will a¤ect the term structure
of yields: a change in the holdings of outstanding debt will a¤ect the savings decisions of
the restricted households through a change in the long-term yield, and consequently, output
and in‡ation in the economy.
6.1.2

Firms

There are three types of …rms in the economy: capital goods producers, which are competitive
and make investment decisions. These …rms rent capital to intermediate goods producers,
26

and the amount of capital rented is determined by the utilization rate chosen by the capital
goods producer. The intermediate goods producers combine labor hired from households and
the rented capital to produce output using the Cobb-Douglas production function. In the
production of intermediate goods, technology is assumed to be labor augmenting. Prices of
intermediate goods are set using the Calvo staggered price mechanism. The last type of …rms
are the perfectly competitive …nal goods producers: these combine di¤erentiated intermediate
goods into a homogeneous product, with a price markup. The …rms’ optimizations are
presented in the online appendix.
6.1.3

Central Bank

Orphanides (2003) analyzes the historical behavior of the interest rates of the Federal Reserve, and …nds that for the 1920s, the interest rate rule could be well approximated using
the Taylor rule. Taylor (1999) further discusses how during the international gold standard
era, the interest rate would react positively to change in in‡ation and real output. Therefore,
the central bank is assumed to set the interest as:
RS;t
=
RS
The Taylor parameters are
m 2 (0; 1) :
6.1.4

RS;t
RS

m

"

> 1, and

Yt =Yt
e4

t

4

y

#1

m

e"m;t :

(7)

0. The interest rate smoothing parameter

y

Government

The government …nances its purchases by collecting lump-sum taxes and issuing long and
short-term bonds:
BS;t + PL;t BL;t = RS;t 1 BS;t

1

+ (1 + PL;t ) BL;t

1

+ Pt Gt

Tt :

(8)

Long-term debt is issued in non-zero supply, and the real value of this debt assumed to
evolve as:
PL;t 1 BL;t 1 B "B;t
PL;t BL;t
=
e :
Pt Z t
Pt 1 Zt 1

27

The issuance of long-term debt is …nanced according to the following …scal policy rule:
Tt
Pt Zt

Gt
=
Zt

PL;t 1 BL;t
Pt 1 Zt 1

1

Following Davig and Leeper (2006), the …scal parameter

6.2

T

e"T;t :

T

(9)

>0

Equilibrium strategy and Numerical Solution

In equilibrium, the households and …rms maximize utilities and pro…ts respectively, subject
to the corresponding budget constraints. The …rst-order log linearized model is estimated
using Bayesian methods, following the strategy of Cúrdia, Chen and Ferrero (2012).
6.2.1

Data

In order to estimate the model, the relevant macroeconomic time series are constructed for
January 1920 to December 1934. Balke and Gordon’s (1986) Real GNP and GNP de‡ator
series are used for the output and in‡ation measure. Population numbers are taken from
the U.S. Census Bureau. The construction of the number of labor hours supplied entails
two di¤erent data sources. From Beney’s (1936) study, the series of average hours worked
per week per worker in manufacturing is used to construct average actual hours per quarter
per wage earner. This is multiplied with the average number of workers in manufacturing,
available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Yields on bonds and notes are taken from
the Banking and Monetary Statistics for 1914-1941 publication of the Federal Reserve, and
the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury debt is constructed from the tables on Factors
a¤ecting bank reserves and condition statement of the Federal Reserve Banks.
6.2.2

Parameters

We use the period 1920Q2 to 1932Q1 for estimation. In the numerical simulations for the
1932 episode, the prior on output growth in steady state is assumed at 1%, on in‡ation it
is 1%, and the standard deviation is 0.5. The degree of segmentation is assumed at 0.7,
with a standard error of 0.2. Using the data on the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury
securities, the average duration of debt is found to be approximately 15 quarters, and the

28

steady state level of debt is 15% of GDP. The priors on the remaining parameters are shown
in table 9.
We obtain mean posterior estimates of market segmentation of 0.7620 . Table 10 shows
the posterior estimates obtained from our exercise. This degree of segmentation con…rms
our original hypothesis of a large degree of …nancial segmentation during the 1920s. Cúrdia,
Chen and Ferrero (2012) estimate the market segmentation parameter to be 0.94, and …nd
signi…cantly smaller e¤ects of the asset purchase program of the Federal Reserve in the
posterior distribution. However, our estimates of the degree of relative risk aversion are
much lower than those estimated for the 2008 crisis ( u and r are estimated to be 1.64
and 1.08 relative to 3.35 and 2.08). This would attenuate the responses of consumption and
savings to the monetary policy operation. Therefore, we turn to our simulations to estimate
the e¤ects of the purchase operation on the economy.

6.3

Simulations

First, we consider the e¤ects of the 1932 purchase on the economy, using the timelines from
the actual operation itself. In our benchmark simulation, presented in …gure 7, we consider
an increase of $1 billion of medium- and long-term Treasury security holdings of the Federal
Reserve. This was the initial increase in the Federal Reserve’s holdings, and we …rst analyze
the case of the e¤ect on the economy if the purchases had stopped there. Although the Bank
did not explicitly follow a policy of setting the Federal Funds Rate at the zero-lower bound,
as noted in sections 2 and 5.1 above, the Treasury yields were e¤ectively at this bound. Our
assumption is that economic agents, on observing the low policy rates and the state of the
economy, would not have expected these rates to rise in the immediate future. Thus, we
assume that the zero-lower bound was active for two years after the start of the operation.
Consistent with the historical experience, the purchase operation is only assumed to last
for two quarters. The Fed is assumed to purchase assets in the …rst quarter, and it then
divests these in the second quarter. Given the unexpected nature of the operation, and no
indications that it would continue, we assume that agents only expect the operation to last for
20

Following Cúrdia et al. (2012), the posterior distribution is obtained in the following way: after obtaining
the posterior mode, the normal approximation around the mode is used to form a jump distribution. This is
used to generate a sample of parameter vector draws representative of the posterior, based on the Metropolis
random walk MCMC simulation process.

29

this period. In this simulation, the Fed is assumed to not hold the assets on its balance sheets.
Following an increase in the Federal Reserve’s holdings of the long-term securities, we observe
approximately a 0.07% increase in output growth, a decline of 12 b.p. in the long-term yield.
These results are presented in …gure 6. The intuition for the e¤ects of the purchase operation
operates through the e¤ect of the purchase on the long-term yield on the risk premium ;
as falls, the institutional investors are not able to arbitrage away the di¤erence between
the returns on the long and short term bonds (unlike the households). This a¤ects their
expected returns, altering their discount factor and subsequent consumption. As the pricing
decisions of intermediate …rms and investment decisions of capital goods producers change,
consumption and investment are a¤ected in equilibrium.
Our next simulation considers the following counterfactual: suppose the Federal Reserve
had purchased assets over two quarters, held onto these on its balance sheet for another two,
and then divested its holdings over the remaining two quarters. That is, it had announced the
size and extended duration of the purchase, and agents believed that the perfectly credible
central bank would carry out the entire operation. This is similar to the announcement
structure followed during the QE1 operation. We …nd that the real e¤ects are signi…cantly
larger: as shown in …gure 6, output growth increases by 0.5%, and the long-term yield
declines by 23 b.p. Under this simulation, the agents in the economy are assumed to fully
understand the path of purchases announced by the central bank. These results suggest that
while the response of consumption and in‡ation to a change in the holdings of long bond
results follows due to the response of the risk premium to bond holdings, the forward-looking
behavior of agents leads to signi…cant e¤ects of announcements. Thus, our …ndings indicate
that the risk premium as well as the signaling channels are important in the transmission of
the e¤ects of changes in bond holdings to the real economy21 .
Our next set of simulations considers the e¤ects of lengthening the duration of debt. This
is increased to 20 quarters (an increase of approximately 1 year relative to the benchmark),
and the results are shown in …gure 7. Ceteris paribus, the open-market purchase has a smaller
e¤ect on the risk-premium as well as output growth and the long-term yield compared to the
…rst counterfactual. The in‡ation response is found to be slightly larger than the benchmark.
21

In the fall of 1932 and spring of 1933, there was a spate of banking activity suspensions. Since our
estimation period ends in the …rst quarter of 1932, we do not capture the e¤ects of these suspensions.
However, we hypothesize that if the Federal Reserve had continued its purchase operation, the e¤ects of the
suspensions may have been attenuated.

30

Increasing the steady state level of debt to 20% of the GDP has similar e¤ects on output
growth, but the in‡ation response is much more persistent. These are shown in …gure 8.
These results suggest that although the 1932 operation was signi…cantly smaller in magnitude than the QE program, it had more substantial e¤ects on the economy. For the LSAP
program conducted by the Federal Reserve during the crisis of 2008, Cúrdia, Chen and Ferrero (2012) …nd that the e¤ect on output growth was approximately 0.13%, which is smaller
than what the Federal Reserve could have achieved in 1932 if it had used forward guidance
and held on to the purchased securities for a longer period.

7

Conclusion

We …nd that the 1932 open market operations conducted by the Federal Reserve during the
Great Depression, were e¤ective in lowering Treasury yields and boosting output growth.
The decomposition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the operation shows that the
largest increase in the Bank’s holdings of Treasury securities at the medium end of the term
structure (i.e., for Treasury notes). Our event study analysis indicates signi…cant responses of
Note and Bond yields around the dates identi…ed from the narrative record. We then estimate
the e¤ects of changes in the central bank’s asset portfolio composition on the economy. Since
there are several indicators which suggest …nancial market segmentation during the 1920s
and 30s, we use a segmented markets approach to model the e¤ects of changes in portfolio
composition. Households in the economy are subject to transactions cost while purchasing
the long-term bonds, while the institutional investors are restricted to holding long bonds.
Bayesian estimates of the model indicate a signi…cant degree of market segmentation, and
we …nd relatively large responses of output and in‡ation following the purchase of longerterm securities by the central bank. Our main counterfactual simulation suggests that if the
Federal Reserve had announced the operation and conducted the operation over a longer
period, the e¤ects on the real economy would be magni…ed. In our forward-looking model,
the provision of forward guidance by the Bank leads households to expect the changes in
risk premium (resulting from the decline in holdings of the longer-term security) to persist
for longer.
Our results indicate several dimensions that can be explored further. In our counterfactual simulation, agents in the 1932 economy are assumed to …nd the Federal Reserve’s
31

announcement of the purchase operation to be fully credible, and they form expectations
accordingly. However, this may not have been the case. Thus, we will be exploring the e¤ects
of the purchase operation for the case where the operation was a surprise to the agents in
the subsequent periods as well (in addition to the period of the announcement). This will
allow us to consider the e¤ects of forward guidance in a more comprehensive manner. Also,
we have assumed that the central bank followed a Taylor rule during the 1932 episode when
the Gold Standard was operational. While the Taylor rule has been used in the literature
in this period by Orphanides (2003) and Taylor (1999), additional research is required to
consider the e¤ects of the operation under the assumption that the gold standard can be
approximated by a price-level targeting regime. Finally, we have abstracted from the e¤ects
of paying interest rate on excess reserves in our model. This will be considered as a part of
our future research agenda.
Our results from the 1932 open market operation suggest that the Fed in 2008-2009
followed a successful strategy not too dissimilar from what it did over eighty years ago
but which it had abandoned too soon. Had the early Fed been more persistent or had it
adopted something like forward guidance the Great Contraction would have been attenuated
signi…cantly earlier than it did.

References
[1] Alvarez, Fernando, Andrew Atkeson and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2002. "Money, Interest Rates
and Exchange Rates with Endogenously Segmented Markets." Journal of Political Economy 110 (1): 73-112.
[2] Andrés, Javier, J. David Lopez-Salido and Edward Nelson. 2004. "Tobin’s imperfect
asset substitution in optimizing general equilibrium." Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 36 (4): 665-90.
[3] Auerbach, Alan J. and Maurice Obstfeld. 2005. "The Case for Open-Market Purchases
in a Liquidity Trap." American Economic Review 95(1): 110-137.
[4] Balke, Nathan S. and Robert J. Gordon. 1986. Appendix B, Historical Data. In The
American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, edited by Robert J. Gordon, 781850. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
32

[5] Bauer, Michael and Glenn D. Rudebusch. 2014. "The Signaling Channel for Federal
Reserve Bond Purchases." International Journal of Central Banking 10 (3): 233-289.
[6] Beney, M. Ada. 1936. Wages, Hours, and Employment in the United States 1914-36.
New York: National Industrial Conference Board, Inc.
[7] Bernanke, Ben S. and Vincent R. Reinhart. 2004. "Conducting Monetary Policy at Very
Low Short-Term Interest Rates." American Economic Review 94(2): 85-90.
[8] Bordo, Michael D. 2013. "The Federal Reserve’s Role: Actions Before, During, and
After the 2008 Panic in the Historical Context of the Great Contraction." In Across the
Great Divide; New Perspectives on the Financial Crisis, edited by Martin Neil Baily
and John B. Taylor. Hoover Institution Press.
[9] Bordo, Michael D., Ehsan U. Choudhri and Anna J. Schwartz. 2002. "Was Expansionary
Monetary Policy Feasible during the Great Contraction? An Examination of the Gold
Standard Constraint.”Explorations in Economic History 39 (1): 1–28.
[10] Bordo, Michael D. and David Wheelock. 2013. "The Promise and Performance of the
Federal Reserve as Lender of Last Resort, 1914-1933." In The Origins, History and
Future of the Federal Reserve: A Return to Jekyll Island, edited by Michael D. Bordo
and Will Roberds. New York: Cambridge University Press.
[11] Campbell, Je¤ery R., Charles Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher and Alejandro Justiniano.
2012. "Macroeconomic E¤ects of Forward Guidance." Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity: 1-80.
[12] Cecchetti, Stephen J. 1988. "The Case of Negative Nominal Interest Rates: New Estimates of the Term Structure of Interest Rates during the Great Depression." Journal
of Political Economy 96 (6): 1111-1141.
[13] Chen, Han, Vasco Cúrdia and Andrea Ferrero. 2012. "The Macroeconomic E¤ects of
Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs." Economic Journal 122 (564): F289-F315.
[14] D’Amico, Stefania and Thomas B. King. 2013. "Flow and stock e¤ects of large-scale
treasury purchases: Evidence on the importance of local supply." Journal of Financial
Economics 108 (2): 425–448.
33

[15] Davig, Troy and Eric Leeper. 2006. "Fluctuating Macro Policies and the Fiscal Theory."
In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, edited by Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogo¤, and
Michael Woodford, 247-98. Cambridge: MIT Press.
[16] Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States:
1867 to 1960. Princeton University Press
[17] Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache and Brian Sack. 2011. "The Financial
Market E¤ects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases." International
Journal of Central Banking 7 (1): 3-43.
[18] Garbade, Kenneth D. 2012. Birth of a Market: The U.S. Treasury Securities Market
from the Great War to the Great Depression. MIT Press.
[19] Goldsmith, Raymond W. and Robert E. Lipsey. 1963. Studies in the National Balance
Sheet of the United States. Princeton University Press.
[20] Grossman, Sanford J. and Laurence Weiss. 1983. "A Transactions Based Model of the
Monetary Transmission Mechanism: Part 1." American Economic Review 73 (5): 871880
[21] Hsieh, Chiang. and Christina D. Romer. 2006. "Was the Federal Reserve Constrained
by the Gold Standard During the Great Depression? Evidence from the 1932 Open
Market Purchase Program." Journal of Economic History 66 (1): 140-176.
[22] Kang, Won S. and Hugh Rocko¤. 2015. "Capitalizing patriotism: the Liberty loans of
World War I." Financial History Review 22: 45-78.
[23] Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. "The E¤ects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy." Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity: 215-265.
[24] Lopez, Jose, A. 2009. "Gauging Aggregate Credit Market Conditions." Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco Economic Letters 2009-32.
[25] McLaren, Nick, Ryan N. Banerjee, and David Latto. 2014. "Using Changes in Auction
Maturity Sectors to Help Identify the Impact of QE on Gilt Yields." Economic Journal
124: 453–479.
34

[26] Meltzer, Alan. 2003. A History of the Federal Reserve. Volume 1: 1913-1951. University
of Chicago Press
[27] Nelson, Charles R. and Andrew F. Siegel. 1985. "Parsimonious Modeling of Yield Curves
for U.S. Treasury Bills." National Bureau of Economic Research Working paper 1594.
[28] Occhino, Filippo. 2004. "Modeling the Response of Money and Interest Rates to Monetary Policy Shocks: A Segmented Markets Approach." Review of Economic Dynamics
7: 181-197.
[29] Orphanides, Athanasios. 2003. "Historical monetary policy analysis and the Taylor
rule." Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (5): 983-1022.
[30] Perkins, Edwin J. 1999. Wall Street to Main Street: Charles Merrill and Middle-Class
Investors. Cambridge University Press.
[31] Strahan, Phillip, E. 2012. "Liquidity Risk and Credit in the Financial Crisis." Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letters 2012-15.
[32] Swanson, Eric T. 2011. "Let’s Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of
Operation Twist and Its Implications for QE2." Brooking Papers on Economic Activity:
151-188.
[33] Swanson, Eric T. and John Williams. 2014. "Measuring the E¤ect of the Zero Lower
Bound on Medium- and Long-Term Interest Rates." American Economic Review 104
(10): 3154-85.
[34] Taylor, John B. 1999. “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules.” In Monetary
Policy Rules edited by John B. Taylor, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[35] Vayanos, Dimitri and Jean-Luc Vila. 2009. “A Preferred Habitat Model of the Term
Structure of Interest Rates.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working paper
15487.
[36] Woodford, Michael, (2012), "Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate
Lower Bound." Paper presented at the Changing Policy Landscape Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY.
35

Table 1: Comparison of the 1932 and 2008 Economies
Characteristic
1932
2008
Real GDP
Unemployment

787,518 million
21.03%-25.02%

14,833,557 million
6.8%-8.7%

Size of the program:
% change in Bills
- % change in Notes
% change in Bonds

114%
370%
32%

0:05%a
7%b
1:5%

As a fraction of
U.S. Treasury Marketable Debt:
Short term
- Medium term
Long term

32:5%
67:5%
22:9%

2:1%
5:8%
7:8%

Notes: The real GDP series is evaluated at 2009 dollars, on an annual basis. The unemployment numbers are monthly and seasonally adjusted. a : This is the average change in
the Federal Reserve’s holdings of bills with maturity 15 days or less, 15 to 90 days and 91
days to 1 year; b : this is the change in the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Notes of maturity
5 to 10 years. The last row shows the change in the fraction of di¤erent Treasury securities
of the Federal Reserve, as a fraction of Marketable Debt between November 2008 and May
2009.

36

37

(M)2/24/32
0
0

Narrative Record

Feb 17, 1932

Feb 28, 1932

Mar 11, 1932

Apr 1, 1932

Apr 8, 1932

Apr 13, 1932

Apr 14, 1932

Apr 15, 1932

Cumulative change
0

-

-

-

-

-

-

0

0

3/2/32

11/30/31

-10

-

-

-

-

-

0

-10

0

3/30/32

12/30/31

-10

-

-

-

-

-

0

-10

0

4/13/32

1/13/32

-20

0

0

0

-10

0

0

-10

0

4/27/32

1/25/32

-70

0

0

-50

-10

0

0

-10

0

5/11/32

2/8/32

-55

0

0

-50

0

0

0

-5

0

5/18/32

2/15/32

-60

0

0

-50

0

0

0

-10

-

5/25/32

2/24/32

-50

0

-10

-40

0

0

0

-

-

6/1/32

3/2/32

around the dates identi…ed from the narrative record.

Note: These are the changes in the level of Treasury Bill yields (in basis points) recorded in the Wall Street Journal,

(I)11/24/31

Dates from

Issue and Maturity dates of Treasury Bills

Table 2: Daily Changes in Treasury Bill Yields

-90

0

-25

-50

-10

-5

-

-

-

6/29/32

3/30/32

-40

0

-40

-

-

-

-

-

-

7/13/32

4/13/32

38

3 13 %

2 34 %
-30
-1
-3
-6
-24
-7
-4
-13
-88

Narrative Record

Feb 17, 1932

Feb 28, 1932

Mar 11, 1932

Apr 1, 1932

Apr 8, 1932

Apr 13, 1932

Apr 14, 1932

Apr 15, 1932

Cumulative change
-99

-31

-8

-29

-13

-6

-24

12

0

1 31 %

Sept15, 1932

Cert

-85

-27

-9

-23

-17

-8

-6

5

0

3%

Sept15, 1932

Cert

-89

-47

-26

-13

-26

23

-

-

-

3 31 %

Oct15, 1932

Cert

-79

-25

-10

-16

-14

-10

-5

4

-3

3 14 %

Dec15, 1932

Notes

-114

-42

-15

-22

-30

-5

-7

7

0

3 34 %

Feb1, 1933

Cert

Street Journal, around the dates identi…ed from the narrative record.

Note: These are the changes in the level of Treasury note and Certi…cate yields (in basis points) recorded in the Wall

-111

-29

-13

-32

-24

-13

-1

1

0

Aug1, 1932

Jun15, 1932

Cert

Dates from

Cert

Maturity dates of Treasury Certi…cates Notes and Corresponding Rates

Table 3: Daily Changes in Treasury Note Yields

-104

-35

-14

-18

-29

-8

-

-

-

3 43 %

Mar15, 1933

Cert

39

4%

4 14 %
-3
0
1
0
19
-2
-6
0
9

Narrative Record

Feb 17, 1932

Feb 28, 1932

Mar 11, 1932

Apr 1, 1932

Apr 8, 1932

Apr 13, 1932

Apr 14, 1932

Apr 15, 1932

Cumulative change
-25

0

-6

-7

-8

-1

0

-1

-2

3 34 %

1946-56

-38

9

-23

-5

-14

-2

0

0

-3

3 38 %

1943-47

-37

8

-20

-13

-10

0

0

1

-3

3 38 %

1940-43

-42

8

-21

-11

-11

-1

0

0

-6

3 83 %

1941-43

-29

4

-23

-6

-3

0

-1

2

-2

3 18 %

1946-49

-29

12

-21

-5

-9

-3

0

-1

-2

3%

1951-55

around the dates identi…ed from the narrative record.

Note: These are the changes in the level of Treasury note yields (in basis points) recorded in the New York Times,

-19

4

-7

-2

-10

0

-1

0

-3

1944-54

1947-52

Dates from

Maturity dates of Treasury Bonds and Corresponding Rates

Table 4: Daily Changes in Treasury Bond Yields

Table 5: Daily Changes in Dow Jones Bond Prices

Levels of Bond Prices
Dates from

40 Bonds

Railroad

Narrative Record

(Avg)

Bonds (Close)

Feb 17, 1932

79.17

38.81

Feb 28, 1932

79.96

36.29

Mar 11, 1932

82.21

36.10

Apr 1, 1932

77.69

28.53

Apr 8, 1932

74.45

23.44

Apr 13, 1932

73.34

20.94

Apr 14, 1932

73.45

22.15

Apr 15, 1932

74.69

22.95

Note: These are the levels of bond prices recorded in the Wall Street Journal, around the dates
identi…ed from the narrative record.

40

Table 6: Response of Yields around the QE1 Announcement Dates

Announcement
Dates

Changes in yields on
10-year

5-year

1-year

Bonds

Notes

Notes

(in b.p.)
K-V

GRRS

K-V

K-V

November 25, 2008

-36

-22

-23

-2

December 1, 2008

-25

-19

-28

-13

December 16, 2008

-33

-26

-15

-5

January 28, 2009

28

14

28

4

March 18, 2009

-41

-47

-36

-9

Cumulative change

-107

-104

-74

-25

Note: These estimates are taken from Vissing-Jorgensen and Krishnamurthy (2011; noted
as K-V) and Gagnon et al. (2011).

41

Table 7: Denominations of Liberty Bonds

Denominations

Denominations

% of All Bonds

on

in

Outstanding

June 20, 1920

2009$

$50

536.34

7.87

100

1072.69

12.11

500

5363.43

9.33

1000

10,726.85

41.49

5000

53,634.25

7.23

10,000

107,268.50

16.10

50,000

536,342.50

1.32

100,000

1,072,685.00

4.54

Note: These are taken from Kang and Rocko¤ (2015).

42

Table 8: Asset Compositions

Non-farm households Finance
(% of total assets in 1945)
Financial assets
Bonds
Stocks
Debt
Short-term
Long-term

67.9
13.0
17.9
4.9
1.9
3.0

99.3
58.6
2.1
93.9
72.9
21.0

Note: These are obtained from the National Balance Sheet of the United States, Goldsmith and Lipsey (1963)

43

Table 9: Estimates from the Prior Distribution

Coe¤

Dist

5%

Median

95%

400
400
400( u 1 1)
400
LM V
B
=B
00
S
a00
h

G

0.3416

0.9180

1.9384

G

0.3416

0.9180

1.9384

G

0.6272

0.9792

1.4436

G

0.2558

0.5657

G

0.6953

G

Dist

5%

Median

95%

B

0.2486

0.6143

0.9024

G

1.2545

1.9585

2.8871

w

B

0.3351

0.5000

0.6649

1.0614

p

B

0.3351

0.5000

0.6649

0.9867

1.3501

T

G

0.7825

1.4448

2.4058

2.5090

3.9170

5.7743

r

B

0.5242

0.7068

0.8525

G

0.0683

0.1836

0.3877

G

1.0164

1.7026

2.6453

B

0.4302

0.6029

0.7597

y

G

0.1366

0.3672

0.7754

u

G

0.6832

1.8360

3.8768

z

B

0.0976

0.3857

0.7514

r

G

0.6832

1.8360

3.8768

B

0.5701

0.7595

0.8971

G

0.3067

1.2846

3.4294

B

0.5701

0.7595

0.8971

B

0.3214

0.7334

0.9646

B

0.5701

0.7595

0.8971

G

0.3416

0.9180

1.9384

B

0.6146

0.8135

0.9389

G

0.3416

0.9180

1.9384

B

0.6146

0.8135

0.9389

g

B

0.5701

0.7595

0.8971

IG1

0.1663

0.3433

1.2367

z

IG1

0.1663

0.3433

1.2367

IG1

0.1663

0.3433

1.2367

IG1

0.1663

0.3433

1.2367

IG1

0.1663

0.3433

1.2367

IG1

0.1663

0.3433

1.2367

100 0
!u
u
= r
C u =C r

f

b

44

Coe¤
wu

b

B

B

Table 10: Estimates from the Posterior Distribution

Coe¤

Mean

SE

5%

95%

400
400
400( u 1 1)
400
LM V
B
=B
00
S
a00
h

0.6179

0.3556

0.1804

1.3250

1.4260

0.7299

0.3725

2.6751

1.4826

0.1991

1.1637

1.8232

0.9253

0.3097

0.5434

1.4920

0.1094

7.0017

Mean

SE

5%

95%

0.2936

0.0993

0.1450

0.4988

1.9388

0.4955

1.2326

2.7276

w

0.7769

0.0236

0.7338

0.8168

1.5123

p

0.8017

0.0277

0.7626

0.8492

1.3181

1.6700

T

1.1026

0.2118

0.7862

1.4645

0.8785

5.7809

8.4352

r

0.7611

0.0246

0.7254

0.8080

0.0911

0.0021

0.0875

0.0943

1.0457

0.0272

1.0059

1.0929

0.8729

0.0215

0.8363

0.9036

y

0.4369

0.0340

0.3877

0.4950

u

1.6409

0.1463

1.3758

1.8528

z

0.1728

0.0591

0.0791

0.2810

r

1.0751

0.3069

0.5824

1.6119

0.6976

0.1261

0.4850

0.8860

0.3635

0.0729

0.2479

0.4884

0.9103

0.0378

0.8370

0.9641

0.7624

0.0363

0.7098

0.8292

0.8381

0.0246

0.7967

0.8765

0.4669

0.1518

0.2374

0.7325

0.6528

0.0470

0.5735

0.7340

0.5370

0.1531

0.2822

0.8091

0.9507

0.0069

0.9400

0.9632

g

0.7733

0.0810

0.6126

0.8938

0.8109

0.1480

0.5831

1.0697

z

1.8703

0.2267

1.5628

2.3089

14.2339

0.5736

13.2389

15.0704

1.2286

0.2656

0.8542

1.6881

1.1709

0.2943

0.6266

1.6530

3.1861

0.4661

2.4594

3.9191

100 0
!u
u
= r
C u =C r

f

b

45

Coe¤
wu

b

B

B

3 .2

4 5 0 ,0 0 0

2 .8

4 0 0 ,0 0 0

2 .4

3 5 0 ,0 0 0

2 .0

3 0 0 ,0 0 0

1 .6

2 5 0 ,0 0 0

1 .2

2 0 0 ,0 0 0

0 .8

1 5 0 ,0 0 0

0 .4

1 0 0 ,0 0 0

0 .0

In T h o u sa n d s o f D o lla rs

In %

Figure 1: US Treasury Notes and Yields
1932

5 0 ,0 0 0
M ar 3 2

Apr 32

M ay 3 2

J un 3 2

NOTE_YIELD

J ul 3 2

A ug 3 2

A ug 3 2

NOTES

4.0

176,000

3.6

175,000

3.2

174,000

2.8

173,000

2.4

172,000

2.0

171,000

1.6

170,000

1.2

169,000

0.8

168,000

0.4
Oct 08

Nov 08

Dec 08

Jan 09

NOTE_YIELD

Feb 09

M ar 09

In M illions of Dollars

In %

QE1

167,000
M ar 09

NOTES

Note: This …gure shows the weekly yields on Treasury notes during the 1932 and 2008-09
operations (on the left axis), and the holdings of these securities by the Federal Reserve.
The shaded regions show the period of the operations.

46

Figure 2: US Treasury Bonds and Yields
1932

3.9

420,000

3.8

400,000

3.7

380,000

3.6

360,000

3.5

340,000

3.4

320,000

In %

440,000

3.3

In Thousands of Dollars

4.0

300,000
Mar 32

Apr 32

May 32

Jun 32

BOND_YIELD

Jul 32

Aug 32

Aug 32

BONDS

4.4

108,000

4.0

106,000

3.6

104,000

3.2

102,000

2.8

100,000

2.4

98,000

2.0
Jul 08

O ct 08
BOND_YIELD

Jan 09

In M illio n s o f D o lla rs

In %

QE1

96,000
Apr 09

BONDS

Note: This …gure shows the weekly yields on Treasury bonds during the 1932 and 2008-09
operations (on the left axis), and the holdings of these securities by the Federal Reserve. The
shaded regions show the period of the operations.

47

.7

.48

.6

.44

.5

.40

.4

.36

.3

.32

.2

.28

.1

.24

.0
Feb 32 Mar 32

% of Total Holdings (Bonds)

% of Total Holdings (Bills and Notes)

Figure 3: Treasury Holdings of the Federal Reserve as a Fraction of Total Holdings
1932

.20
Apr 32

May 32

FRAC_BONDS

Jun 32

Jul 32

FRAC_NOTES

Aug 32

FRAC_BILLS

.7

.50

.6

.45

.5

.40

.4

.35

.3

.30

.2

.25

.1

.20

.0

% of Total Holdings (Bonds)

% of Total Holdings (Bills and Notes)

QE1

.15
I

II

III

IV

I

II

2007

III

IV

I

2008
FRAC_BILLS

II

III

2009
FRAC_NOTES

IV

I

II

III

IV

2010
FRAC_BONDS

Note: This shows the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury Bills, Bonds and Notes as
a fraction of the total holdings, during the 1932 and 2008-09 operations. The percentage
holdings of Bonds are shown on the right axis. The shaded regions show the period of the
operations
48

5

.04

4

.03

3

.02

2

.01

1

.00

0

-.01

-1

-.02

-2

-.03

-3

-.04

-4

Inflation

Output growth (%)

Figure 4: Output growth and In‡ation
1932

-.05
I

II

III

IV

I

II

1929

III

IV

I

1930

II

III

IV

I

1931

II

III

IV

I

1932

OUTPUTGROW TH

II

III

IV

1933

INF

1.5

.9

1.0

.8

0.5

.7

0.0

.6

-0.5

.5

-1.0

.4

-1.5

.3

-2.0

.2

-2.5

Inflation

Output growth (%)

QE1

.1
I

II

III

2005

IV

I

II

III

2006

IV

I

II

III

2007
OUTPUTGROW TH

IV

I

II

III IV

2008

I

II

III

2009

INF

Note: This shows the evolution of output growth and in‡ation in the years preceding and
following the purchase operations.

49

Figure 5: E¤ects of Treasury bond purchases by the Federal Reserve
(Benchmark)

Notes: In this simulation, the average duration of debt is 15 quarters, and the purchase
operation lasts for one quarter. The Fed then divests its holdings over the next quarter. The
shaded regions show the 90 percent con…dence bands. The zero-lower bound operates for 8
quarters.

50

Figure 6: E¤ects of Treasury Bond purchases by the Federal Reserve
(Long-term securites are not immediately divested)

Notes: In this simulation, the average duration of debt is 15 quarters, and the purchase
operation lasts for two quarters. The Fed holds onto the long-term assets for two quarters,
and then divests these over the next two quarters. The shaded regions show the 90 percent
con…dence bands. The zero-lower bound operates for 8 quarters.

51

Figure 7: E¤ects of Treasury Bond purchases by the Federal Reserve
(Duration of Debt is Increased)

Notes: In this simulation, the average duration of debt is 20 quarters, and the purchase
operation lasts for 2 quarters, as in the benchmark simulation. The shaded regions show the
90 percent con…dence bands. The zero-lower bound operates for 8 quarters.

52

Figure 8: E¤ects of Treasury Bond purchases by the Federal Reserve
(Size of Debt is larger)

Notes: In this simulation, the average size of debt is 20% of the GDP, and the purchase
operation lasts for 2 quarters, as in the benchmark simulation. The shaded regions show the
90 percent con…dence bands. The zero-lower bound operates for 8 quarters.

53

