NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF PUBLIC INSURANCE USING COMPLEMENTARY
PRIVATE INSURANCE
Marika Cabral
Mark R. Cullen
Working Paper 22583
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22583

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016, Revised April 2018

For providing helpful comments, we thank Michael Geruso, Josh Gottlieb, Amanda Kowalski,
Neale Mahoney, Mark Shepard, and seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon Heinz College,
Indiana University Kelley School of Business, University of Texas at Austin, the 2016 Chicago
Booth Whistler Junior Health Economics Summit, the 2016 IFN Stockholm conference, the 2016
NBER Summer Institute Public Economics Meeting, the 2016 STATA Texas Empirical Micro
Conference and the 2017 CEPRA/NBER Workshop on Aging and Health. We thank David
Beheshti and Frank Martin-Buck for their excellent research assistance. The Alcoa data were
provided as part of an ongoing service and research agreement between Alcoa, Inc. and academic
institutions to perform jointly agreed-upon ongoing and ad hoc research projects on workers’
health, injury, disability, and health care, and research using this data is supported by a grant from
the National Institute on Aging (Disease, Disability and Death in an AgingWorkforce, NIH/NIA,
1 R01 AG026291). Mark R. Cullen previously served as Senior Medical Advisor for Alcoa, Inc.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marika Cabral and Mark R. Cullen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Value of Public Insurance Using Complementary Private Insurance
Marika Cabral and Mark R. Cullen
NBER Working Paper No. 22583
August 2016, Revised April 2018
JEL No. H0,H53,I38,J68
ABSTRACT
The welfare associated with public insurance is often difficult to quantify because the demand for
coverage is unobserved and thus cannot be used to analyze welfare. However, in many settings,
individuals can purchase private insurance to supplement public coverage. This paper outlines an
approach to use data and variation from private complementary insurance to quantify welfare
associated with counterfactuals related to compulsory public insurance. We then apply this
approach using administrative data on disability insurance. Our findings suggests that public
disability insurance generates substantial surplus for the sample population, and there may be
gains to increasing the generosity of coverage.

Marika Cabral
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
One University Station
BRB 1.116, C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
marika.cabral@austin.utexas.edu
Mark R. Cullen
Stanford University School of Medicine
1265 Welch Rd X338
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
mrcullen@stanford.edu

Social insurance programs are ubiquitous and cover many of the largest risks individuals face. To determine the welfare generated by public insurance, it is important to quantify both the benefits and the costs of
this insurance. While the costs of public insurance are relatively straightforward to calculate, the benefits of
public insurance are often difficult to quantify. A fundamental difficulty is that public insurance is typically
compulsory, so the demand for this non-market good is unobserved and thus cannot be used to infer the value
individuals place on coverage. While a relatively large literature has worked to quantify welfare in private
insurance markets, this difficulty may explain why there have been far fewer studies investigating the welfare
associated with public insurance.
Several recent studies investigate welfare within private insurance markets (e.g., Hackmann, Kolstad and
Kowalski (2015), Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney (2012), Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010)). Although recent
studies investigating welfare in private insurance settings use a range of methods, the commonality among
these studies is that they use price variation to identify the demand for insurance and thus the value individuals place on coverage.1 Perhaps because of the unique challenges that arise in the setting of compulsory public
insurance, a recent literature on the welfare generated by compulsory public insurance has evolved independently of the literature on welfare in private insurance settings. A handful of recent studies have analyzed
welfare within public insurance settings, such as Medicaid (Finkelstein, Hendren and Luttmer (2015)), unemployment insurance (e.g., Chetty (2008), Gruber (1997)), and disability insurance (Low and Pistaferri (2015),
Chandra and Samwick (2005)). While these studies employ a range of approaches across these settings, all of
these studies confront the fact that demand for compulsory public coverage is unobserved by making several
critical assumptions on the nature of individual utility (or marginal utility), uncertainty, and heterogeneity to
estimate welfare, often employing data on consumption or assets.2 Importantly, these studies make several
assumptions that can meaningfully affect the resulting analysis and are often difficult to empirically validate.
In this paper, we propose a complementary approach to analyzing the welfare associated with public insurance that leverages the fact that individuals can often purchase supplemental private insurance to top-up
the benefits of compulsory public insurance. The basic idea behind this approach is simple: The existence of
complementary private insurance allows us to extend standard willingness-to-pay approaches used in private
insurance settings and apply these to welfare questions associated with compulsory public insurance. Relative to other approaches to value compulsory public insurance, the approach outlined in this paper requires
minimal assumptions and can be implemented using commonly available data and straightforward variation.
While the existence of parallel private and public insurance is a necessary condition to implement this
1 See Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010) for a review of the literature on welfare analysis in private insurance markets and a discussion
of the various empirical methods employed in this literature.
2 See Chetty and Finkelstein (2013) for a review of the recent literature on social insurance. In addition, see Finkelstein, Hendren and
Luttmer (2015) for a discussion of some of the trade-offs between modeling assumptions and data requirements in conducting welfare
analysis in compulsory public insurance settings.

1

approach, it turns out that this is a common feature of many social insurance programs in the United States
and abroad.3 Some of the largest social insurance programs in the United States have this feature including
Medicare (private Medigap insurance), Social Security disability insurance (private long-term disability insurance), and Social Security retirement benefits (private annuities). The model of complementary public and
private insurance is also very common outside of the United States, particularly in the context of universal
public health insurance. Many countries that provide universal public health insurance also allow individuals
to purchase complementary private health insurance coverage to top-up the incomplete public health insurance benefits including France, the Netherlands, Canada, Denmark, Japan, Switzerland, New Zealand, Italy,
England, Norway, and Sweden.4
Intuitively, in settings in which individuals can purchase private complementary insurance, coverage
decisions individuals make in the private supplemental insurance market can inform us about individuals’
willingness-to-pay for extending the generosity of the compulsory coverage to include the benefits of supplemental insurance, and, in some settings, these decisions can inform us about individuals’ underlying valuation
of the inframarginal compulsory public coverage. Formalizing this intuition, this paper begins by outlining a
framework which illustrates that data and variation from the market for supplemental insurance can be used
to quantify welfare associated with several policy-relevant counterfactuals related to compulsory public insurance. We then apply this framework to the context of disability insurance using administrative data on
enrollment and claims from one large employer that provides its employees long-term disability insurance
that supplements the wage replacement benefits of public disability insurance.
Our modeling approach builds upon prior work by Einav and Finkelstein (2011) and Einav, Finkelstein and
Cullen (2010). The key empirical inputs into the welfare analysis are the demand and cost curves associated
with the private supplemental insurance market. We describe how these demand and costs curves can be used
to evaluate marginal counterfactuals related to the incremental coverage sold in the existing market for supplemental insurance and to bound the surplus provided by the inframarginal compulsory public insurance.
For instance, consider the welfare associated with extending the generosity of compulsory public insurance
to include the coverage provided by private supplemental insurance. The existence of a private supplemental
insurance market provides the opportunity to study the welfare from extending the generosity of public insurance to incorporate the coverage provided by supplemental insurance because we effectively observe a market
3 Despite that fact that private insurance is often available to top-up compulsory public insurance, most of the prior literature on welfare
analysis in compulsory public insurance settings abstracts from opportunities individuals have to purchase private complementary coverage. A notable exception is Chetty and Saez (2010) who characterize the impact of endogenous private insurance on the welfare associated
with government intervention under a range of different modeling assumptions. In addition, a few recent papers have characterized the
welfare associated with top-up supplemental insurance, including Cabral and Mahoney (2014) in the setting of Medigap coverage and
Einav, Finkelstein and Williams (2016) in the setting of coverage for alternative options for breast cancer treatment.
4 In some of these countries, private supplemental insurance covers the cost-sharing associated with services partially covered by
the compulsory public insurance; in other countries, private supplemental insurance covers complementary services not covered by the
compulsory public insurance (e.g., drugs, dental, out-of-network doctors/hospitals). For a detailed overview of parallel public and private
health insurance internationally, see Thomson et al. (2013).

2

for the extension of this public coverage. Thus, we illustrate how a simple, straightforward extension of the
Einav and Finkelstein (2011) framework can be used to investigate the welfare associated with an expansion of
the generosity of compulsory public insurance, where we incorporate key features that can matter in this setting such as externalities induced by the supplemental insurance and crowd-out of the private supplemental
insurance market.
Beyond examining a marginal extension of public insurance, we also outline an approach to study the
total welfare generated by compulsory public insurance, which relies on the demand and cost curves associated with supplemental insurance (the same objects required to implement the marginal welfare analysis
described above). Looking toward the empirical application to disability insurance, we focus attention on the
case where public and private insurance provide coverage that is linear in the insured loss. We then derive
a lower bound on the total surplus generated by the inframarginal compulsory public insurance coverage in
terms of the demand and cost curves that can be estimated within the supplemental insurance market. This
derivation relies on minimal assumptions on the nature of individual preferences, and we provide a simple
and intuitive sufficient condition applicable when preferences are represented by a univariate utility function:
utility exhibits non-increasing absolute risk aversion. Using a numerical example, we discuss the central tradeoff between this bounding approach and a more structural approach to analyzing the welfare associated with
the compulsory inframarginal public insurance. The bounding approach we outline is more robust in terms
of perturbations in the underlying utility, risk distribution, and liquidity; however, this robustness comes at
the cost of obtaining a lower bound on welfare rather than a precise welfare number. We note that in some
applications this cost may be considerable if the lower bound is too loose to provide valuable insights.
Using administrative data from one large firm on employee long-term disability (LTD) insurance, we then
apply this approach empirically to quantify the value of the wage replacement benefits of disability insurance
among this population. Disability insurance is a particularly important setting in which to understand the
welfare associated with insurance, as the threat of a career-ending disability is one of the largest financial
risks many individuals face, and the public Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) program is one of the
largest social insurance programs in the United States. In 2014, approximately 9 million disabled workers
received SSDI benefits, and the total SSDI benefits paid exceeded $140 billion.5 Despite the large size of this
social insurance program, there has been very little research quantifying the welfare provided by disability
5 Source:

https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2015/highlights.pdf.

3

insurance.6,7 In addition to the coverage available to workers through SSDI, 34% of US workers have the
opportunity to purchase private supplemental LTD coverage through their employer to top-up the benefits of
SSDI.8 A typical empirical challenge to investigating the welfare associated with public SSDI coverage (relative
to other social insurance programs) is that it is a national program with little variation in coverage across
workers. Thus, disability insurance is a natural context to apply the framework described above as it allows us
to use variation within employer-provided private supplemental LTD insurance to overcome this key empirical
challenge and analyze the welfare associated with disability insurance.
We apply the welfare framework by leveraging premium variation and the subsequent decisions employees make in the context of LTD insurance at one large firm, Alcoa, Inc. There are several nice features of the
setting of this empirical application. First, the firm offers salaried employees three vertically differentiated
plans with wage replacement rates of 50%, 60%, and 70% in the event of disability. Second, the basic 50%
replacement rate plan is free for employees. This is convenient as no one opts out of the plans, and thus claims
data is available for all employees in the estimation population. Third, there is variation over time in the incremental premium for the highest generosity plan. This variation allows us to trace out the relative demand
curves for an incremental 10% replacement rate, starting from a baseline 60% replacement rate. Fourth, the administrative data include information on disability claims in addition to disability insurance enrollment, so the
demand estimates can be paired with cost data to evaluate welfare. Lastly, the firm’s disability plans explicitly
require workers to apply to SSDI and, if approved, SSDI benefits crowd-out LTD benefits dollar for dollar. In
this way, the LTD plans at this firm top-up the compulsory public insurance, providing a natural interpretation
to our estimates.
Using premium variation among the LTD policies available to employees, we find that the demand for
supplemental disability coverage is price-sensitive. Our baseline estimates indicate that if the premium for
the most generous LTD plan increases by 0.1% of annual earnings, enrollment would decline by 7 percentage
points. This is precisely estimated and robust to controlling for time trends and individual fixed-effects. Based
on our estimates, the implied mean willingness-to-pay for the incremental 10% replacement rate (starting from
6 While there has been limited research on the consumption-smoothing benefits of disability insurance, there are a small number of
recent related studies. A few recent papers document consumption changes in response to disability onset or major health shocks: Meyer
and Mok (2013) document changes in consumption and income that follow a change in self-reported disability status using PSID data;
Kostol and Mogstad (2015) document changes in income and consumption among denied and approved disability insurance applicants in
Norway; Dobkin et al. (2017) document consumption changes following major hospitalizations, providing indirect evidence on individuals’ exposure to disability-induced earnings losses. In addition, a few papers have investigated the ex ante welfare provided by disability
insurance using calibrated life-cycle models (see Low and Pistaferri (2015), Chandra and Samwick (2005)). In another recent study, Autor
et al. (2017) employ a structural model along with earnings and consumption data to estimate Norwegian disability insurance applicants’
implied willingness-to-pay to be approved for disability insurance. In contrast to these few related papers which rely on consumption
data and/or calibrated life-cycle models to infer the value of disability insurance, the approach in the present paper employs data and
variation from the market for supplemental disability coverage to directly investigate the willingness-to-pay for disability insurance and
the welfare associated with this coverage.
7 While there has been relatively little research on the welfare associated with disability insurance, there has been extensive research on
the causes and consequences of the vast growth in disability insurance rolls over time. See Autor and Duggan (2006) and Liebman (2015)
for a review of this literature.
8 These statistics are reported in Table 16 of the U.S. Department of Labor’s National Compensation Survey, Employee Benefits in the
U.S., March 2015 publication at: http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2015/ownership/civilian/table16a.pdf.

4

the baseline of 60% wage replacement) is roughly 0.31% of annual earnings, or $202 annually for a worker
earning $65K a year (roughly the mean annual earnings in the estimation population). Based on these estimates, the total surplus generated by public insurance is at least 0.68% of annual earnings, or $440 annually
for a worker with annual earnings of $65K. This bound is meaningful, as it indicates that the value individuals place on the compulsory public coverage is more than 2.5 times the cost of providing this coverage. It is
important to emphasize that these estimates come from a particular population that is not representative of a
broader set of workers. However, based on these estimates, compulsory public disability insurance is associated with benefits that far exceed the costs of this coverage for this employee population, and, for a plausible
range of moral hazard elasticities, extending the generosity of compulsory public coverage would result in
substantial welfare gains for these employees if they would not otherwise have access to employer-provided
supplemental disability coverage. We demonstrate that these results are robust to a wide range of alternative
specifications.
While the empirical results are specific to the population we examine, our analysis also highlights some
general strengths of this approach for evaluating the welfare generated by compulsory public insurance. First,
this method requires straightforward variation and limited data to be implemented empirically. Implementing this approach simply requires sufficient variation in the price of supplemental coverage to estimate the
demand curve for supplemental coverage and standard data on prices, insurance enrollment, and costs. In
contrast, other approaches to valuing public insurance often require isolating random (or like-random) assignment of benefits within the compulsory public insurance program and often require data on consumption or
assets. Second, this approach does not require us to specify many of the underlying primitives of individuals’
decisions, in contrast to other approaches of valuing compulsory public coverage which typically rely on fully
specifying individual utility (or marginal utility), obtaining data on all the inputs in the utility (or marginal
utility), specifying the uncertainty individuals face, and/or assumptions on the nature of individuals’ optimization. Third, this approach can accommodate features of complementary public and private insurance
in a range of settings. In settings with linear coverage, this approach can also be used to bound the welfare
generated by the inframarginal compulsory public coverage under minimal assumptions.
Of course, this approach is not without limitations. A primary limitation of this approach is that it can only
be applied in settings in which individuals are permitted to buy supplemental insurance coverage. While there
are many public insurance settings in which individuals can buy complementary coverage (e.g., disability insurance, universal health insurance settings such as Medicare, etc.), there are some public insurance settings in
which no complementary coverage is typically available (e.g., unemployment insurance, means-tested public
insurance such as Medicaid), and in these settings this approach does not provide a constructive alternative

5

to existing approaches for valuing compulsory public insurance.9 Further, this approach is subject to the same
challenges and limitations of welfare analysis based on revealed preference in private insurance markets more
broadly. For instance, this approach relies on the notion of revealed preference to use demand estimates to
conduct welfare analysis, which is subject to potential criticisms related to behavioral biases or information
frictions. Moreover, empirical implementation of this approach requires isolating credible price variation and
requires making some parametric assumptions when there is not sufficient price variation to estimate demand
non-parametrically.10
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 describes the framework for evaluating welfare.
Section 2 describes the background and data for the empirical application. Section 3 describes the empirical
strategy, and Section 4 presents the demand estimates and welfare analysis. Lastly, Section 5 concludes.

1
1.1

Framework
Model

Setup and Notation The setup of our framework draws heavily upon prior work by Einav and Finkelstein
(2011) and Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010). Suppose there is a population of heterogeneous individuals,
indexed by ϕ. Let G(ϕ) represent the distribution of the population. An important aspect of this approach is
that heterogeneity across individuals is unrestricted. Importantly, this means ϕ may be multi-dimensional to
include variation in preferences and risk, and there are no restrictions on G.
Individuals each face some continuous downside risk, where this absolute disposable income risk can vary
arbitrarily across individuals.11 Let w represent an individual’s baseline income, which can also vary arbitrarily across individuals. Looking forward to our empirical application, let us consider linear insurance products
where the generosity of insurance is indexed by the fraction of the risk covered by the insurance, so that a θ
generosity policy covers θ% of the continuous underlying risk.12 Specifically, consider a supplemental insurance product that provides δ generosity coverage on top of baseline public compulsory insurance coverage of
generosity α, so that an individual who holds both the baseline and supplemental insurance has total coverage
of generosity α + δ. Let π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) represent an individual’s willingness-to-pay for coverage of generosity θ
relative to the outside option of coverage of generosity γ. In this notation, we can represent the willingnessto-pay for supplemental coverage (π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ)) and the willingness-to-pay for the compulsory baseline
9 While supplemental insurance to top-up the benefits of compulsory public unemployment insurance is uncommon, supplemental
unemployment insurance exists in Sweden and thus a similar approach to analyzing welfare could be useful in that setting.
10 Section 1.3 discusses the advantages and limitations of this approach in greater detail.
11 Our empirical application focuses on insurance for lost earnings due to disability, which represents a continuous downside disposable
income risk. Disability is a continuous risk because disability shocks can vary in severity in terms of the duration of time that an individual
is unable to work. Some disability spells are relatively short-lived (e.g., 2-3 years), while many disability spells are of a much longer
duration often representing an absorbing state.
12 While the framework is described in terms of linear contracts, all of the counterfactual welfare analysis related to the marginal coverage
sold in the supplemental insurance market can easily be extended to non-linear insurance settings as discussed further below.

6

coverage (π(w, α, 0|ϕ)). Throughout, we suppose that the underlying primatives are such that π(w, θ, 0|ϕ) is
continuous and differentiable with respect to θ for all ϕ. Let c(w, θ, γ|ϕ) represent the expected cost borne by
insurance providers for an individual with coverage of generosity θ relative to coverage of generosity γ. In
this notation, we can describe the expected cost associated with an individual buying supplemental coverage
as the sum of two components,
c(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) = cS (w, α + δ, α|ϕ) + cP (w, α + δ, α|ϕ),

(1)

where cS (w, α + δ, α|ϕ) is the expected cost to the supplemental insurer for providing this incremental coverage of generosity δ to the individual, and cP (w, α + δ, α|ϕ) is the expected external cost associated with the
individual having this incremental coverage which are borne by the primary insurer.13 In the special case
where the supplemental coverage is not associated with an externality on the primary insurer (with linear contracts, this is equivalent to the case of no moral hazard), then there is no external cost for the primary insurer,
cP (w, α + δ, α|ϕ) = 0, and thus the total expected cost is simply the expected cost to the supplemental insurer,
c(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) = cS (w, α + δ, α|ϕ). As will become clear, the framework outlined below accommodates ex post
moral hazard that arises after the purchase of supplemental insurance. Importantly, we abstract from moral
hazard that takes place prior to the supplemental insurance market decision.14
Supplemental Insurance Market: Demand, Costs, and Equilibrium Suppose each individual makes a discrete choice whether to buy supplemental insurance of generosity δ for (relative) price p or go with the outside
option of the basic compulsory insurance of generosity α. Define the demand curve for this supplemental
coverage as follows:
Z
D(p|α + δ, α) =

1 π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) ≥ p dG(ϕ),


(2)

where we assume the underlying primitives in the population are such that demand is decreasing, continuous,
and differentiable. Throughout we ignore income effects associated with changes in the price of supplemental
insurance.15 As will become clear, the theoretical framework explicitly accommodates income effects associated with a change in the generosity of the inframarginal coverage.
Define the social marginal cost and social average cost curve for an insurance product that provides δ
generosity coverage on top of a baseline coverage of generosity α as follows:
M C(p|α + δ, α)

= E[c(w, α + δ, α|ϕ)|π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) = p]
Z

AC(p|α + δ, α) =
c(w, α + δ, α|ϕ)1 π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) ≥ p dG(ϕ)

(3)
(4)

where the cost curves M C(p|α + δ, α) and AC(p|α + δ, α) represent the costs inclusive of those incurred by both
13 Throughout the discussion, the cost of insuring an individual is treated as invariant to the insurer’s identity. The model could easily
be extended to incorporate systematic cost differences across insurers.
14 For example, in the empirical application to employer-provided disability insurance, this would rule out that the existence of disability
insurance may cause individuals to work in more risky occupations.
15 Ignoring income effects from supplemental insurance premium variation allows us to use estimates of the Marshallian demand curve
for supplemental insurance in the welfare analysis that follows. Abstracting from income effects may be reasonable in settings where the
variation in premiums for supplemental insurance is small relative to income (as is the case in our empirical application).

7

the supplemental insurer and the primary insurer. We can also define the marginal and average cost curves for
the supplemental insurer, who is only responsible for the incremental coverage:
M C S (p|α + δ, α)

= E[cS (w, α + δ, α|ϕ)|π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) = p]
Z

S
AC (p|α + δ, α) =
cS (w, α + δ, α|ϕ)1 π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) ≥ p dG(ϕ)

(5)
(6)

Consider the benchmark case of perfect competition, where we define the equilibrium price P CE , such that
supplemental insurers break even on average,
P CE (α + δ, α) = min{p : p = AC S (p|α + δ, α)}.

1.2

(7)

Welfare Measures

Next, we apply the framework above to analyze welfare. First, we consider the welfare associated with the
marginal coverage sold in the existing market for supplemental insurance and marginal counterfactuals involving extensions of the compulsory insurance to include this incremental coverage. We illustrate how a
simple, straightforward extension of the Einav and Finkelstein (2011) framework can be used to investigate
the welfare associated with an expansion of compulsory insurance, where we incorporate key features that
can matter in the presence of parallel public and private insurance such as externalities induced by the supplemental insurance and crowd-out of the private supplemental insurance market. Second, we consider the
welfare associated with the inframarginal coverage provided by the compulsory public insurance.
1.2.1

Marginal Coverage: Welfare From Extending the Generosity of Compulsory Public Insurance

A basic policy-relevant parameter of interest in social insurance settings is the value of extending the generosity
of compulsory public insurance. In a setting in which the only insurance available is the baseline compulsory
insurance of generosity α, the welfare from extending the generosity of the compulsory insurance coverage
can be described using the notation above as,
Z 


∂
π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) − c(w, θ, γ|ϕ)
dG(ϕ).
(8)
∂θ
θ,γ=α
In settings where individuals have access to complementary insurance, there is a direct empirical analogue
to the objects in the expression above. Notice that the surplus generated by supplemental insurance for an indi
∂
π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) − c(w, θ, γ|ϕ)
vidual, π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) − c(w, α + δ, α|ϕ), is simply a discretized version of ∂θ
.
γ,θ=α

In other words, relative to a benchmark of only compulsory insurance of generosity α, the social surplus associated with increasing the generosity of the compulsory coverage by δ for an individual is simply the social
surplus associated with that individual purchasing supplemental insurance, π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) − c(w, α + δ, α|ϕ).
Note that equation 8 measures the welfare associated with a marginal extension of compulsory coverage
relative to a benchmark scenario where only compulsory coverage exists (i.e., a world with no private supplemental insurance market). More generally, we may be interested in measuring the effect of extending the
generosity of compulsory coverage relative to a benchmark scenario in which individuals are able to pur-

8

chase private supplemental insurance themselves. This alternative benchmark scenario is of particular interest
because a necessary condition for empirically implementing this approach is the existence of a private supplemental insurance market.
Let W elf are Extn(p|α + δ, α) represent the per-capita welfare associated with extending compulsory coverage to include the supplemental coverage relative to a benchmark scenario where private supplemental
coverage is available for price p:
Z
W elf are Extn(p|α + δ, α)

=



π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) − c(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) 1 π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) < p dG(ϕ). (9)

In words, the above expression for welfare tells us that the value of extending compulsory public insurance
comes from aggregating individual values among people who would not have otherwise bought the private
supplemental coverage. There are a few important points to highlight about the above expression. First,
this expression nests the case in which no supplemental insurance is available (where effectively the price for
supplemental insurance is infinite),
Z
W elf are Extn(∞|α + δ, α)

=


π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) − c(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) dG(ϕ).

(10)

Second, this expression provides an intuitive way to characterize how crowd-out affects the value of extending
the generosity of public coverage. To see this, note that we can decompose this expression as follows:
W elf are Extn(p|α + δ, α)

= W elf are Extn(∞|α + δ, α)
(11)
Z


−
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) − c(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) 1 π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) ≥ p dG(ϕ),

where the first term represents the value of the extension if there were no private market available to crowdout, and the second term represents crowd-out of the voluntary private market for supplemental insurance
that would have existed in the absence of the compulsory public insurance extension.
Graphical Illustration We build intuition further through a graphical example in the spirit of Einav and
Finkelstein (2011). For the moment let us abstract from moral hazard, meaning that the social and private
cost curves are one and the same. Figure 1 Panel (A) plots the demand, marginal cost, and average cost
curves where the horizontal axis represents the fraction with supplemental insurance, and the vertical axis is
measured in dollars. For the purposes of this example, let us consider a private supplemental insurance market
that is characterized by competitive average-cost pricing, and let us assume the market is adversely selected
(as depicted in the figure by the downward sloping cost curves). In the absence of moral hazard, full insurance
is optimal if individuals are risk averse and administrative costs are negligible.
Consider an extension of the compulsory coverage to include the benefits of the supplemental insurance coverage. It is straightforward to measure the objects of interest in the context of this example. Relative to a benchmark where no supplemental coverage is available, the welfare generated by this extension is: W elf are Extn(∞|α + δ, α) = Area ABCD − Area EFCD. Relative to a benchmark of a competitive private supplemental insurance market, the welfare generated by extending compulsory coverage is:

9

W elf are Extn(P CE |α + δ, α) = W elf are Extn(∞|α + δ, α) − Area AHIE, where this expression makes clear
that the term (Area AHIE) represents crowd-out of the private supplemental market that otherwise would
have existed.
There are several additional counterfactual scenarios one can consider within this graphical example. For
instance, fixing the level of compulsory public coverage, the welfare associated with allowing a private supplemental insurance market relative to banning supplemental coverage is represented by the trapezoid AHIE.
Relative to the first-best efficient allocation, a private competitive market for supplemental coverage is associated with welfare losses due to adverse selection represented by the trapezoid HBFI. It is also straightforward
to generalize this graphical example along several dimensions. For instance, Figure 1 Panel (B) illustrates a
setting with moral hazard, in which the supplemental insurer does not internalize the full cost of the incremental insurance it provides. Thus, a supplemental insurer’s cost curves lie below the social cost curves for
the incremental coverage, where the vertical distance between these curves represents the externality associated with the supplemental coverage. While the optimal allocation is different than in the situation with no
moral hazard, the points have been re-labeled to emphasize that the analogous welfare measures associated
with extending the generosity of compulsory insurance are represented as in the discussion above.
1.2.2

Inframarginal Coverage: Welfare Generated by Compulsory Public Insurance

Beyond estimating the welfare associated with extending the generosity of compulsory public insurance, we
may also be interested in estimating the welfare associated with the inframarginal compulsory public coverage.
Below, we derive a lower bound on the total surplus generated by compulsory public insurance relative to the
absence of insurance for this risk using data and variation from supplemental private insurance.16
Once again, consider a setting in which compulsory public insurance provides coverage α and supplemental coverage of generosity δ is available for price p. Our primary focus is to investigate the welfare provided
by the baseline compulsory coverage relative to a world with no insurance for this risk:
Z n


W elf are Baseline(p|α + δ, α) =
π(w, α, 0|ϕ) − c(w, α, 0|ϕ) 1 π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) < p

o
α
c(w, α + δ, 0|ϕ) 1 π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) ≥ p dG(ϕ). (12)
α+δ
The first term in the expression above captures the value of compulsory public coverage among individ+ π(w, α, 0|ϕ) −

16 In the interest of investigating counterfactuals requiring minimal assumptions, our primary focus is to investigate welfare provided by
the baseline compulsory coverage relative to a world with no insurance for this risk. Note that this welfare measure does not necessarily
represent the value of compulsory public insurance relative to a world without this compulsory insurance, as it could be the case that
alternative private insurance or alternative public programs providing coverage for this risk would exist in the absence of compulsory
public insurance. The welfare measure we focus on may characterize the welfare associated with compulsory public insurance more
generally in insurance settings in which there is a large degree of private information, in which we might expect complete (or nearly
complete) unraveling of private insurance in the absence of public coverage. For instance, this is arguably the relevant case for disability
insurance and long-term care insurance, as Hendren (2013) argues that the large degree of asymmetric information in these settings can
explain the almost complete unraveling of private, non-group insurance for these risks. Because nothing about the observed supplemental
insurance market can reveal what private or public coverage might exist in the absence of the compulsory public insurance, we avoid
making arbitrary assumptions about such a counterfactual and focus instead on the surplus generated by the inframarignal compulsory
public insurance relative to a world with no insurance for this risk.

10

uals who do not buy supplemental insurance, and the second term captures the value of compulsory public coverage among individuals who purchase supplemental insurance at price p.17 Note that it is relatively
straightforward to estimate costs in the expression above. The observed claim costs for those with and without insurance could be used to estimate costs for this bound under the status quo allocation of supplemental
insurance (Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010)). If one wanted to estimate the bound under a counterfactual
allocation of supplemental insurance, one would need to predict costs leveraging an estimate of (or assumption
regarding) moral hazard. The key challenge to estimating the equality above is the fact that the willingness-topay for the baseline coverage, π(w, α, 0|ϕ), is unobserved. To be able to empirically use this measure of welfare,
we need to have a way to connect what we can estimate in the data to the objects in the above expression. The
proposition below helps us do this.
Proposition 1. For an individual represented by ϕ, define the demand for insurance generosity on the intensive
margin: v(w, θ|ϕ) ≡

∂
∂θ π(w, θ, 0|ϕ).

Suppose that (i) v(w, θ|ϕ) is weakly decreasing in θ, and (ii) v(w, θ|ϕ) is

weakly decreasing in w. Then,
π(w, α, 0|ϕ) ≥

α
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ).
δ

(13)

Proof. Note that π(w − π(w, α, 0|ϕ), α + δ, α|ϕ) ≡ π(w, α + δ, 0|ϕ) − π(w, α, 0|ϕ).18 Under the assumptions in
the proposition, we get
Z
Z
π(w, α, 0|ϕ)
1 α
1 α+δ
=
v(w, θ|ϕ)dθ ≥ v(w, α|ϕ) ≥
v(w, θ|ϕ)dθ
α
α 0
δ α
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ)
π(w − π(w, α, 0|ϕ), α + δ, α|ϕ)
≥
,
=
δ
δ
where the first two inequalities follow from assumption (i) and it is straightforward to show the final inequality
follows from additionally assuming (ii) holds.
Proposition 1 provides us a way to empirically bound the welfare provided by the inframarginal coverage.
To see this, note that the left-hand-side of inequality 13 is the key unknown in equation 12 , while the righthand-side of this inequality is a linear transformation of the willingness-to-pay for supplemental coverage,
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ), an object whose distribution one can estimate with sufficient data and variation from the
private supplemental insurance market. To make this result concrete, consider the following example: Suppose
that compulsory public insurance covers 60% of some risk and supplemental insurance covers an additional
10% of the risk. Applying Proposition 1, we get that an individual’s willingness-to-pay for compulsory public
17 Note that one could use a broader measure of welfare associated with public insurance if one accounted for the indirect value of
public insurance through allowing for a supplemental market in which individuals may buy supplemental coverage (as the existence of
the supplemental market is an indirect consequence of the public coverage).
18 The willingness-to-pay for supplemental coverage is implicitly defined as the difference between the willingness-to-pay for α + δ
coverage and the willingness-to-pay for α coverage, with an appropriate shift in the income at which these expressions are evaluated:
π(w − π(w, α, 0|ϕ), α + δ, α|ϕ) ≡ π(w, α + δ, 0|ϕ) − π(w, α, 0|ϕ). Intuitively, this definition follows from the fact that the willingnessto-pay for α + δ coverage (π(w, α + δ, 0|ϕ)), is the sum of the willingness-to-pay for α coverage (π(w, α, 0|ϕ)) and the willingness-to-pay
for the incremental coverage at a lower effective income (π(w − π(w, α, 0|ϕ), α + δ, α|ϕ)). By ruling out large income effects that operate
in the direction of undermining the bounding strategy, assumption (ii) allows us to connect the willingness-to-pay for the supplemental
coverage to the marginal willingness-to-pay for the baseline coverage.

11

insurance is at least six times his/her willingness-to-pay for the incremental coverage sold in the supplemental
market. More generally, we get the following natural corollary defining a population-level bound on the
welfare provided by the compulsory baseline coverage:
Corollary 1. If π(w, α, 0|ϕ) ≥

α
δ π(w, α

+ δ, α|ϕ), ∀ϕ, then:
Z n


α
W elf are Baseline(p|α + δ, α) ≥
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) − c(w, α, 0|ϕ) 1 π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) < p
δ

o
α
α
+
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) −
c(w, α + δ, 0|ϕ) 1 π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) ≥ p dG(ϕ). (14)
δ
α+δ
The assumptions behind Proposition 1 have a simple intuitive basis and are related to concepts in the prior

theoretical literature related to decisions under uncertainty.19 The first assumption states that an individual’s
demand for insurance generosity is weakly downward sloping. The second assumption says that an individual’s demand for insurance generosity for a fixed risk is weakly declining with his/her baseline income. In
the case that preferences can be represented by a univariate utility function, we obtain an alternative sufficient
condition in terms of utility for applying this bound:
Proposition 2. Suppose an individual’s utility can be represented by the increasing, thrice differentiable function u(c). Define π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) as: E[u(w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ))] = E[u(w + (1 − γ)x)], where θ > γ and the
expectation is taken over x ≤ 0, representing the uncertain losses the individual faces. Additionally, suppose
the individual is risk averse and his/her utility exhibits weakly decreasing absolute risk aversion. Then,
α
π(w, α, 0|ϕ) ≥ π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ).
(15)
δ
and thus we obtain the bound in Corollary 1.
Proof. See Appendix A.
The propositions above give us two alternative conditions under which we can apply a simple method
to bound the welfare generated by compulsory public insurance using information from the associated private supplemental insurance market. There are a few important points to note. First, the key assumption
within Proposition 2 is weakly decreasing absolute risk aversion, which is satisfied by most of the common
utility functions used by empiricists, including Constant Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA), Constant Relative
Risk Aversion (CRRA), and a broader class of empirically relevant Hyperbolic Absolute Risk Aversion (HARA)
utility functions.20 Second, the sufficient condition in Proposition 2 applies when utility is defined over a single
19 Perhaps because it is so intuitive that an individual’s willingness-to-pay to avoid taking on risk should scale with the size of the risk,
prior theoretical papers have worked to derive sufficient conditions on utility functions such that the underlying preferences satisfy similar
properties to the properties we study here. See Eeckhoudt and Gollier (2001) and Menezes and Hanson (1970) for examples. While much
of the related theoretical literature focuses on risks with both positive and negative realizations (as is applicable in a finance setting), we
show that in the context of an insurance problem (where all realizations of risk are non-positive), we obtain a simple sufficient condition
for the assumptions within Proposition 1 when preferences can be represented by a univariate utility function (see Proposition 2).
20 The general version of the HARA family is characterized by a utility function of the following form: u(c) = ξ(ν + c )1−γ . The absolute
γ
risk aversion for this family is then equal to rA = (ν + γc )−1 , which is clearly weakly decreasing in c for all parameter values for which
the individual is risk averse over the entire range of possible consumption values. Note the values for which the individual is risk averse
are those that satisfy: ξ(1 − γ)γ −1 (ν + γc )−γ−1 ≥ 0, ∀c ≥ 0.

12

argument. Most of the theory surrounding decisions under uncertainty is developed within the setting of univariate utility, and Proposition 2 follows in this spirit. In situations in which consumers face more complicated
optimization problems with utility defined over multiple goods, as is the case in insurance models with moral
hazard, one would want to directly rely on the assumptions on the demand for insurance within Proposition 1
to obtain the lower bound on the welfare provided by the inframarginal coverage.
Regardless of whether one relies on the conditions within Proposition 1 or Proposition 2 to implement
the welfare bound, it is important to emphasize that this bounding approach does not require specifying particular individual utility/demand functions or restricting heterogeneity across individuals. In other words,
each individual may have his/her own distinct utility/demand function that varies arbitrarily throughout the
population, so long as each individual’s preferences exhibit weakly decreasing absolute risk aversion (or more
generally, satisfy the conditions on demand for insurance generosity within Proposition 1), the lower bound
on welfare described in Corollary 1 above is applicable.
Graphical Illustration Figure 2 illustrates Proposition 1 graphically. Consider a fixed individual indexed
by ϕ. This figure displays the individual’s demand for insurance on the intensive margin (e.g., the marginal
valuation v(w, θ|ϕ) =

∂
∂θ π(w, θ, 0|ϕ)),

where the horizontal axis represents the generosity of insurance (θ) and

the vertical axis is measured in dollars. As in Proposition 1, suppose that (i) v(w, θ|ϕ) is weakly decreasing in
θ, and (ii) v(w, θ|ϕ) is weakly decreasing in w. Recall, our goal is to use the observed data to investigate the
Rα
willingness-to-pay for the inframarginal compulsory coverage: π(w, α, 0|ϕ) = 0 v(w, θ|ϕ)dθ.
Suppose that data and variation within the supplemental insurance market allows us to estimate the individual’s willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ). Under assumptions (i) and (ii), the
willingness-to-pay for supplemental coverage scaled by the amount of supplemental coverage,

π(w,α+δ,α|ϕ)
,
δ

provides an (under)estimate of the mean value of v(w, θ|ϕ) for θ ∈ [α, α + δ], represented by point A in Figure
2. While we have an estimate for point A, we cannot identify the function representing the individual’s demand
for insurance, v(w, θ|ϕ), without further assumptions, as the true function could be v1 (w, θ|ϕ) or v2 (w, θ|ϕ) or
any other function that passes through point A. However, as long as the individual’s demand for coverage is
downward sloping, we obtain the lower bound on the individual’s willingness-to-pay for the inframarginal
coverage in Proposition 1: π(w, α, 0|ϕ) ≥

α
δ π(w, α

+ δ, α|ϕ) = Area DEBC.

To fully evaluate the net welfare from the inframarginal coverage for this individual, we must consider the
costs associated with this coverage accounting for any moral hazard induced by this coverage. Figure 2 represents a context with moral hazard, where the marginal cost of coverage

∂
∂θ c(w, θ, 0|ϕ)

is upward sloping.21 The

efficient generosity level is represented by the intersection of the demand and marginal cost curves. The expected cost associated with the compulsory inframarginal coverage for this individual will depend on whether
21 If

there were no moral hazard,

∂
c(w, θ, 0|ϕ)
∂θ

would be constant as a function of θ.

13

the individual has supplemental insurance. If the individual does not have supplemental insurance, the expected cost associated with the baseline coverage is: c(w, α, 0|ϕ) =Area LJBC; if the individual does have supplemental insurance, the expected cost associated with the baseline coverage is:

α
α+δ c(w, α+δ, 0|ϕ)

=

α
α+δ

(Area

LKMC). Thus, the net welfare associated with the baseline coverage for this individual would be bounded be

α
low by Area DEJL if the individual has no supplemental coverage or Area DEBC− α+δ
(Area LKMC) if the
individual does have supplemental insurance.
Figure 2 also illustrates that the tightness of the bound on the surplus associated with the inframarginal
coverage will depend on several factors. First, fixing the observed willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance, the tightness of the bound will depend on the individual’s unobserved demand for insurance. For
instance, in the graphical illustration the bound would be tighter if the individuals true underlying demand
was represented by v2 (w, θ|ϕ) (where π(w, α, 0|ϕ) = Area FHBC) than if his/her demand was as in v1 (w, θ|ϕ)
(where π(w, α, 0|ϕ) = Area IGBC). Second, fixing the unobserved demand for insurance, the figure illustrates
that the lower bound is tight for low values of α and becomes very loose as α approaches the efficient generosity level (which is 100% absent moral hazard, but lower otherwise).22 An implication of this is that, all
else equal, we would expect to obtain a tighter lower bound in settings where supplemental insurance tops up
very incomplete compulsory insurance than in settings where supplemental insurance tops up very generous
compulsory insurance. We present a numerical example below that illustrates how the tightness of this bound
can vary under a range of assumptions on the underlying utility and decision environment.
Numerical Example

Next, we consider a numerical example to compare the bounding approach to a more

structural approach that specifies all the underlying primitives to illustrate the trade-offs between these complementary approaches more concretely. Consider an individual indexed by ϕ who faces some potential loss
and has compulsory public insurance that covers 60% of this risk. Further, suppose the individual has the
option to purchase private supplemental insurance to cover an additional 10% of the risk on top of the public
insurance. Supposing that the conditions within Proposition 1 hold, the individual’s willingness-to-pay for the
infrmarginal coverage is at least six times his/her willingness-to-pay for the supplemental coverage, and thus
the individual’s surplus associated with the inframarginal coverage is at least six times the surplus associated
22 To

more precisely characterize the tightness of the bound in our discussion below, we define the surplus ratio as: surplus ratio=
 . The surplus ratio describes how tight the lower bound is under a given set of assumptions, with a smaller

π(w,α,0|ϕ)−c(w,α,0|ϕ)

Bound π(w,α,0|ϕ)−c(w,α,0|ϕ)
ratio indicating a tighter bound. As can be seen in Figure 2, the surplus ratio will be close to 1 for small values of α and will be very
large as α approaches the efficient generosity level. In the special case of linear demand for insurance generosity and no moral hazard,
the surplus ratio is monotonically increasing in α. The surplus ratio need not be monotonically increasing in α for a downward sloping
demand function more generally, though we find that the surplus ratio is monotonically increasing in α under the range of assumptions
analyzed within the numerical example below (see Appendix Figure A1). In the special case that the demand for insurance generosity is
2−α
linear and there is no moral hazard, the surplus ratio is equal to (2−δ)−2ζ
, when α represents the compulsory insurance generosity and
the willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance is measured over the range of coverage (ζ, ζ + δ). The surplus ratio in the special case
with linear demand and no moral hazard is equal to 2.4 for (α, ζ, δ) = (0.34, 0.60, 0.10), which is the relevant range for the empirical
application. Thus, if the demand for insurance generosity were linear and there were no moral hazard, then the lower bound we estimate
would capture roughly 40% of the welfare associated with the inframarginal compulsory coverage. While the key advantage of the
bounding approach is that we do not need to specify the functional form of the demand for insurance on the intensive margin, this
suggests our estimated bound may be fairly conservative.

14

with the supplemental coverage. This bound is applicable regardless of the distribution of uncertainty, the
specific form of utility, and access to liquidity.
Suppose we observe (or have a reliable estimate for) an individual’s willingness-to-pay for supplemental
insurance and the expected cost associated with this insurance. For a given willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance, Table 1 reports the calibrated value of the inframarginal coverage under various assumptions
on the underlying utility function, liquidity, and risk. For each scenario considered, the table also displays
the surplus ratio, which we define as the ratio of the surplus from the inframarginal coverage under the stated
assumptions to the lower bound on surplus from the inframarginal coverage derived under Proposition 1 (surπ(w,α,0|ϕ)−c(w,α,0|ϕ)
 ). The surplus ratio describes how tight the lower bound is under a
Bound π(w,α,0|ϕ)−c(w,α,0|ϕ)
given set of assumptions, with a smaller ratio indicating a tighter bound. To ease comparisons across the sets

plus ratio=

of assumptions, each distribution of risk we consider has the same expected cost: $8 for each 1 percentage
point of insurance coverage.
Fixing the willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance at $100, Figure 3 displays the numerical analogue of Figure 2 under the range of assumptions considered in Table 1. Specifically, this figure displays the
marginal cost and marginal valuation of insurance generosity on the intensive margin, where units are scaled
to represent dollars per 1 percentage point of insurance coverage. Given a willingness-to-pay for supplemental
insurance of $100, an (under)estimate of the individual’s mean marginal valuation of insurance for a 1 percentage point increase in coverage is $10 over the range θ ∈[0.6, 0.7]. Based on Proposition 1, the lower bound on

the individual’s valuation of the inframarginal 60% coverage is $600 π(w, 0.6, 0|ϕ) ≥ 6 × π(w, 0.7, 0.6|ϕ) and
the lower bound on the net surplus from the inframarginal coverage is $120 (Area ABCD in Figure 3). For each
of the considered sets of assumptions in Table 1 and the associated calibrated parameters, this figure displays
the implied marginal willingness-to-pay for insurance on the intensive margin.
Figure 3 and Table 1 illustrate two important points. First, the precise implied valuation for the inframarginal public coverage is very sensitive to the underlying assumptions on the form of the utility, liquidity, and the nature of uncertainty. Comparing the associated values in Table 1 columns (2) and (3) when
π(w, 0.7, 0.6|ϕ) = $100, we see that the implied net surplus from public coverage is 40% higher under the
CRRA specification than under the CARA specification, with the same assumed risk and benchmark income.
Comparing Table 1 columns (2), (4), (6), and (8), we see that the implied net surplus from public coverage
varies greatly with changes in the assumed risk distribution, even conditional on specifying the same form
of utility, benchmark income, and expected cost. A comparison of columns (2), (10) and (11) reveals that
the implied valuation of public coverage is very sensitive to the benchmark income; in this example, when
π(w, 0.7, 0.6|ϕ) = $100, the implied net surplus from public coverage based on CRRA utility increases 71%
when the benchmark income is cut by $14.5K. Second, the lower bound can be quite conservative, and the

15

tightness of the lower bound depends on the underlying risk, utility, and liquidity. Across all the considered
scenarios, we see that the implied surplus associated with inframarginal public coverage ranges from 1.79 to
6.29 times the lower bound.23 This highlights an important limitation of the bounding approach: it provides
less precise information about welfare than an approach that fully specifies the underlying primitives.
In summary, this numerical example highlights the central trade-off between these complementary approaches to quantifying welfare. The bounding approach is more robust than a more structural approach in
terms of perturbations in the underlying utility, risk distribution, and liquidity; however, this robustness comes
at the cost of obtaining a lower bound on welfare rather than a precise welfare number. In some applications,
this cost may be considerable if the lower bound is too loose to provide valuable insights.
Empirical Implementation While the propositions above provide a lower bound on the surplus from the
inframarginal coverage for a given individual, we empirically implement the population-level bound in Corollary 1 which aggregates across individuals. The key empirical inputs for the population-level welfare bound
are: (i) the mean willingness-to-pay for the supplemental coverage and (ii) the mean expected costs associated
with the inframarginal coverage given the status quo allocation of supplemental insurance. To estimate (i), we
estimate the demand for supplemental insurance and integrate under this demand curve. In settings with rich
enough price variation, the demand for supplemental insurance could be estimated non-parametrically. In
practice, there is typically a limited range of price variation available, and thus applying either the bounding
approach or a more structural approach to quantify the welfare associated with the inframarginal coverage
would typically require some extrapolation from the identifying variation to estimate the demand for supplemental insurance. However, in contrast to more structural approach, the bounding approach requires minimal
restrictions on the demand for insurance generosity for a given individual to relate the willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance to the willingness-to-pay for the inframaringal coverage.
Following the empirical insurance literature, one can use ex post realized costs to estimate (ii). Note that
the observed realized costs are inclusive of any moral hazard induced by the status quo allocation of insurance
coverage, meaning that the bound estimated with these observed costs trades off the value associated with
the inframarginal coverage and the costs of this coverage inclusive of moral hazard induced by the observed
coverage.24 Putting this all together, empirical implementation of the population-level bound requires lever23 Appendix Figure A1 depicts how the surplus ratio varies with the generosity of the baseline coverage, fixing the underlying utility
parameters as calibrated under the assumptions analyzed in Figure 3.
24 More generally, one might be interested in applying this bounding approach in settings with a counterfactual allocation of supplemental insurance that departs from the observed allocation, and thus rely on the degree to which claims respond as one increases (or
decreases) coverage relative to the observed allocation. To do this extrapolation, one would need an estimate of moral hazard induced
by marginal coverage changes. To obtain such an estimate, one could either look to the prior literature for an estimate of moral hazard
or one could estimate moral hazard in the empirical application itself. In theory, a feature of this approach is that the claims data and
price variation required to implement this approach may be sufficient for estimating moral hazard as well. In practice, some empirical
applications will provide sufficient power to estimate demand but insufficient power to obtain precise estimates of moral hazard, as is the
case in our empirical application to disability insurance. We illustrate how one could proceed if this practical difficulty arises through our
approach to incorporating moral hazard in the empirical application.

16

aging plausibly exogenous variation in premiums to estimate the demand curve for supplemental coverage
and standard data on prices, insurance enrollment, and costs.

1.3

Comparison to Alternative Methods

Below, we discuss how the willingness-to-pay approach we outline compares to other approaches used in the
prior literature to analyze the welfare associated with compulsory public insurance. There are a few notable
strengths of the willingness-to-pay approach. First, this method requires straightforward variation and limited
data to be implemented empirically. To estimate all of the inputs of the marginal and inframarginal welfare
analysis discussed above, one simply needs sufficient variation in the price of supplemental coverage to estimate the demand curve for supplemental coverage and standard data on prices, insurance enrollment, and
costs. In contrast, other approaches to valuing compulsory public insurance often require isolating random
(or like-random) variation in compulsory public insurance (which by virtue of the program being compulsory
is often difficult to do). In addition, alternative approaches often require data on consumption or assets, data
which is often not available and can suffer from considerable measurement error when it is available.
Second, an advantage of this approach is that it allows us to remain largely agnostic as to the underlying primitives of individuals’ decisions (similar to Einav and Finkelstein (2011)). It is possible to investigate
a wide range of marginal welfare questions (welfare analysis in the spirit of the sufficient statistics literature
on social insurance (e.g., Chetty, 2008)) without making restrictions on the form of individual utility or individuals’ underlying optimization problem. In settings with linear insurance coverage, going beyond marginal
welfare questions and bounding the welfare provided by the compulsory inframarginal coverage requires only
minimal assumptions on individual preferences. Further, because the framework does not restrict heterogeneity across individuals, this approach could be applied without restricting heterogeneity in settings with rich
enough variation to estimate demand non-parametrically.25 The fact that this approach requires few assumptions is in contrast to other approaches of valuing compulsory public coverage which rely on fully specifying
utility (or marginal utility), specifying the nature of uncertainty individuals face, restricting heterogeneity
across individuals, obtaining data on all the inputs in the utility (or marginal utility), and/or assumptions on
the nature of the individual’s optimization.
Third, this approach can accommodate features of complementary public and private insurance in a range
of settings. It is straightforward to show that this approach can accommodate features that may be present
25 Other approaches in the prior literature analyzing welfare associated with compulsory public insurance often require making assumptions to extrapolate along two margins: (i) extrapolate from a LATE estimate to a broader population by making parametric restrictions
on heterogeneity (similar in spirit to the parametric demand extrapolation in our application) and (ii) extrapolate to connect the estimated
elasticities to an expression for welfare through specifying underlying primitives (e.g., an optimization model for decision-making, budget constraint, marginal utility, etc). In theory, if there were rich enough variation that one could estimate demand non-parametrically,
the approach we outline would not require much extrapolation on either margin. In practice, given the typical scope of variation available to estimate demand, the approach we outline will often require parametric extrapolation along margin (i), but will require minimal
assumptions to connect the parametric demand estimates to welfare (i.e., no substantial extrapolation on margin (ii)).

17

in the supplemental insurance market, such as imperfect competition, administrative costs, multiple contract
options, and pricing regulations. Importantly, while the framework above is discussed in the context of linear
insurance (which is the relevant case in the empirical application that follows), the general approach to valuing
a marginal extension of compulsory coverage to include benefits covered by supplemental insurance can be
applied to any setting with complementary private insurance provided sufficient data and variation exist, even
settings with highly non-linear coverage. For example, if compulsory public insurance includes a deductible
and supplemental insurance fills in this deductible, an individual’s willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance reveals his/her valuation of extending public insurance to fill in this deductible.26 In settings with
linear coverage, this approach can be used to go beyond marginal welfare questions and bound the welfare
generated by the inframarginal compulsory coverage under minimal assumptions.
Of course, an important limitation of this approach is that it can only be applied in settings in which individuals can purchase complementary private insurance to top-up the compulsory public coverage. While there
are many public insurance settings in which individuals can buy complementary coverage (e.g., disability insurance, universal health insurance settings such as Medicare, etc.), there are some public insurance settings in
which no complementary coverage is typically available (e.g., unemployment insurance, means-tested public
insurance such as Medicaid), and in these settings this approach does not provide an alternative to existing
approaches to valuing public insurance. In addition, applying the inframarignal welfare bound requires that
the public and private insurance provide linear coverage for the same financial risk. Implicit in this requirement is that the public and private insurance be of the same quality aside from the definition of generosity.27
In settings where this additional requirement is not met, the applicable analysis would be limited to analyzing
marginal extensions of the compulsory public insurance to include coverage comparable to that offered by the
supplemental insurance.
It is also important to note the interpretation of the welfare analysis discussed above. Because this approach draws upon the demand for supplemental insurance, any information realized before the purchase of
supplemental insurance is considered pre-determined at the time of evaluating welfare. In this way, the welfare
from public coverage discussed above is the welfare of this coverage based on the information known at the
point in time of the observed supplemental insurance market decisions. Thus, the lower bound on the value
of public coverage described above may be conservative from the perspective of ex ante welfare as it does not
capture any additional welfare from insurance against risk type revelation over time before the supplemental
26 Or alternatively, in the setting of health insurance, if private supplemental insurance improves upon basic compulsory public insurance by providing access to a broader group of health care providers, an individual’s willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance reveals his/her valuation of an extension of the compulsory public insurance coverage to include this broader group of health care providers.
To the extent that the available supplemental insurance fills the obvious gaps in the compulsory public insurance coverage in a given setting, expanding compulsory public coverage to include the benefits of supplemental insurance may be one of the most policy-relevant
marginal expansions to consider.
27 There may be instances where supplemental insurance is of higher or lower quality than the compulsory public coverage. In such
cases, the public and private insurance may be covering slightly different financial risks, and thus the linear insurance assumption fails
and the inframarginal welfare bound is not applicable.

18

insurance purchase decision.28
More broadly, this approach is subject to the same limitations and challenges of welfare analysis in private
insurance markets. For instance, this approach relies on the notion that individuals’ decisions to buy or forgo
insurance can be used within a revealed preference framework to do welfare analysis. While this is a common
approach to evaluating welfare in private insurance settings, there are potential criticisms and drawbacks to
relying on revealed preference as individuals may suffer from behavioral biases or may face informational frictions. Additionally, as in typical analyses within private insurance markets, this approach relies on estimating
demand, which requires isolating price variation that is plausibly exogenous and typically requires making
parametric assumptions when there is not sufficient price variation to estimate demand non-parametrically.29
Despite the non-trivial challenges associated with using revealed preference for welfare analysis, researchers
conducting welfare analysis in private insurance settings typically opt to employ demand estimates and rely
on revealed preference (as opposed to employing methods similar to those used in the prior compulsory public
insurance literature). In this way, the framework described above provides a constructive illustration of how to
extend this revealed preference style analysis often employed in settings with private insurance to investigate
questions related to compulsory public insurance.

2

Empirical Application: Background and Data Description

The remainder of the paper applies the framework discussed in the prior section to evaluate welfare in the
context of public and private disability insurance. Specifically, we leverage price variation in the private supplemental long-term disability (LTD) policies offered by one large employer to quantify the value of disability
insurance among workers in this population. While the empirical setting is interesting in its own right, the
empirical application also illustrates some of the strengths and challenges associated with this willingness-topay approach for analyzing the welfare associated with compulsory public insurance. This section begins by
briefly describing some relevant background on public and private disability coverage. We then proceed to
discuss the data and identifying variation.

2.1

Brief Background on Public and Private Disability Coverage

In the United States, the public disability insurance program, Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), is one
of the largest social insurance programs. In 2014, approximately 9 million disabled workers received SSDI ben28 While much of the literature analyzing welfare in private insurance markets follows a similar approach taking heterogeneity underlying the demand for insurance as pre-determined, there are some notable recent exceptions that consider broader ex ante measures of
welfare. Hendren (2017) describes a method to estimate the ex ante value of insurance behind the veil of ignorance before individual
risk types are realized. His approach similarly draws on estimated demand and cost curves from an existing private insurance market.
Similar issues regarding a divergence between the point in time at which demand and welfare are measured arise in Handel, Hendel and
Whinston (2015) and Einav, Finkelstein and Williams (2016).
29 As discussed above, most empirical applications of this approach will require some parametric extrapolation to identify the demand
curve across the population because a key input in the welfare analysis described above is an estimate of the mean willingness-to-pay for
the supplemental coverage (i.e., the integral under the demand curve across the population).

19

efits, and the total SSDI benefits paid exceeded $140 billion.30 . Eligible workers may apply for public disability
insurance benefits in the event of a disability. The applicant then goes through an evaluation of his/her case
that includes an assessment of the severity of his/her disability and an assessment of his/her residual work
capacity.31 If an individual’s SSDI case is approved, the individual receives a monthly benefit that is a function
of his/her prior earnings history. In particular, the Social Security Administration (SSA) calculates the individual’s Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME), which is defined as the average inflation-adjusted monthly
earnings in the individual’s 35 highest earning years of employment (or all years of employment if the beneficiary has worked fewer than 35 years).32 The monthly benefit for the beneficiary, the Primary Insurance
Amount (PIA), is then determined by a piece-wise linear function of the AIME. Since SSDI pays a benefit for
each month the individual is out of the labor force due to disability, from an individual’s perspective SSDI insurance provides coverage that is linear in the risk (lost wages due to time out of work with disability), where
the effective replacement rate for individual i in the event that he becomes disabled in terms of his/her current
Benefiti , where Annual SSDI Benefit = 12×P IA(AIM E ). Among
annual earnings, wi , is: γi = Annual SSDI
i
i
wi
US workers, the mean pre-tax replacement rate for public disability insurance through SSDI is roughly 45%.33
Throughout the following discussion, we focus on the welfare generated by the primary wage-replacement
benefits of SSDI abstracting from additional benefits associated with the SSDI program (e.g., Medicare coverage, survivor benefits, etc).34
Many employers offer LTD insurance to supplement the wage replacement benefits of SSDI. Approximately 34% of all workers have the option to buy LTD coverage through their employer to top-up the coverage
from SSDI.35 While on average 34% of all workers have access to LTD coverage, the percent of workers with
access to LTD is much higher among particular subgroups: 44% of full-time workers, 53% of managerial and
professional workers, and 57% high income workers (workers in the top 25% of earners). The median replacement rate of employer-provided LTD coverage is 60%, with only 1% of plans providing coverage in excess of
67% and 24% of plans providing coverage less than 60%.36
30 Source:

https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2015/highlights.pdf.
http://www.ssa.gov/pubs/EN-05-10029.

31 The following SSA publication contains a basic description of the evaluation criteria:

pdf.
32 A calculator on the SSA website describes the disability benefit formula:
https://www.ssa.gov/planners/retire/
AnypiaApplet.html#&sb=-1.
33 This statistic is based on authors’ calculations using employees in the CPS, as described in Table 3. Note this replacement rate is
calculated before considering the tax treatment of wages and SSDI benefits.
34 Some SSDI beneficiaries have access to additional benefits beyond the wage-replacement benefits described above. For example, after
two years of SSDI coverage, beneficiaries receive health insurance through Medicare. Additionally, in some circumstances, SSDI provides
additional financial benefits to beneficiary dependents (i.e., young children or elderly spouses). Throughout the following discussion, we
focus on the welfare generated by the primary wage-replacement benefits of SSDI abstracting from these additional features. Note that
the estimated lower bound on the welfare provided by the SSDI wage replacement benefits would be a conservative characterization of
welfare of the entire SSDI program to the extent that these additional features generate positive surplus.
35 These statistics are reported in Table 16 of the U.S. Department of Labor’s National Compensation Survey, Employee Benefits in the
U.S., March 2015 publication at: http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2015/ownership/civilian/table16a.pdf.
36 These statistics are reported in Table 30 of the U.S. Department of Labor’s National Compensation Survey, Employee Benefits in the
U.S., March 2015 publication at: http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2015/ownership/civilian/table30a.pdf.

20

2.2

Data Description and Identifying Variation

In this paper, we use data from one large employer that offers LTD coverage. The data comes from Alcoa,
Inc., a large, multinational manufacturing firm that annually employed roughly 48,000 employees within the
United States residing within 24 different states during our sample period. Approximately half of the the
firm’s employees are offered LTD benefits. The data include information on LTD benefit menus, enrollment
decisions, wages, employment status, basic demographics, and LTD claim payments.
As is typical with employer-provided LTD policies, the policies offered by this employer guarantee a stated
replacement rate in terms of annual earnings, with the explicit stipulation that LTD claimants must apply for
SSDI, and, if approved, SSDI benefits crowd-out LTD benefits dollar-for-dollar.37 The LTD policies at this firm
insure relatively long duration disability spells, as workers cannot place an LTD claim until he/she has been
disabled for at least six months.38 In this way, LTD policies at this firm largely operate as a means to topup the replacement rate of the public program. For the remainder of the empirical application, we make the
simplifying assumption that the LTD plans provide pure top-up insurance for SSDI. While this simplification
is helpful in interpreting the lower bound on the value of the inframarignal coverage, the simplification is not
necessary to have a meaningful interpretation of the marginal coverage welfare analysis.39
Estimation Setting For the empirical application, we focus on employees offered the most common LTD
benefit menu containing three vertically differentiated plans with replacement rates of 50%, 60%, and 70%,
which we denote as Plan L, Plan M, and Plan H, respectively. We focus on the years in which this menu is
consistently available, 2003-2006. Employees choose a LTD plan during the annual open enrollment period
in November.40 The selected plan is effective for the following calendar year, where disabilities that originate
within that calendar year are covered if the disability results in time out of work in excess of six months.
37 Based on notes in the LTD claims data regarding SSDI application status, the requirement to apply to SSDI seems to be enforced.
The crowd-out of SSDI benefits is in terms of pre-tax monetary benefits (not post-tax benefits), which is an important consideration when
incorporating the differential tax treatment of LTD benefits and SSDI benefits. We discuss this further in the robustness analysis in Section
4.
38 This required period of disability before applying for benefits is often referred to as the “elimination period”. Autor, Duggan and
Gruber (2012) analyze data from a large LTD insurer covering policies offered by nearly ten thousand unique employers, and they report
that nearly two-thirds of beneficiaries have LTD insurance with a shorter elimination period than the firm we study, with the most common
elimination period being 90 days.
39 In our empirical context, the LTD plans offered by the firm only vary with respect to the replacement rate. Since the identification
relies on comparing different LTD plans, the comparability of LTD and SSDI coverage in terms of quality is not important for identification.
Though LTD and SSDI appear to be of similar quality in this setting, it is important to think about how any differences in quality would
affect the interpretation of our analysis. The interpretation of some of our welfare analysis is largely unchanged by the comparability of
SSDI and LTD coverage. For instance, our estimate of the welfare associated with the observed market for a 70% LTD plan relative to
a 60% LTD plan (in Table 6 Panel A row 1) is the same regardless of the degree of comparability. However, if LTD and SSDI coverage
are not comparable, we would need to interpret the inframarginal welfare bound as more narrowly representing a bound on the value
of inframarginal disability coverage of quality comparable to LTD insurance. Similarly, if LTD and SSDI coverage are not comparable,
we would want to interpret our analysis of counterfactuals related to extending the generosity of disability insurance as more narrowly
applying to an insurance extension of comparable quality to LTD coverage (e.g., mandating the purchase of the marginal LTD coverage).
40 In the event that an employee does not actively select a LTD plan, the employee is assigned to a default level of coverage. Plan M
is the default coverage for new employees, and the default for continuing employees is their coverage choice from the previous year.
Importantly, individuals in plans consistent with these default options could have actively chosen these plans. In Section 4, we analyze
the robustness of our results to excluding individuals who appear to not be active choosers based on their insurance allocations across the
range of employee benefits offered by this firm.

21

Table 2 describes the menu of LTD policies offered during our sample period, displaying the plan premiums by year both in levels and relative to the plan of adjacent quality. In this setting, both benefits and
premiums are described in terms of an individual’s annual earnings. To ease interpretation, Table 2 also displays the premiums scaled by $60K, which is roughly the median annual earnings in the estimation sample.
From this table, one can see that there are several nice properties of the data for this empirical application.
First, the basic 50% replacement rate plan is free for all employees. This is convenient as no one opts out of the
plans, and thus claims data are available for all employees in the sample. Second, there is variation over time
in the incremental premium for the highest generosity coverage. For a worker with earnings of $60K annually,
the premium for Plan H (relative to Plan M) falls by $33 on a baseline of $98, representing a one third price
decline relative to the baseline premium. Thus, while the Plan H relative price change is modest in absolute
terms, it is fairly large in relative terms.41
In this setting with vertically differentiated plans, the demand for a plan is determined by the premium
relative to the premiums for the adjacent plans, provided that no plans are dominated in the observed range of
premiums. Consistent with this intuition, the bottom panel of Table 2 illustrates that the decline in the Plan H
premium between 2003 and 2004 is associated with a sharp increase in Plan H enrollment and a sharp decline
in Plan M enrollment, while Plan L enrollment is largely unaffected. The primary estimation focuses on the
demand and costs associated with the incremental 10% replacement rate moving from Plan M to Plan H. That
is, the estimation focuses on estimating the demand for a 10 percentage point increase in the replacement rate
starting from a baseline replacement rate of 60%. Although there is a small amount of variation in the Plan
M premium that could be used to investigate the demand for Plan M (relative to Plan L), there are two key
reasons why we focus on the Plan H demand for our baseline estimation. First, from inspecting Table 2, one
can see that the relative premium for Plan H (compared to Plan M) varies more than five times as much as the
relative premium for Plan M (compared to Plan L) varies; thus, we obtain more precise estimates by focusing
on the demand for Plan H coverage. Second, under the assumptions used to derive the bound in Section 1,
focusing on the demand for Plan H provides a more conservative lower bound on the welfare provided by
public insurance.42
Measuring Variables for Analysis The primary data needed for the analysis are cost data, premium data,
and coverage data. While measuring premiums and coverage are straightforward, there are a few subtle issues that arise when measuring costs in this setting. The ideal cost data would follow all realized disability
spells through their entire duration to calculate the cost measures used in the welfare analysis. Because the dis41 Another way to benchmark the price change is to compare it to the mean insurer costs for this coverage. In these terms, the magnitude
of the Plan H relative price drop is 35% of the mean cost for the incremental coverage among those enrolled in Plan H.
42 Appendix C provides suggestive evidence on the validity of the assumptions used to derive the bound by comparing the baseline
Plan H demand estimates to Plan M demand estimates that we obtain by leveraging the modest amount of available variation in the price
for Plan M (relative to Plan L).

22

ability spells we focus on originated relatively recently (our sample period is 2003-2006), many of the disability
spells are still unfinished, and thus, this ideal information following each spell through its entire duration is
not available.43 In practice, we have data on LTD claims paid through 2011, which means that all disability
spells originating during the period of coverage (2003-2006) are observed through at least the first five years
of the spell. Although complete data is not available for censored spells, we can construct proxies for the total
realized costs using the data that is available. In our baseline analysis, we use a conservative measure of costs
where we calculate the maximum potential costs by extending those spells truncated at five years to their maximum possible duration and imputing the lost wages.44 Because our aim is to estimate a lower bound on the
welfare provided by disability insurance, this conservative measure is appropriate. However, we also repeat
the welfare analysis with alternative (less conservative) cost measures and display the results in Appendix D
for comparison. The primary cost measure used in the welfare analysis is the mean present discounted value
of the realized costs relative to annual earnings associated with the incremental 10 percentage point increase
in the replacement rate. The baseline cost measure is constructed using an interest rate of 4%, and additional
analysis in Appendix D illustrates that the results are robust to a range of alternative interest rates.
One aim of the welfare analysis is to estimate a lower bound on the wage replacement benefits of public
disability insurance. In this analysis, we focus on bounding the surplus generated by compulsory disability
insurance coverage of generosity equal to the mean SSDI replacement rate in the estimation sample, where we
calculate an individual’s SSDI replacement rate using the SSA formula replacing the AIME with the monthly
wage rate according to the firm’s human resources records. We note this is an imperfect calculation because
the data does not contain each worker’s full work history which would be needed to precisely calculate the
AIME following the SSA formula.
Summary Statistics and Identifying Variation The estimation sample is restricted to salaried employees
who are actively employed in the previous calendar year, who are subject to the relevant LTD benefit menu,
and who have an SSDI replacement rate less than 50%.45 This final restriction ensures that for all the employees
in the sample, the LTD plans offered by the firm all provide coverage that goes beyond SSDI’s coverage. To
ensure the workers in the estimation sample are comparable over time, we exclude workers at job sites that
open or close during the period of analysis (2003-2006), and we exclude workers at job sites that experience
very large fluctuations in employment during the period of analysis (job sites at which the percent change in
43 Notice that this is not just a data availability issue. Many of the disability spells originating during the period of coverage (2003-2006)
are currently still unfinished. Thus, even with the most up-to-date data available to claims administrators, there would still be a censoring
issue.
44 Specifically, regardless of when the disability spell originated, we use the cost data to measure the length of the spell over the first
five years and extend spells that continue through the end of this five year window to their maximum possible duration. The maximum
possible duration of benefits is set by the LTD insurance policies and depends on the age at disability. For those disabled before age 60,
benefits may be paid until the individual turns age 65. For those disabled after age 60, the benefits may continue for a maximum of five
years.
45 The restriction that workers be “actively employed” means that the workers were employed continuously at the firm and were not on
leave, paid or unpaid, during the previous calendar year.

23

employment from the minimum to the maximum employment year exceeded 75%).46
Figure 4 describes the public and top-up private disability coverage available to employees at the firm.
The horizontal axis displays the monthly earnings, and the right vertical axis displays the associated pre-tax
monthly potential disability benefit. The solid line displays the SSDI public disability benefit formula for the
year 2003 (the first year of our sample), while the remaining three lines display the benefit formula for those
who have one of the firm’s three available top-up private LTD plans in addition to SSDI public disability
insurance. The estimation sample focuses on individuals with an SSDI replacement rate less than 50% (the
Plan L replacement rate). In terms of this figure, these are the individuals whose monthly earnings lie to the
right of the intersection of the “with Plan L top-up” line and the “SSDI” line. This level of monthly earnings
based on the 2003 benefit formula is roughly $2,020 which is indicated in the figure by the vertical reference
line. In addition to displaying the public and private potential disability benefits, this figure also displays a
histogram of the monthly earnings for all salaried employees.47 As can be seen in this figure, the vast majority
of salaried employees at the firm have high enough earnings that their implied SSDI replacement rate lies
below the 50% threshold used to define the estimation sample.
Table 3 compares employees in the estimation sample (column 3) to the entire employee population at the
firm (column 1) and to all salaried employees at the firm (column 2). From inspecting Table 3, one can see that
the mean employee tenure is approximately 13 years. The majority of employees are male, and the median
age is 45. The estimation sample contains roughly 23% of the overall employee population. Those in the
estimation sample differ from the wider employee population at the firm along a couple of dimensions: those
in the estimation sample are salaried employees (as opposed to hourly employees) and earn higher wages on
average. The median wage is roughly $60K in the estimation sample, while the median wage is approximately
$36.5K across the entire firm. Along several other dimensions such race, age, sex, and company tenure, the
estimation sample and the overall employee population look quite similar.
For comparison, Table 3 columns (4) through (7) report analogous summary statistics for employees in
the Current Population Survey (CPS), pooling data across 2004-2007. Comparing columns (1) and (4), we see
that employees in the firm and a nationally representative sample of employees in the CPS appear broadly
similar in terms of mean age and mean annual earnings, but quite different in terms of gender composition.
The difference in gender composition can be explained by industry, as the employees at the firm (column 1)
and manufacturing employees in the CPS (column 5) look very similar along this dimension. Examining the
table further, we can see that the salaried employees at the firm (column 2) look similar in terms of observable
characteristics to manufacturing employees in the CPS with white collar occupations (column 6).48 Lastly,
46 Because the identification strategy leverages over time variation, we make this restriction to ensure the sample is relatively homogeneous year-to-year.
47 In this figure, monthly earnings are censored at ($200,000/12).
48 The definition of white collar occupations used here encompasses individuals who report professional or managerial occupations.

24

comparing the estimation sample (column 3) to the sample in the CPS that meets an analogous selection criteria
(column 7), one can see that they look broadly similar on observables such as age, gender, race, and annual
earnings. Overall, it is important to emphasize that neither the firm’s overall employee population nor the
estimation sample are representative of employees in the United States as a whole, so one should exercise
appropriate caution in interpreting the estimates. That being said, along the lines of observable attributes, the
employees in the estimation sample look similar to manufacturing, white collar employees more broadly.
To identify the demand for Plan H, we utilize a straightforward over-time identification strategy exploiting
the sharp decrease in Plan H premiums between 2003 and 2004. Importantly, we have three years of data after
the price change to trace out any underlying time trends. The key identification assumption is that absent
the price change, the take-up of Plan H would not have changed discontinuously between 2003 and 2004.
While we cannot test this assumption directly, we can provide several pieces of evidence in support of this
assumption. First, the aggregates reported in Table 2 provide some support for this assumption. We see that
coincident with the sharp drop in premiums between 2003 and 2004 there is a sharp increase in the take-up of
Plan H, and this increase in Plan H market share comes at the expense of Plan M, as expected if the change in
market share was due to the relative price change. Moreover, we see that both the Plan H market share and the
relative premium for Plan H are stable thereafter, from 2004 to 2006. Second, as we discuss further below, our
analysis in Table 4 indicates that the identifying variation is unrelated to observable employee characteristics
that may be important determinants of the demand for disability insurance. Third, we demonstrate that the
welfare analysis is robust to the inclusion/exclusion of covariates in the demand estimation (e.g., a time trend,
demographic controls, individual fixed effects, etc.).
Table 4 explores whether the identifying variation is related to observable characteristics of employees.
Since the identifying variation stems from a sharp change in premiums between 2003 and 2004, it is important
to demonstrate that the estimation sample is comparable across years in all other ways. Column (1) summarizes demographic information for employees in the sample during 2003 (the year in which the relative price
for Plan H was the highest), while columns (2) through (4) display summary statistics for the subsequent three
years, during which the relative price for Plan H was lower and quite stable. Across these columns, the table
summarizes observable employee information by year, along with the overall mean predicted probability of the
worker claiming LTD based on the worker’s observable characteristics (denoted by “predicted LTD claims”).
This predicted probability is simply the fitted value from regressing an indicator for having a disability claim
on all the observable attributes summarized in Table 4, where we control flexibly for age and wage using indicators for deciles of these distributions. Inspecting this table, we see the sample looks very similar across the
four years in terms of age, job tenure, fraction male, earnings, and predicted LTD claims. In particular, there
is no evidence of a problematic break in observables coincident with the Plan H price decrease between 2003

25

and 2004. We also investigate this in a slightly different way, relating the continuous (relative) price for Plan
H to each of these worker characteristics including a time trend. The coefficients and p-values associated with
these pair-wise regressions, reported in columns (5) and (6), collectively illustrate that the identifying variation
is unrelated to the observable characteristics. In addition, we cannot reject that all of these observables are
jointly unrelated to the premium variation (p-value 0.34). Overall, the evidence from Table 4 illustrates that
the identifying premium variation is unrelated to observable characteristics.

3

Empirical Strategy and Connection to Welfare Framework

Applying Framework To apply the framework outlined in Section 1, we make the following assumption:
Assumption 1. For an individual represented by ϕ, define the demand for insurance generosity: v(w, θ|ϕ) ≡
∂
∂θ π(w, θ, 0|ϕ).

For all individuals (i.e., for all ϕ), suppose that (i) v(w, θ|ϕ) is weakly decreasing in θ , and (ii)

v(w, θ|ϕ) is weakly decreasing in w .
We implement this analysis by estimating the demand and costs associated with a 10 percentage point
increase in the replacement rate starting from a baseline of 60% wage replacement in the event of disability
(moving from Plan M to Plan H among the plans offered by the firm). Thus, the empirical application departs
from the initial basic framework in Section 1 in that there is a wedge between the willingness-to-pay we estimate (moving from a 60% to 70% replacement rate) and the replacement rate of compulsory public insurance
(on average 34% in our estimation sample). Under Assumption 1, π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) is decreasing in α, and we
apply Proposition 1 to obtain a lower bound (analogous to that in Corollary 1) on the welfare associated with
compulsory disability insurance of generosity αP ublic relative to no insurance coverage in the presence of the
status quo allocation of supplemental insurance:
Z

W elf are P ublic =
π(w, αP ublic , 0|ϕ) − c(w, αP ublic , 0|ϕ) dG(ϕ)
Z n

αP ublic
αP ublic
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) −
c(w, αobs (ϕ), 0|ϕ) dG(ϕ), (16)
≥
δ
αobs (ϕ)
where αobs (ϕ) is the observed aggregate replacement rate across public and supplemental insurance for
individual ϕ.49 In addition to calculating this bound, we also analyze the welfare generated by the marginal
coverage moving from a 60% to a 70% replacement rate. Under the assumption used to calculate the inframarginal welfare bound (Assumption 1), the value of the incremental coverage, W elf are Extn(∞|α + 0.1, α),
is decreasing in the baseline coverage α. Thus, under Assumption 1, we can interpret the welfare associated
with the marginal coverage as a lower bound on the welfare obtained by a 10 percentage point increase in the
replacement rate, starting from the lower replacement rate of public disability coverage.
49 Because the counterfactuals we consider allow for moral hazard, we leverage Proposition 1 to derive the population-level bound we
implement rather than Proposition 2. See Section 1 for further comparison of these propositions.

26

Demand To analyze welfare, we estimate the demand for supplemental coverage. In the disability insurance
setting, an individual’s coverage and an individual’s premium are defined relative to the individual’s annual
earnings, and the variation used to identify the demand curve is in the relative premium for supplemental
coverage. Thus, we estimate the demand curve in relative terms and then discuss how this demand curve is
M
used in the welfare analysis below. Let pH
it and pit represent the premium (relative to annual earnings) faced

by individual i in year t for Plan H and Plan M, respectively. Let rπ (θ, γ|ϕ) =

π(w,θ,γ|ϕ)
w

denote the relative

willingness to pay for generosity θ coverage over the outside option of γ coverage. The focus of the empirical
analysis is on estimating demand for Plan H relative to Plan M: the distribution of rπ (0.7, 0.6|ϕ). To recover
this relative demand curve from the empirical setting, we assume that none of these vertically differentiated
products are dominated in the ranges of prices observed in the data, so that the relevant price for tracing out
the relative demand curve for a product is the price compared to that of the adjacent products. Under this
M
assumption, we can use variation in the relative price for Plan H over Plan M, (pH
it − pit ), to trace out the

distribution of rπ (0.7, 0.6|ϕ).
Given rich enough variation in relative prices, one could in principle estimate a nonparametric demand
curve for the incremental coverage, giving one an almost fully nonparametric bound on welfare generated by
the compulsory insurance (under the minimal conditions within Assumption 1 above). Though we leverage a
fairly large relative price change for Plan H compared to Plan M, this price variation translates into a modest
change in the quantity of individuals insured through Plan H, moving the share insured under Plan H from
60% to 64% of employees. Given a primary aim of our analysis is to estimate the mean willingness-to-pay for
the incremental coverage (i.e., the integral under the demand curve across the population), we must rely on a
parametric specification of demand. In the face of these practical constraints, we conduct our baseline welfare
analysis leveraging a linear demand specification and then show the key findings from the welfare analysis are
robust to several alternative demand specifications.50 In our baseline specification, we estimate the demand
for Plan H coverage using the following estimation equation:
M
H
M
P lanHit = I(rπ (0.7, 0.6|ϕ) ≥ pH
it − pit ) = α0 + α1 (pit − pit ) + ρXit + it ,

(17)

M
where P lanHi indicates if individual i selected Plan H and (pH
it − pit ) is the price of Plan H relative to Plan

M. The baseline demand estimation includes a time trend to control for any unrelated trends in insurance enrollment that may be correlated with the identifying variation. Further analysis presented in Section 4 demonstrates that the welfare analysis is robust to several other alternative specifications of demand, including alternative included/excluded covariates (e.g., no controls, individual fixed effects, etc.) and alternative demand
forms (e.g., probit demand, logit demand, linear-log demand, log-log demand, etc.).
50 Although the shape of the demand curve certainly varies across alternative functional form extrapolations, the implied mean
willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance is less sensitive to the specific extrapolation. Thus, the resulting lower bound on the
value of the inframarignal coverage is in the same general range across the functional form extrapolations for demand that we investigate.
See Table 7 for this robustness analysis.

27

Costs While cost data is not necessary to measure the willingness-to-pay for disability insurance, to fully
evaluate welfare it is necessary to have data on costs. We use individual-level data on disability claims to
analyze costs, where we use realized costs as a proxy for expected costs. As is the case with demand, costs
are measured relative to annual earnings. Let cit represent the present discounted value of the realized costs
relative to annual earnings associated with providing individual i in year t an incremental 10% replacement
rate paid in the event of disability. We use an interest rate of 4% in the baseline estimation.51 Our focus
throughout is on the wage replacement costs for disability insurance, abstracting from administrative costs.52
With regard to analyzing costs, the empirical environment has both strengths and weaknesses. A strength
of the empirical environment is that there is individual-level administrative cost data. While in principle one
could use the very same price variation used to estimate the demand curves to estimate moral hazard and
selection, a practical limitation is that it is difficult to obtain precise estimates of selection and moral hazard
within the context of disability insurance because realized costs are noisy proxies for expected costs given the
low incidence of disability.53 In the face of these strengths and weaknesses, we take the following approach.
First, our baseline welfare analysis focuses on estimating welfare in the status quo allocation of insurance. Since
this estimation draws on observed realized costs, this analysis fully incorporates moral hazard and selection
within the status quo insurance allocation. Second, we analyze welfare within counterfactuals that depart
from the status quo allocation of insurance under a wide range of assumptions on the moral hazard elasticity.54
Overall, we find that the key lessons of the counterfactual welfare analysis are not very sensitive to the amount
of incremental moral hazard within a plausible range of elasticities.

4

Empirical Application: Estimates and Welfare Analysis

Estimates Table 5 displays the demand and cost estimates. Panel A columns (1) and (2) display linear demand estimates for Plan H coverage, without individual fixed effects (column 1) and with individual fixed
effects (column 2). Across these specifications, we see that an increase in the relative premium for Plan H is
associated with a statistically significant decline in the share of individuals with this disability plan. Drawing
on the estimates from column (1), the magnitude implies that an increase in the premium for Plan H by 0.1%
of annual earnings would lead the share of individuals enrolled in Plan H to decline by 7 percentage points (or
11% of the mean value). Table 5 Panel A also displays the mean implied willingness-to-pay for the incremental
coverage based on these regression estimates, along with the associated bootstrapped standard error. Using
51 Additional

analysis presented in Appendix D illustrates that our results are robust to a range of alternative interest rates.
we have no data on administrative costs and thus abstract from such costs here, it would be straightforward to calculate
alternative welfare measures incorporating administrative costs. Because the welfare analysis discussed below illustrates that the marginal
disability coverage generates substantial surplus, incorporating even quite large administrative costs would not affect the qualitative
findings.
53 While our baseline welfare analysis does not depend on estimating moral hazard or selection, we exploit the available price variation
to investigate these and report the results in Appendix B. As noted in the text, this analysis has limited statistical power due to the low
incidence of disability claims.
54 As will become clear, the counterfactuals we focus on do not require estimating the degree of selection.
52 While

28

these estimates from column (1), the implied annual mean willingness-to-pay for the incremental coverage
provided by Plan H is 0.31% of annual earnings, or $202 for an individual earning $65K annually (roughly the
mean annual earnings in the sample population). The 95% confidence interval allows us to rule out estimates
less than 0.25% of annual earnings or more than 0.37% of annual earnings.55 The implied valuation of the
incremental coverage is similar when employing estimates from a specification with individual fixed effects
(column 2). Table 5 Panel B displays the mean observed costs scaled to represent a 10% replacement rate for all
and separately for those who do and those who do not purchase supplemental coverage. Comparing Panels
A and B, the mean willingness-to-pay for incremental coverage in the population is large relative to the mean
observed costs among the insured or among the sample population overall.
Implied Welfare Analysis Next, we present the welfare analysis based on these estimates. For each scenario considered, Table 6 reports the mean willingness-to-pay and welfare per dollar of annual earnings using
the demand estimates from Table 5 column 1. The table reports the associated bootstrapped standard errors,
and reported per-capita mean values are evaluated over the entire sample population.56 In addition, we also
present two scaled versions of these measures to ease interpretation. The table reports the mean willingnessto-pay and welfare as a percent of the mean per-capita cost associated with the counterfactual. To contextualize
the relative estimates in terms of dollars, the table also reports the mean willingness-to-pay and welfare measures scaled by $65K, approximately the mean annual earnings in the sample. Note that scaling the estimates
by the mean annual earnings provides an unbiased estimate of these welfare measures in dollar terms if earnings are uncorrelated with the relative willingness-to-pay for disability coverage.57
Table 6 Panel A presents our baseline welfare analysis analyzing the welfare associated with the marginal
and inframarginal coverage under the observed allocation of supplemental insurance in the status quo. Row
(1) displays welfare associated with the incremental coverage evaluated at the mean observed allocation of
supplemental coverage. Because the mean observed allocation of the incremental coverage is very close to the
allocation under a competitive equilibrium for this coverage, these welfare measures approximate the welfare
associated with a competitive market for the incremental coverage.58 The per-capita mean willingness-to-pay
associated with the observed market for the incremental coverage is 0.36% of annual earnings, or $233 annually
when scaled by $65K. The implied per-capita welfare associated with the market for incremental coverage is
0.26% of annual earnings, or $170 annually when scaled by $65K. Row (2) presents the implied lower bound on
55 This confidence interval is based on the bootstrapped standard error on the mean willingness-to-pay reported in Table 5, where we
utilize 10,000 bootstrap samples.
56 The bootstrapped standard errors are calculated using 10,000 bootstrap samples.
57 Note that this scaling will underestimate the value of disability coverage in dollar terms if instead the relative surplus from disability
coverage is positively correlated with annual earnings.
58 Comparing the estimates within Table 5 Panel B, the mean relative price for the incremental Plan H coverage is very close to the
average cost of those individuals willing to pay for the incremental coverage. In other words, the predicted competitive equilibrium in
the market for the incremental coverage would be close to the observed pair of average prices and quantities regardless of the shape of
the average and marginal cost curves far outside of the variation in the data. Thus, we can think of the mean observed allocation as an
approximation of the competitive equilibrium. See Appendix B for more details.

29

the welfare associated with the inframarginal disability insurance providing a 34% replacement rate, the mean
public disability replacement rate among individuals in the sample. The mean willingness-to-pay for public
disability coverage is at least 1.05% of annual earnings, or 279% of the per-capita cost of this coverage. The
implied per-capita welfare of this coverage is at least 0.68% of annual earnings, or $440 when scaled by $65K.
Overall, there are two key findings. First, the observed market for supplemental insurance coverage generates substantial surplus. Second, the observed demand and costs within the supplemental insurance market
provide a meaningful lower bound on the value of the inframarginal public disability insurance coverage,
indicating that individuals highly value the public coverage relative to the costs of providing it.
It is important to emphasize that our baseline welfare measures in Table 6 Panel A fully incorporate moral
hazard, and thus implicitly the trade-off between risk protection and moral hazard (e.g, Chetty (2008), Baily
(1978)). To see this, note that the observed costs in the supplemental insurance market are inclusive of any
moral hazard induced by the status quo allocation of insurance coverage. This means that the observed costs
are the relevant costs for calculating the welfare associated with the observed supplemental insurance market
and the lower bound on the welfare associated with the inframarginal public coverage in the presence of the
observed supplemental insurance market. Thus, the lower bound in Row (2) Panel A indicates that public
disability coverage is highly valued relative to the costs of this coverage inclusive of moral hazard induced by
the public coverage and the observed allocation of LTD supplemental coverage.
Next, we consider welfare under counterfactual allocations of insurance that depart from the observed
allocation. To evaluate welfare under these counterfactual insurance allocations, we will need an estimate
of moral hazard—-the degree to which costs respond as one increases or decreases coverage relative to the
observed allocation. In theory, an advantage of this general approach is that the same data and variation
used to estimate demand could be used to explore moral hazard. In practice, there is limited power to detect
moral hazard in our empirical setting given the observed range of variation and the low incidence of disability
claims.59 Thus, we analyze welfare in counterfactual allocations of insurance under a range of moral hazard
elasticities to illustrate how these welfare estimates vary with the degree of moral hazard.
Table 6 Panel B presents estimates of welfare under a hypothetical compulsory insurance extension from
a baseline 60% replacement rate to a 70% replacement rate relative to a setting where individuals do not have
access to this incremental coverage.60 Each column displays these estimates under the stated assumed moral
hazard semi-elasticity: the percentage change in the PDV of lost earnings due to disability with respect to a
change in the replacement rate. There are a few key take-aways from this additional analysis. First, the in59 Appendix B exploits the available price variation to investigate moral hazard in this setting. As noted in the text, this analysis has
limited statistical power due to the low incidence of disability claims.
60 For employees on Plan H, we observe costs inclusive of any moral hazard associated with the incremental coverage. However, for
individuals on Plan M and Plan L we need to project what their costs would have been under Plan H. If there is no moral hazard, this
is simply the costs associated with a 10% replacement rate applied to their observed mean per-unit of coverage costs. If there is moral
hazard, we inflate these costs by the appropriate moral hazard semi-elasticity in the calculations in Table 6.

30

cremental disability coverage is associated with substantial surplus if moral hazard is in the range of prior
estimates. Prior studies in other disability settings have found that a 10 percentage point increase in the replacement rate leads to approximately an 8-10% increase in disability (e.g., Gruber (2000), Autor, Duggan and
Gruber (2012)).61 If the moral hazard elasticity is in the range of these prior estimates, the net welfare from extending the generosity of disability insurance is at least 78% of the cost of providing this coverage. Second, the
incremental disability coverage is associated with positive surplus for a much broader range of moral hazard
elasticities; in this population, the incremental disability coverage is associated with positive surplus provided
that a 10 percentage point increase in the replacement rate leads to less than a 38% increase in lost earnings due
to disability. Third, comparing Panel A and Panel B, we see that mandating the incremental coverage does not
increase surplus relative to a private voluntary market for this coverage.
It is important to emphasize that the estimates come from a particular population that is not representative
of workers more broadly. However, based on these estimates, workers in this population seem to highly value
the inframarginal disability coverage offered by public disability insurance, and, if it were not for the fact
that this firm offers fairly priced supplemental coverage, there would likely be significant welfare gains from
extending the generosity of public coverage for these workers. Below, we demonstrate that the key findings
are robust to a wide range of alternative specifications. The general qualitative result— that individuals highly
value disability insurance on the margin— is in line with the findings from prior studies related to disability
insurance. Prior studies by Low and Pistaferri (2015) and Chandra and Samwick (2005) employ calibrated lifecycle models to quantify the welfare associated with disability insurance. While the approach in these studies
is quite different from our willingness-to-pay approach, these calibration studies provide similar qualitative
findings as they predict that extending the generosity of SSDI would improve welfare.62
Robustness Next, we illustrate the robustness of the welfare analysis to a variety of alternative specifications.
In the interest of brevity, the discussion focuses on the robustness of the estimated lower bound on the value
of public coverage. For each alternative specification considered, Table 7 Panel A displays the implied lower
bound on the mean willingness-to-pay and welfare generated by public insurance, and Table 7 Panel B displays
the underlying parameter estimates corresponding to each alternative specification. The first rows of each
panel of Table 7 display the baseline welfare measures and linear demand estimates for reference.
Because the welfare analysis requires us to extrapolate outside the empirical variation in premiums, the
61 Gruber (2000) estimates the effect of benefit generosity on labor force participation using variation in public disability insurance
generosity in Canada. Autor, Duggan and Gruber (2012) estimate the effect of benefit generosity on the probability of claiming LTD using
variation across employers in LTD offerings, focusing on plans that typically have much shorter elimination periods than the plans in our
setting. Though these prior studies estimate slightly different elasticities than the elasticity of interest in the present setting, we use these
prior estimates to contextualize the results in Table 6 Panel B.
62 Given the large stakes associated with disability risk and the incomplete coverage available from other sources, it is perhaps not
surprising that individuals would highly value an incremental increase in coverage for this risk. The threat of a career-ending disability is
arguably the largest adverse financial shock faced by many individuals. Prior work by Dobkin et al. (2017) has found that while individuals
tend to have close to complete coverage for the medical costs associated with health shocks, individuals have relatively little coverage for
the earnings losses associated with severe health shocks.

31

functional form of the demand curve could meaningfully influence the welfare estimates. Thus, we assess the
robustness of our findings by considering alternative demand forms. Rows (2) and (3) present estimates from
alternative probit and logit demand specifications, respectively. An undesirable property of the linear demand
estimates is that the implied willingness-to-pay for those with the lowest willingness-to-pay is below zero. To
address this concern, we consider several additional alternative specifications. Row (4) displays alternative
welfare measures based on the baseline linear demand curve truncated at an implied valuation of zero. Row
(5) displays a linear-log specification, while Row (6) displays a log-log specification where both quantity and
premiums enter in logs. Because unconstrained linear-log and log-log specifications yield somewhat unrealistically high valuations of LTD in the upper tail and our aim is to obtain a lower bound, we constrain the
estimated demand curves in Rows (5) and (6) such that the maximum willingness-to-pay for Plan H incremental coverage is 1% of annual earnings. Overall, we obtain a meaningful lower bound on the value of public
coverage across all of these demand specifications, ranging from 0.5% to 0.9% of annual earnings.
Next, we consider the robustness of the analysis with respect to the variation used to estimate demand.
Because the identification relies on over-time variation, it is important that individuals in the sample in different years are comparable to one another. In addition to the evidence in Table 4 that observable characteristics
look similar across time, we illustrate that our results are robust to the inclusion/exclusion of a wide range of
controls. The baseline specification estimates Equation 17 where we include a time trend to control for any unrelated trends in coverage that could be correlated with the identifying variation. Row (7) displays the results
associated with estimating Equation 17 with no controls, and Row (8) displays the results associated with estimating Equation 17 with additional controls for demographic characteristics.63 Row (9) displays the results of
the individual fixed effects specification, and Row (10) displays the results from a propensity score re-weighted
regression, where observations are re-weighted to look demographically alike to individuals in the first year
of the sample. Taken together, the results in Table 7 rows (7) through (10) illustrate that the welfare bounds are
qualitatively and quantitatively similar with the inclusion of more or fewer controls.
We also consider robustness with respect to the tax treatment of premiums and benefits. For the LTD plans
offered at this employer, premiums are paid by employees with pre-tax dollars, and the benefits individuals
receive from their LTD policy in the event of a disability are taxable. In contrast, SSDI benefits are largely
exempt from tax.64 Because it is not clear that employees know the differential tax treatment of each of these,
premiums and the benefits are treated symmetrically in the baseline specification. Row (11) reports the results
from an alternative specification that reflects the tax treatment of premiums and benefits, where we assume
LTD premiums are paid with pre-tax dollars, LTD benefits individuals receive are taxable, and public SSDI
benefits are not taxable (effectively raising the mean SSDI replacement rate from 34% to 52%). For simplicity,
63 Specifically,
64 See

the demographic covariates included in this specification are age, sex, and race.
this SSA website describing the tax treatment of SSDI benefits: https://www.ssa.gov/planners/taxes.html.

32

we assume that the same marginal tax rate is applicable to premiums and benefits, and we use a marginal tax
rate of 35%, roughly the average marginal tax rate among individuals in this sample accounting for state and
federal income taxes. While accounting for the tax treatment of LTD premiums and benefits leads to a lower
implied surplus for a fixed extension of LTD coverage, accounting for the tax treatment of public SSDI benefits
(and the effectively higher after-tax replacement rate) exactly offsets this giving us the same lower bound on
the welfare of public disability insurance as in the baseline specification.65
Lastly, drawing upon a strategy in prior work by Einav et al. (2012), we analyze the robustness of our results
to excluding employees who appear to be “passive” choosers.66 Row (12) reports the demand estimates and
associated welfare measures excluding the roughly 13% of employees in our sample who appear to be passive
choosers, where we characterize an individual as a passive chooser if at any point during the sample period
his/her insurance selections are completely consistent with all the default options across the range of employee
benefits offered by the firm including health insurance, prescription drug insurance, dental insurance, and
disability insurance.67 The results for the sub-sample of individuals who appear to be active choosers in each
year are very similar and statistically indistinguishable from the results for the baseline sample.

5

Conclusion

This paper outlined an approach to analyze welfare associated with compulsory public insurance relying on
data and variation from the private market for complementary insurance. This approach has several nice
properties as it requires straightforward variation, commonly available data, and minimal assumptions to
evaluate a wide range of welfare questions. Specifically, we described how the demand curve and costs from
the private market for complementary insurance can be used to investigate counterfactuals associated with
a marginal extension of the compulsory public coverage (a counterfactual that is within the set of observed
contracts), as well as estimate a lower bound on the welfare provided by compulsory public insurance.
We illustrated this framework by applying it to the setting of disability insurance, employing administrative data from one large employer. Based on our estimates, compulsory public disability insurance is associated with benefits that far exceed the costs of this coverage for this employee population, and, for a plausible
range of moral hazard elasticities, extending the generosity of compulsory public coverage would result in
substantial welfare gains for these employees if they would not otherwise have access to employer-provided
supplemental disability coverage. While one should exercise caution in extrapolating from the specific estimates, the fact that some workers highly value disability insurance beyond the incomplete compulsory public
coverage is interesting given that only a third of workers nationwide have access to employer-provided sup65 See

Appendix E for a more detailed description.
shown by Handel (2013), inertia can bias the results of welfare analysis based on estimated demand curves.
67 We create the individual-level measures of passive choice by comparing insurance selections to defaults for the range of employee benefits from 2004-2006, the time period for which we know the default options across all the other employee benefits (e.g., dental insurance,
health insurance, prescription drug insurance, etc).
66 As

33

plemental disability insurance. More generally, the analysis highlights that individuals’ willingness-to-pay for
supplemental coverage can provide useful insights into the value of compulsory public insurance.

References
Autor, David, Andreas Ravndal Kostol, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler. 2017. “Disability Benefits,
Consumption Insurance, and Household Labor Supply.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 23466.
Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2006. “The Growth in the Social Security Disability Rolls: A Fiscal
Crisis Unfolding.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3): 71–96.
Autor, David, Mark Duggan, and Jonathan Gruber. 2012. “Moral Hazard and Claims Deterrence in Private
Disability Insurance.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18172.
Baily, Martin Neil. 1978. “Some aspects of optimal unemployment insurance.” Journal of Public Economics,
10(3): 379 – 402.
Bundorf, M. Kate, Jonathan D. Levin, and Neale Mahoney. 2012. “Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan Choice.”
American Economic Review, 102(7): 3214–3248.
Cabral, Marika, and Neale Mahoney. 2014. “Externalities and Taxation of Supplemental Insurance: A Study
of Medicare and Medigap.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19787.
Chandra, Amitabh, and Andrew A. Samwick. 2005. “Disability Risk and the Value of Disability Insurance.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11605.
Chetty, Raj. 2008. “Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance.” Journal of Political
Economy, 116(2): 173–234.
Chetty, Raj, and Amy Finkelstein. 2013. “Social Insurance: Connecting Theory to Data.” Handbook of Public
Economics, 5: 111.
Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez. 2010. “Optimal Taxation and Social Insurance with Endogenous Private
Insurance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(2): 85–114.
Dobkin, Carlos Dobkin, Amy Finkelstein, Raymond Kluender, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2017. “The
Economic Consequences of Hospital Admissions.” forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Eeckhoudt, Louis, and Christian Gollier. 2001. “Which Shape for the Cost Curve of Risk?” The Journal of Risk
and Insurance, 68(3): 387–401.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Heidi Williams. 2016. “Paying on the Margin for Medical Care: Evidence
from Breast Cancer Treatments.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8: 52–79.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Jonathan Levin. 2010. “Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of Insurance
Markets.” Annual Review of Economics, 2: 311–336.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen. 2010. “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets Using
Variation in Prices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3): 877–921.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Iuliana Pascu, and Mark R. Cullen. 2012. “How General Are Risk Preferences?
Choices under Uncertainty in Different Domains.” American Economic Review, 102: 2606–2638.
Einav, Liran, and Amy Finkelstein. 2011. “Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Empirics in Pictures.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 115–38.
Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2015. “The Value of Medicaid: Interpreting
Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 21308.

34

Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance.” The American
Economic Review, 192–205.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2000. “Disability Insurance Benefits and Labor Supply.” Journal of Political Economy,
108(6): 1162–1183.
Hackmann, Martin, Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2015. “Adverse Selection and an Individual Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice.” American Economic Review, 105: 1030–66.
Handel, Benjamin, Igal Hendel, and Michael Whinston. 2015. “Equilibria in Health Exchanges: Adverse
Selection vs. Reclassification Risk.” Econometrica, 83(4): 1261–1313.
Handel, Benjamin R. 2013. “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging
Hurts.” American Economic Review, 103(7): 2643–82.
Hendren, Nathaniel. 2013. “Private Information and Insurance Rejections.” Econometrica, 81(5): 1713–1762.
Hendren, Nathaniel. 2017. “Measuring Ex-Ante Welfare in Insurance Markets.” working paper.
Kostol, Andreas Ravndal, and Magne Mogstad. 2015. “Earnings, Disposable Income, and Consumption of
Allowed and Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants.” The American Economic Review, 105(5): 137–141.
Liebman, Jeffrey B. 2015. “Understanding the Increase in Disability Insurance Benefit Receipt in the United
States.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2): 123–50.
Low, Hamish, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2015. “Disability Insurance and the Dynamics of the Incentive Insurance
Trade-Off.” American Economic Review, 105(10): 2986–3029.
Menezes, C. F., and D. L. Hanson. 1970. “On the Theory of Risk Aversion.” International Economic Review,
11(3): 481–487.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Wallace K.C. Mok. 2013. “Disability, Earnings, Income and Consumption.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18869.
Thomson, Sarah, Robin Osborn, David Squires, and Miraya Jun. 2013. “International Profiles of Health Care
Systems, 2013: Australia, Canada, Denmark, England, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States.” The Commonwealth Fund.

35

Figure 1: Graphical Illustration: Marginal Coverage Counterfactuals

Price, $

Price, $

A

A
E

Demand curve: D-1(Q|α+δ, α)

Demand curve: D-1(Q|α+δ, α)
ACS curve : ACs(D-1 (Q|α+δ, α)|α+δ, α)
[=AC curve]

ACS curve : ACs(D-1 (Q|α+δ, α)|α+δ, α)
[=AC curve]

E
PCE K

PCE K

H

H
I

MC curve: MC(D-1 (Q|α+δ, α)|α+δ, α)

I

G
MCS curve: MCs(D-1 (Q|α+δ, α)|α+δ, α)

MCS curve: MCs(D-1 (Q|α+δ, α)|α+δ, α)
[=MC curve]

F
B

B
F
D

Externality= MC-MCs

QCE

C
Qmax =1

J

D

C
Qmax =Qeff =1

J

QCE

Qeff

Fraction w/ Supp Insurance (Q)

Fraction w/ Supp Insurance (Q)

(A) No Externality

(B) Externality

Notes: The above figure illustrates the welfare counterfactuals related to the incremental coverage sold in the existing market for supplemental insurance. Panel (A)
displays the case where there is no moral hazard and considers a competitive equilibrium as the relevant benchmark against which to measure the welfare associated
with a public insurance extension. Panel (B) displays the case where there is moral hazard such that the incremental coverage exerts a negative externality on the
primary insurer which is not internalized by the supplemental insurer when setting prices in the benchmark perfectly competitive private supplemental insurance
market.

Figure 2: Graphical Illustration: Bounding Surplus from Inframarginal Coverage for a Given Individual
Marginal Cost,
Marginal Value ($)

I
Estimate of value of incremental generosity based on supplemental
market:
π(w,α+δ, 0|φ)−π(w,α,0|φ) π(w, α+δ, α|φ)
(w, |φ)
=
≈
δ
δ
δ

F

G
H
D

c(w,θ,0|φ)

J

L

A

E
K

(w,θ|φ)

(w,θ|φ)
C

B

α

M

α+

1

Generosity (θ)

Notes: For an individual indexed by φ, this figure displays the individual’s demand for insurance on the intensive margin (e.g., the marginal valuation
∂
v(w, θ|ϕ) = ∂θ
π(w, θ, 0|ϕ)), where the horizontal axis represents the generosity of insurance (θ) and the vertical axis is measured in dollars. As in
Proposition 1, suppose that (i) v(w, θ|ϕ) is weakly decreasing in θ, and (ii) v(w, θ|ϕ) is weakly decreasing in w. Under assumptions (i) and (ii), the
π(w,α+δ,α|ϕ)
willingness-to-pay for supplemental coverage scaled by the amount of supplemental coverage,
, provides a (under)estimate of the mean
δ
value of v(w, θ|ϕ) for θ ∈ [α, α + δ], represented by point A. By Proposition 1 we have: π(w, α, 0|ϕ) ≥ α
δ π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) = Area DEBC. This
∂
figure represents a context with moral hazard, where the marginal cost of coverage ∂θ
c(w, θ, 0|ϕ) is upward sloping. The net welfare associated with

α
the baseline coverage for this individual would be bounded below by Area DEJL if the individual has no supplemental coverage or Area DEBC- α+δ

(Area LKMC) if the individual does have supplemental insurance.

36

Figure 3: Numerical Example

35
Marginal Cost
Lower Bound on Marginal WTP for
Marginal WTP Assumptions 1A
Marginal WTP Assumptions 1B
Marginal WTP Assumptions 2A
Marginal WTP Assumptions 2B
Marginal WTP Assumptions 3A
Marginal WTP Assumptions 3B
Marginal WTP Assumptions 4A
Marginal WTP Assumptions 4B
Marginal WTP Assumptions 5A
Marginal WTP Assumptions 6A

Implied Marginal WTP; Marginal Cost ($ per 1 pp coverage)

30

25

[0,0.6]: 0.1* (w, 0.7,0.6)

20

Estimate of value of incremental generosity based
on supplemental market:
0.1*[v(w,0.7)-v(w,0.6)] ≈ 0.1*π(w,0.7,0.6)

15

10

D

A

C

B

5

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

Generosity of Coverage,

60

70

80

90

100

100

Notes: Fixing the willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance at $100, this figure displays the numerical analogue of Figure 2 under the range of assumptions
considered in Table 1. Specifically, this figure considers an individual indexed by ϕ and displays the individual’s marginal cost and marginal valuation of insurance
generosity on the intensive margin, where units are scaled to represents dollars per 1 percentage point of insurance coverage. Given the willingness-to-pay for
supplemental insurance is $100, an (under)estimate of the individual’s mean marginal valuation of insurance for a 1 percentage point increase in coverage is $10 over
the range θ ∈[0.6, 0.7]. Based on Proposition 1, the lower bound on the individual’s valuation of the coverage is $600 (π(w, 0.6, 0|ϕ) ≥ 6 × π(w, 0.7, 0.6|ϕ)) and
the lower bound on the net surplus from the inframarginal coverage is $120 (Area ABCD in this figure). Under each of the considered sets of assumptions in Table 1,
this figure displays the implied marginal willingness-to-pay for insurance on the intensive margin based on the parameters calibrated to match the willingness-to-pay
for supplemental insurance.

0

0

5000
10000
15000
Potential Monthly Disability Benefit

Density
5.0e-05 1.0e-04 1.5e-04 2.0e-04 2.5e-04

Figure 4: Public and Private Disability Insurance Among Employees

0

2000
SSDI

4000

6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000
Monthly Earnings

with Plan L top-up

with Plan M top-up

with Plan H top-up

Notes: This figure displays both: (i) the potential monthly disability benefit for public and private insurance for each level of monthly earnings (on the right vertical
axis), and (ii) a histogram of the monthly earnings among salaried employees at the firm (on the left vertical axis). Referencing the right vertical axis, the solid line
displays the SSDI public disability benefit formula for the year 2003 (the first year of our sample). The remaining three lines display the benefit formula for those who
have one of the firm’s three available top-up private LTD plans in addition to SSDI public disability insurance. As described in the main text, the estimation sample
focuses on individuals with SSDI replacement rate less than the replacement rate of Plan L of 50%. In terms of this figure, these are the individuals whose monthly
income lies to the right of the intersection of the “with Plan L top-up” line and the “SSDI” line. This level of monthly earnings based on the 2003 benefit formula is
roughly $2,020 and this is indicated in the figure by the vertical reference line. In addition to displaying the public and private potential disability benefits, this figure
also displays a histogram of the monthly earnings for all salaried employees (censored at $200,000/12). As can be seen in this figure, the vast majority of salaried
employees at the firm have high enough earnings that their implied SSDI replacement rate lies below the 50% threshold used to define the estimation sample.

37

Table 1: Numerical Example

(1)
Lower bound on π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
Supplemental Insurance
WTP: π(w, 0.7, 0.6|φ )
$85
$90
$95
$100
$105

$510
$540
$570
$600
$630

0.21
0.41
0.60
0.77
0.94

Assumptions
utility
no restrictions beyond sufficient
risk, [loss (probability)]
conditions in either Propositions 1 or 2
wage

WTP for supplemental insurance,
π(w, 0.7, 0.6|φ )
$85
$90
$95
$100
$105

38

Assumptions
utility
risk, [loss (probability)]
wage

calibrated
parameter
2.41E-05
4.70E-05
6.89E-05
8.97E-05
1.10E-04

(7)
Assumptions 3B
implied
π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
$541.84
$607.24
$676.03
$747.97
$822.83

(2)
Assumptions 1A
calibrated
implied
parameter π(w,0.6, 0|φ )

surplus
ratio
2.06
2.12
2.18
2.23
2.29

CARA
loss=$0 (0.90), -$8K (0.10)
wage=$55K

$561.02
$651.61
$752.47
$864.29
$987.77

surplus
ratio
2.70
2.86
3.03
3.20
3.39

CRRA
loss=$0 (0.98), -$40K (0.02)
wage=$55K
(8)
Assumptions 4A
calibrated
implied
parameter π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
0.15
$587.03
0.29
$717.43
0.42
$876.40
0.55
$1,070.18
0.66
$1,306.17

surplus
ratio
3.57
3.96
4.40
4.92
5.51

CRRA
loss=$0 (0.985), -$53,333.33 (0.015)
wage=$55K

(3)
Assumptions 1B
calibrated
implied
parameter π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
4.42E-06
8.59E-06
1.25E-05
1.63E-05
1.99E-05

$542.06
$608.25
$678.60
$753.14
$831.87

surplus
ratio
2.07
2.14
2.21
2.28
2.35

CARA
loss=$0 (0.98), -$40K (0.02)
wage=$55K

calibrated
parameter
3.30E-06
6.41E-06
0.00E+00
1.21E-05
1.48E-05

(9)
Assumptions 4B
implied
π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
$542.07
$608.30
$0.00
$753.44
$832.40

surplus
ratio
2.07
2.14
-5.33
2.28
2.35

CARA
loss=$0 (0.985), -$53,333.33 (0.015)
wage=$55K

(4)
Assumptions 2A
calibrated
implied
parameter π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
12.22
24.54
37.06
49.89
63.17

$540.27
$598.85
$654.21
$705.19
$751.06

surplus
ratio
2.01
1.98
1.94
1.88
1.81

CRRA
loss=$0 (0.50), -$1.6K (0.50)
wage=$55K

calibrated
parameter
0.15
0.28
0.41
0.54
0.65

(10)
Assumptions 5A
implied
π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
$593.12
$734.76
$913.07
$1,138.45
$1,424.00

surplus
ratio
3.77
4.25
4.81
5.49
6.29

CRRA
loss=$0 (0.98), -$40K (0.02)
wage=$40.5K

(5)
Assumptions 2B
calibrated
implied
parameter π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
2.24E-04
4.49E-04
6.78E-04
9.13E-04
1.16E-03

$539.71
$597.74
$652.60
$703.19
$748.79

surplus
ratio
1.99
1.96
1.92
1.86
1.79

CARA
loss=$0 (0.50), -$1.6K (0.50)
wage=$55K

calibrated
parameter
0.32
0.62
0.91
1.18
1.44

(11)
Assumptions 6A
implied
π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
$551.93
$630.48
$715.93
$808.50
$908.42

(6)
Assumptions 3A
calibrated
implied
parameter π(w,0.6, 0|φ )
1.29
2.52
3.69
4.80
5.87

surplus
ratio

$544.15
$612.37
$684.50
$760.32
$839.55

2.14
2.21
2.27
2.34
2.40

CRRA
loss=$0 (0.90), -$8K (0.10)
wage=$55K

surplus
ratio
2.40
2.51
2.62
2.74
2.86

CRRA
loss=$0 (0.98), -$40K (0.02)
wage=$80K

Notes: The above table describes a numerical example which compares the bounding approach described in the text to a more structural analysis that defines a particular utility function and distribution of risk.
Consider an individual indexed by ϕ who faces some potential loss and has compulsory public insurance that covers 60% of this risk. Further, suppose the individual has the option to purchase private supplemental
insurance to cover an additional 10% of the risk on top of the public insurance. Following the definitions in the text, let π(w, 0.6, 0|ϕ) represent the individual’s willingness-to-pay for compulsory public insurance
relative to no insurance, and let π(w, 0.7, 0.6|ϕ) represent the individual’s willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance to top-up the compulsory public insurance. Suppose the individual’s demand/preferences
satisfy the sufficient condition in either Proposition 1 or 2, we get a lower bound on π(w, 0.6, 0|ϕ) for any given observed π(w, 0.7, 0.6|ϕ). This bound is applicable regardless of the distribution of uncertainty
the individual faces and regardless of what form the utility takes. To contrast this bound with an approach that specifies more of the underlying primitives, the table displays the implied value of π(w, 0.6, 0|ϕ)
given a value of π(w, 0.7, 0.6|ϕ) under various assumptions. Specifically, for each set of assumptions and each value of the willingness-to-pay for supplemental coverage (π(w, 0.7, 0.6|ϕ)), Table 1 reports the
calibrated utility parameters to match this willingness-to-pay for supplemental insurance and the implied willingness-to-pay for the inframarginal coverage, π(w, 0.6, 0|ϕ), based on these calibrated parameters.
For each scenario considered, the table also displays the surplus ratio, which we define as the ratio of the surplus from the inframarginal coverage under the stated assumptions to the lower bound on surplus from
π(w,0.6,0|ϕ)−c(w,0.6,0|ϕ)
 ). The surplus ratio describes how tight the lower bound is under a given set of assumptions, with a
the inframarginal coverage derived under Proposition 1 (surplus ratio=
Bound π(w,0.6,0|ϕ)−c(w,0.6,0|ϕ)
smaller ratio indicating a tighter bound. Taking the case of π(w, 0.7, 0.6|ϕ) = $100, Figure 3 plots numerical analogue of Figure 2 under the sets of assumptions described in this table.

Table 2: Long-Term Disability Plan Details

Replacement Rate, All years

Plan L
50%

Coverage
Plan M
60%

Plan H
70%

Annual Premium (fraction of annual earnings)
Plan L
Plan M
Plan H

Relative Premium (fraction of annual earnings)
Plan M-Plan L
Plan H- Plan M

Year
2003
2004
2005
2006

0
0
0
0

0.00152
0.00152
0.00151
0.00162

0.00315
0.00261
0.00259
0.00273

0.00152
0.00152
0.00151
0.00162

0.00163
0.00109
0.00108
0.00111

Annual Premium (scaled by reference earnings Relative Premium (scaled by reference earnings of
of $60K)
$60K)
Plan L
Plan M
Plan H
Plan M-Plan L
Plan H- Plan M
Year
2003
2004
2005
2006

0
0
0
0

91
91
91
97

189
157
156
164

91
91
91
97

98
65
65
67

Plan Enrollment in Estimation Sample
Plan L
Plan M
Plan H
Year
2003
2004
2005
2006

18.7%
19.5%
20.4%
22.2%

20.9%
16.3%
15.0%
13.5%

60.3%
64.2%
64.6%
64.3%

Notes: This table describes the three long-term disability plans available on the menu of plans offered to employees in the estimation sample. In the
context of disability, both benefits and costs are stated in relative terms, relative to the annual earnings. The replacement rate for each plan describes
the fraction of annual earnings paid out in the case of disability. In this table, premiums are stated as a fraction of annual earnings, and scaled by
$60K, roughly the median annual earnings in the estimation sample.

39

Table 3: Summary Statistics

All Employees

Firm Data
Salary Employees

(1)

March CPS 2004-2007 (corresponding to 2003-2006)
Manufacturing
Manufacturing White
Manufacturing White
Employees
Collar Employees
Collar Employees with DI
RR <0.5 and wage<200k

Employees in
Estimation Sample

All Employees

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

203,457
(69,297)

62,539
(20,709)

47,884
(15,754)

307,018
(228,952)

40,685
(38,954)

11,478
(11,331)

10,650
(10,265)

0.76
0.31
13.0
0.78

0.72
1.00
13.2
0.86

0.72
1.00
13.5
0.87

0.58
0.37
0.69

0.71
0.29
0.70

0.74
1.00
0.81

0.75
1.00
0.81

Mean
Median
Std Dev

44.1
45
10.3

44.4
45
9.5

44.3
45
9.2

40.8
41
11.1

41.9
42
10.6

43.1
43
9.5

43.2
43
9.4

Mean
Median
Std Dev

$44,401
$36,516
$66,696

$65,160
$58,794
$28,521

$66,668
$59,986
$28,477

$44,118
$33,906
$49,209

$47,578
$36,813
$45,177

$76,145
$63,685
$62,994

$73,293
$65,134
$34,366

42.2%
44.1%
7.8%

34.5%
35.4%
8.8%

34.0%
35.4%
8.6%

45.2%
44.4%
15.7%

43.6%
43.8%
14.5%

33.0%
33.6%
12.6%

32.0%
33.1%
9.8%

Employee-years
(unique employees)
Fraction Male
Fraction Salary
Mean Job Tenure
Fraction White
Age

Wage

SSDI Replacement Rate
Mean
Median
Std Dev

Notes: This table displays summary statistics for employees in the data. All dollar quantities are inflation adjusted to 2005 dollars using the CPI-U.
Column (1) displays summary statistics for all employees from the firm, column (2) displays summary statistics for all salary employees at the firm,
and column (3) displays summary statistics for employees in the estimation sample. The estimation sample is restricted to salary employees who
have the relevant menu of LTD plans offered to them, who have annual earnings less than $200,000, and who have an SSDI replacement rate less than
50%. Columns (4) through (7) display summary statistics for employees from the March Current Population Survey (CPS) for the corresponding
years, 2004-2007 (which describe labor market outcomes from 2003-2006). Column (4) displays the summary statistics for all employees in the CPS,
while column (5) displays summary statistics for all manufacturing employees in the CPS. Column (6) displays summary statistics for manufacturing
employees in white collar occupations, where occupations are classified as white collar if they are managerial or professional occupations. Column
(7) displays summary statistics for manufacturing employees with white collar occupations who have implied SSDI replacement rates less than 50%
(using their reported monthly earnings as a proxy for their AIME) and annual earnings less than $200,000. As described in the text, the table reports
the mean pre-tax SSDI replacement rate for workers in the sample using the SSA formula replacing the average indexed monthly earnings (AIME)
with an individual’s monthly earnings according to the firm’s human resources records (or mean reported monthly earnings in the CPS in columns
(4) through (7)). We note this is an imperfect calculation because we don’t have data on each worker’s full work history which would be needed to
precisely calculate the AIME following the SSA formula.

Table 4: Identifying Variation

Highest Relative Price
2003
(1)

Lower Relative Price
2004
2005
2006
(2)
(3)
(4)

Coefficient

p-value

(5)

(6)

Fraction Male
Mean Age
Mean Job Tenure
Mean ln(Annual Earnings)
Fraction White

0.72
43.8
13.4
10.97
0.87

0.72
44.1
13.5
11.00
0.87

0.73
44.4
13.5
11.02
0.87

0.73
44.8
13.6
11.05
0.86

6.23E-07
4.52E-08
-1.62E-08
-1.99E-06
-8.14E-08

0.39
0.38
0.79
0.12
0.95

Predicted probability of LTD claim

0.0032

0.0032

0.0031

0.0031

1.41E-04

0.38

N

12,687

11,969

11,840

11,388

Notes: This table displays summary statistics by the variation in premiums used for identification. The row labeled “Predicted probability of
LTD claim” reports the mean fitted value from a regression of an indicator of LTD receipt on the demographic characteristics in the table, where we
control flexibly for age and wage using indicators for deciles of these distributions. Columns (1) through (4) display summary statistics for employee
M
demographics by year. The remaining columns display how the identifying variation in the relative price of Plan H (pH
it − pit ) is related to the
demographics in the table. Column (5) and Column (6) displays the coefficient and p-value associated with a regression of the continuous relative
premium for Plan H on the demographic characteristic and a time trend.

40

Table 5: Demand and Cost Estimates

Panel A: Demand Estimates

Relative premium Plan H
Constant
Controls
Time Trend
Individual Fixed Effects
N
Implied Mean WTP for Incremental Coverage, $/annual earnings
Estimate
Std Error
Panel B: Mean Costs

Plan H
(1)

Plan H
(2)

-71.26
(11.77)
0.72
(0.03)

-64.93
(12.21)
0.70
(0.02)

x
47,884

x
x
47,884

0.00310
(0.00032)

0.00328
(0.00034)

Plan H
Mean

Std Error

Per capita cost, $/annual earnings
All
Do Purchase incremental coverage (dep var=1)
Do not purchase incremental coverage (dep var=0)

0.00111
0.00155
0.00036

(.00014)
(.00021)
(.00013)

Relative premium, $/annual earnings

0.00124

(1.09E-06)

Notes: The above table displays the demand and cost estimates. Panel A columns (1) and (2) display the results of estimating a linear demand
specification for Plan H coverage, without individual fixed-effects (column 1) and with individual fixed-effects (column 2). The bootstrapped
standard error on the mean implied willingness-to-pay for the incremental coverage (relative to annual earnings) is calculated using 10,000 bootstrap
samples. Panel B displays the mean cost estimates for everyone and separately for those who do and do not purchase Plan H. As discussed in Section
4, the mean cost reported here is the mean present discounted value of disability claim costs relative to annual earnings scaled to represent a 10%
replacement rate. For reference, the relative premium for Plan H is listed below the mean cost estimates.

Table 6: Implied Welfare Analysis

Panel A: Marginal and Inframarginal Coverage Observed in the Status Quo
(Lower Bound on) Mean WTP
(Lower Bound on) Per-Capita Welfare
relative to annual earnings
relative to annual earnings
% of cost
scaled by 65K
% of cost
scaled by 65K

Mean Cost Per-Capita
relative to annual earnings

(1) Marginal Coverage: Observed Allocation of
Supplemental Insurance

0.00359

(0.00049)

366%

$233

0.00261

(0.00054)

266%

$170

0.00098

(0.00016)

(2) Inframarginal Coverage: Compulsory public
coverage with 34% replacement rate

0.01053

(0.00110)

279%

$684

0.00677

(0.00119)

179%

$440

0.00377

(0.00058)

Panel B: Counterfactual: Extension of compulsory baseline 60% rep rate coverage to include incremental 10% rep rate coverage (relative to no incremental insurance)
Moral hazard semi-elasticity: 10 pp increase in the replacement rate leads to a X% increase in the PDV of lost earnings due to disability
0% (Baseline)
2.5%
5.0%
7.5%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%

50.0%

Per-capita welfare
per dollar of annual earnings
scaled by 65K
% of compulsory insurer costs
Mean compuslory insurer costs
per dollar of annual earnings

0.00199
(0.00036)
$129
(23)
179%

0.00182
(0.00037)
$118
(24)
142%

0.00166
(0.00038)
$108
(25)
115%

0.00151
(0.00040)
$98
(31)
95%

0.00136
(0.00041)
$88
(31)
78%

0.00107
(0.00044)
$70
(33)
53%

0.00081
(0.00047)
$53
(35)
35%

0.00032
(0.00052)
$21
(34)
12%

-0.00012
(0.00058)
-$8
(38)
-4%

-0.00052
(0.00063)
-$34
(45)
-14%

0.00111
(0.00017)

0.00128
(0.00020)

0.00144
(0.00022)

0.00159
(0.00025)

0.00174
(0.00027)

0.00203
(0.00031)

0.00229
(0.00035)

0.00278
(0.00043)

0.00322
(0.00049)

0.00362
(0.00056)

Notes: This table displays the implied welfare measures using demand estimates from Table 5 column (1). Panel A presents our baseline welfare analysis
analyzing the welfare associated with the marginal and inframarginal coverage under the observed allocation of insurance in the status quo. Row (1) displays
welfare associated with the incremental coverage evaluated the mean observed allocation of supplemental coverage. As discussed in the text, the mean
observed allocation of the incremental coverage is very close to the allocation under a competitive equilibrium for this coverage, so we think about these
welfare measures as approximating the welfare associated with a competitive market for the incremental coverage. Row (2) presents the a lower bound
on the welfare associated with the inframarginal disability insurance providing a 34% replacement rate, the mean public disability replacement rate among
individuals in the sample. Panel B presents estimates of welfare under a hypothetical compulsory insurance extension from a baseline 60% replacement
rate to a 70% replacement rate, relative to a scenario in which no one has this incremental coverage. Each column displays these estimates under the stated
assumed moral hazard semi-elasticity: the percentage change in the PDV of lost earnings due to disability with respect to a change in the replacement rate.
The bootstrapped standard errors on the mean willingness-to-pay and welfare estimates are calculated using 10,000 bootstrap samples.

41

Table 7: Robustness: Alternative Specifications

Panel A: Lower Bound on Value of Public Coverage Based on Alternative Specifications
Lower Bound on Mean WTP
Lower Bound on Per-Capita Welfare
relative to annual
% of mean
scaled by 65K relative to annual
% of mean
scaled by 65K
earnings
cost
earnings
cost
(1)
(4)
(2)
(3)
(5)
(6)
Est
Std Err
Est
Std Err
1. Baseline
Robustness to Alternative Demand
2. Probit demand
3. Logit demand
4. Linear demand, wtp=max(linear fitted value,0)
5. Linear-log demand, constrained to go through (q=0, p=0.01)
6. Log-log demand, constrained to go through (q=0, p=0.01)
Robustness to Identifying Variation
7. No Controls
8. Demographics included
9. Individual fixed-effects
10. Propensity Score Reweighted
Robustness to Accounting for Tax Treatment
11. Baseline specification but incorporating tax treatment of premiums and
benefits
Robustness to Alternative Sample
12. Exclude individuals who appear to be passive choosers in any year

0.01053

(.0011)

279%

684

0.00677 (.00119)

179%

440

0.01014
0.01009
0.01239
0.00981
0.00827

(.00104)
(.00103)
(.00159)
(.00034)
(.00031)

269%
267%
328%
260%
219%

659
656
805
638
538

0.00637
0.00633
0.00862
0.00605
0.00450

(.00115)
(.00115)
(.00177)
(.00046)
(.00046)

169%
167%
228%
160%
119%

414
411
560
393
293

0.01019
0.01055
0.01115
0.01094

(.00112)
(.00101)
(.00118)
(.00129)

270%
280%
295%
290%

662
686
725
711

0.00643
0.00678
0.00738
0.00717

(.00132)
(.00114)
(.00125)
(.00138)

170%
180%
196%
190%

418
441
480
466

0.01053

(.0011)

279%

684

0.00677 (.00119)

179%

440

0.01018 (.00117)

263%

662

0.00632 (.00129)

163%

411

Panel B: Parameter Estimates from Alternative Specifications
Demand
Relative Premium
Coeff
Std Err
Coeff
(1)
(2)
(3)
1. Baseline
Robustness to Alternative Demand
2. Probit demand
3. Logit demand
4. Linear demand, wtp=max(fitted linear value,0)
5. Linear-log demand, constrained to go through (q=0, p=0.01)
6. Log-log demand, constrained to go through (q=0, p=0.01)
Robustness to Identifying Variation
7. No Controls
8. Demographics included
9. Individual fixed-effects
10. Propensity Score Reweighted
Robustness to Accounting for Tax Treatment
11. Baseline specification but incorporating tax treatment of premiums and
benefits
Robustness to Alternative Sample
12. Exclude individuals who appear to be passive choosers in any year

Constant

Mean Cost
Std Err
(4)

Mean
(5)

Std Err
(6)

-71.26

(11.77)

0.72

(0.026)

0.00111

(.00014)

-187.70
-303.70
-71.26
-0.30
-0.21

(37.67)
(61.07)
(11.77)
(0.001)
(0.001)

0.57
0.91
0.72
-1.35
-0.93

(0.026)
(0.091)
(0.005)
(0.004)

0.00111
0.00111
0.00111
0.00111
0.00111

(.00014)
(.00014)
(.00014)
(.00014)
(.00014)

-75.30
-72.63
-64.93
-65.22

(14.68)
(14.00)
(12.21)
(14.28)

0.73
0.34
0.70
0.71

(0.029)
(0.024)
(0.015)
(0.021)

0.00111
0.00111
0.00111
0.00111

(.00014)
(.00014)
(.00014)
(.00014)

-109.60

(21.82)

0.72

(0.021)

0.00072

(.0001)

-66.61

(13.11)

0.70

(0.029)

0.00114

(.00019)

Notes: This table illustrates that the main results are similar when using alternative functional forms for demand, using alternative controls isolating slightly different variation, accounting for the tax treatment of premiums and benefits, and focusing on employees who appear to be “active
choosers”. Panel A displays the implied lower bound on the value of public coverage based on the alternative specifications (analogous to that
reported in Table 6 Panel A row 2); Panel B displays the underlying demand and mean cost estimates. As discussed in Section 4, the mean cost
reported here is the mean present discounted value of disability claim costs relative to annual earnings scaled to represent a 10% replacement rate.
Panel A reports bootstrapped standard errors using 10,000 bootstrap samples. Each row represents the results of a distinct specification. For reference, row (1) displays the baseline estimates (from Table 5 column 1) and implied welfare bounds (from Table 6 Panel A row 2). Rows (2) through (6)
display the estimates and implied welfare bounds using alternative specifications of the demand curve. Row (5) reports the results for a linear-log
M
specification where the dependent variable is P lanHit and the main independent variable is ln(pH
it − pit ); the log-log specification in Row (6)
M
reports results for a specification with the dependent variable ln(P lanHit +1) and the main independent variable ln(pH
it −pit ). Rows (7) through
(10) display the estimates and implied welfare bounds concentrating on slightly different aspects of the identifying variation by including alternative
sets of controls. Row (11) displays the estimates and implied welfare bounds accounting for the tax treatment of LTD premiums, LTD benefits, and
SSDI benefits. In this specification, we make these adjustments assuming a constant marginal tax rate in this population of 35% (roughly the average
marginal tax rate based on the observables we have in the data). Row (12) displays the results for an alternative sample excluding the roughly 13%
of employees who appear to be “passive” choosers at some point during the sample period. We designate an employee as a “passive” chooser if
his/her insurance selections in any year during our sample period are completely consistent with all the various default options across the range of
employee benefits offered by the firm including health insurance, prescription drug insurance, dental insurance, and disability insurance.

42

Appendix

For Online Publication
APPENDIX
A

Proof of Proposition 2

Proposition 2. Suppose an individual’s utility can be represented by the increasing, thrice differentiable function u(c). Define π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) as: E[u(w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ))] = E[u(w + (1 − γ)x)], where θ > γ and the
expectation is taken over x ≤ 0, representing the uncertain losses the individual faces. Additionally, suppose
the individual is risk averse and his/her utility exhibits weakly decreasing absolute risk aversion. Then,
π(w, α, 0|ϕ) ≥

α
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ).
δ

(18)

and thus we obtain the bound in Corollary 1.
Proof. Based on Lemma 1 below, we complete the proof by demonstrating: (i)

∂ π(w,θ,γ|ϕ)
≤ 0.
∂γ
θ−γ

∂
∂θ

π(w,θ,γ|ϕ) 
θ−γ

≤ 0, and (ii)

proof of (i):
Let z ≡ w + (1 − γ)x and y ≡ −π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) − (θ − γ)x. Define a function F (β) = Eu(z + βy) − Eu(z).68
Obviously, F (0) = 0. By definition of π(w, θ, γ|ϕ), we know that F (1) = 0.
We want to show that
∂ π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) 
≤ 0.
(19)
∂θ
θ−γ
Note that this is equivalent to,
π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)
∂
−Exu0 (w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ))
≥
π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) =
.
θ−γ
∂θ
Eu0 (w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ))
Re-writing this condition we get:
i
h

E π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) + (θ − γ)x u0 (w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)) ≥ 0.

(20)

(21)

Substituting in the definitions above we get:
E[−yu0 (z + y)] = −F 0 (1) ≥ 0.

(22)
0

Under risk aversion, F is concave. Because F (0) = F (1) = 0, we know that F (1) ≤ 0, and thus the above
condition holds.
proof of (ii):
Let z ≡ w + (1 − γ)x − (θ − γ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) and y ≡ π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) + (θ − γ)x. Define a function F (β) =
Eu(z + βy) − Eu(z). Obviously, F (0) = 0. By definition of π(w, θ, γ|ϕ), we know that F (1) = 0.
We want to show that:


∂ π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)
≤ 0.
(23)
∂γ
θ−γ
Note that this is equivalent to,
π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)
∂
−Exu0 (w + (1 − γ)x)
≤ − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) =
.
θ−γ
∂γ
Eu0 (w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ))
68 The

technique used for this part of the proof draws upon a similar technique used in Eeckhoudt and Gollier (2001).

(24)

Appendix

Let us re-write this as follows:
π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)Eu0 (w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)) + (θ − γ)Exu0 (w + (1 − γ)x) ≤ 0.

(25)

Because the individual’s utility exhibits weakly decreasing absolute risk aversion, we know by Lemma 2
below that: Eu0 (w + (1 − γ)x) ≥ Eu0 (w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)). So, the LHS of the above is bounded above

π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)Eu0 (w+(1−θ)x−π(w, θ, γ|ϕ))+(θ−γ)Exu0 (w+(1−γ)x) ≤ E





π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)+(θ−γ)x u0 (w+(1−γ)x) .
(26)

Re-writing the RHS term using the above definitions,


 0
E π(w, θ, γ|ϕ) + (θ − γ)x u (w + (1 − γ)x) = E[yu0 (z + y)] = F 0 (1).
Under risk aversion, F is concave. Because F (0) = F (1) = 0, we know that F 0 (1) ≤ 0.


∂ π(w,θ,γ|ϕ)
∂ π(w,θ,γ|ϕ)
Lemma 1. Suppose (i) ∂θ
≤ 0, and (ii) ∂γ
≤ 0.
θ−γ
θ−γ
Then,
[a]

π(w, α, 0|ϕ) ≥

α
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ),
δ

and

[b] π(w, α + δ, 0|ϕ) ≥

α+δ
π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ)
δ

(27)

Proof. Under the assumptions, we get the following:
π(w, θ + , γ|ϕ)
π(w, θ + , γ + µ|ϕ)
π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)
≥
≥
θ−γ
θ+−γ
θ +  − (γ + µ)

(28)

where the first inequality follows from assumption (i) and the second from assumption (ii). This holds for all
µ,  ≥ 0. Evaluating this at µ = θ − γ, θ = α, γ = 0, and  = δ gives result [a] and result [b].
Lemma 2. If u(c) exhibits weakly decreasing absolute risk aversion, then Eu0 (w + (1 − γ)x) ≥ Eu0 (w + (1 −
θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ))
Proof. Weakly decreasing absolute risk aversion means,
∂ −u00 (c) 
≤ 0.
∂c u0 (c)

(29)

−u0 u000 + (u00 )2
≤ 0.
(u0 )2

(30)

This is equivalent to,

Multiplying both sides by

u0
u00

(≤ 0) and rearranging terms we get:
−u000
−u00
≥ 0 .
00
u
u

(31)

Notice that v = −u0 is a valid utility function as it is increasing in c. Since we know this holds for all c,
−u0 is more risk averse than u, and thus we can represent −u0 as an increasing concave transformation of u:
−u0 = φ(u).
The result then follows from showing that the distribution of u(w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)) second order
stochastically dominates the distribution of u(w + (1 − γ)x) (and thus every concave utility function, including
φ, prefers it). Consider two distributions, FA (z) and FB (z) with the same mean. Suppose these distributions
are defined over a finite domain [z, z], where FA (z) = FB (z) = 0 and FA (z) = FB (z) = 1. Showing FA (z)
second order stochastically dominates FB (z) is equivalent to showing:
Z y
[FA (z) − FB (z)]dz ≤ 0,
∀y ∈ {z, z}.
(32)
z

Appendix

Applying this to our context, we want to show:
Z

y

[Fx (
z

u−1 (z) − w + π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)
u−1 (z) − w
) − Fx (
)]dz ≤ 0,
1−θ
1−γ

∀y ∈ {z, z}.

(33)

It is easy to show that the cumulative density functions cross exactly once at the point z ∗ = u(w +

1−γ
γ−θ π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)):

u−1 (z) − w + π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)
u−1 (z) − w
) − Fx (
)≤0
1−θ
1−γ
u−1 (z) − w + π(w, θ, γ|ϕ)
u−1 (z) − w
Fx (
) − Fx (
)≥0
1−θ
1−γ

Fx (

∀z ∈ {z, z ∗ },
∀z ∈ {z ∗ , z}.

(34)

Ry
−1
−1
(z)−w
Thus, we know that z [Fx ( u (z)−w+π(w,θ,γ|ϕ)
) − Fx ( u 1−γ
)]dz ≤ 0,
∀y ∈ {z, z ∗ }. In addition, it
1−θ
is straightforward to show that the fact that the distributions have the same means (Eu(w + (1 − γ)x) =
Rz
−1
−1
(z)−w
) − Fx ( u 1−γ
)]dz = 0. Thus, it must
Eu(w + (1 − θ)x − π(w, θ, γ|ϕ))) implies that z [Fx ( u (z)−w+π(w,θ,γ|ϕ)
1−θ
Ry
−1
−1
u (z)−w+π(w,θ,γ|ϕ)
u (z)−w
be the case that z [Fx (
) − Fx ( 1−γ )]dz ≤ 0,
∀y ∈ {z, z}.
1−θ

B

Moral Hazard and Selection: Estimates and Robustness

As discussed in Section 3, the data and environment has both strengths and weaknesses in terms of capturing
the costs associated with disability. A strength of the empirical environment is that there is individual-level
administrative cost data. While in principle one could use the very same price variation used to estimate the
demand curves to estimate moral hazard and selection, a practical limitation is that it is difficult to obtain
precise estimates of selection and moral hazard within the context of disability insurance because realized
costs are noisy proxies for expected costs given the low incidence of disability. In the face of these strengths
and weaknesses, we take the following approach. First, our baseline welfare analysis focuses on estimating
welfare in the status quo allocation of insurance. Since this estimation draws on observed realized costs, this
analysis fully incorporates moral hazard and selection within the status quo insurance allocation. Second, we
analyze welfare within counterfactuals that depart from the status quo allocation of insurance under a wide
range of assumptions on the moral hazard elasticity. As will become clear, the counterfactuals we focus on
do not require estimating the degree of selection. Overall, we find that the key lessons of the counterfactual
welfare analysis are not very sensitive to the amount of incremental moral hazard within a plausible range of
elasticities.
While our baseline welfare analysis does not depend on estimating moral hazard or selection, here we
present estimates of moral hazard and selection leveraging the available price variation. As noted in the text,
there is limited statistical power for these analyses, so they should be interpreted with this caveat in mind.
Moral Hazard Let cit represent the present discounted value of the realized costs relative to annual earnings
associated with providing individual i in year t an incremental 10% replacement rate paid in the event of
disability.69 We investigate the possibility of moral hazard by estimating the following reduced form equation:
M
M
cit = β0 + β1 (pH
it − pit ) + β2 pit + λXit + it ,

(35)

M
M
where (pH
it − pit ) and pit are the relative prices of Plan H and Plan M, respectively. The demand results
reveal that the demand for Plan H coverage and Plan M coverage are both responsive to the respective relative
prices. Thus, the test for moral hazard is then a test on whether lower relative prices (and thus more people
on more generous coverage) lead to higher claims. In addition to estimating the reduced form specification
described above, we also estimate the analogous instrumental variables (IV) specification where we estimate
the relationship between costs and the share of people with Plan H and Plan M coverage, instrumenting these
shares with the variation in relative prices.
Table A1 Panel A displays these estimates. Across all the specifications, the estimates are statistically
indistinguishable from zero, consistent with the incremental disability coverage inducing no moral hazard in
69 Recall

that we use an interest rate of 4% in the baseline estimation.

Appendix

this setting. Note that while the estimates are consistent with no moral hazard associated with the incremental
coverage, the estimates are not very precise. This lack of precision is not surprising, given the low incidence of
disability claims and the range of variation exploited in this IV strategy.
Selection As discussed in Section 4, our baseline analysis investigates welfare under the status quo allocation
of insurance and thus does not require estimating the degree of selection. Additionally, the counterfactual
analysis considers an extension of the compulsory insurance to include the supplemental coverage relative to
a setting in which no one has the supplemental coverage, which again does not require estimating the degree
of selection. Nevertheless, below we investigate selection in this setting for completeness.
Table 5 Panel B in the text displays the mean cost scaled to represent a 10% replacement rate (the mean
value of cit ) for everyone in the estimation sample and separately for those who do and do not purchase the
incremental coverage. Note that the mean relative price for Plan H is very close to the average cost of those
individuals willing to pay for the incremental coverage. In other words, the predicted competitive equilibrium
in the market for the incremental coverage would be close to the observed pair of average prices and quantities
regardless of the shape of the average and marginal cost curves far outside of the variation in the data. Thus,
we can think of the observed mean (relative) costs of the insured and quantity of individuals insured as an
approximation of the competitive equilibrium for the incremental coverage, which allows us to interpret the
welfare measures describing the status quo allocation of supplemental insurance as approximating that of a
competitive equilibrium for supplemental insurance.
While mean costs in the status quo are an approximation of the costs in a competitive equilibrium, we
can use alternative methods to predict counterfactual mean costs in a competitive market and demonstrate
that these yield similar estimates. For instance, one way to measure selection in this setting is to use the price
variation used to estimate demand to trace out the marginal and average cost curves of the insurer, using the
Einav and Finkelstein (2011) approach. Alternatively, another way one could measure selection in this setting
would be to assume there is no moral hazard and thus bring in another moment on the cost curve, the average
costs of insuring everyone under Plan H (the mean value of cit for the population if there is no moral hazard).
Comparing these approaches, the former approach leverages variation in costs among those marginal to the
price variation in the data, while the latter approach provides a measure of global selection in this population.
Figure A2 plots the average and marginal costs curves obtained from each of these approaches. (Table A1 Panel
B column (1) reports the underlying point estimates for the approach leveraging the marginal price variation.)
There are at least two things to note in this figure. First, we obtain very similar cost curves representing
selection regardless of which method we use to measure selection in this setting. Second, regardless of the
shape of the average and marginal cost curves far outside of the variation in the data, the observed average
price and quantity across the sample period are close to the predicted competitive equilibrium using either set
of cost curves.

C

Additional Demand Estimates

As discussed in Section 2, the main estimation focuses on the demand for Plan H over Plan M because most of
the premium variation in this context is in the relative premium for Plan H over Plan M. However, in addition
to our main estimates on the demand for Plan H relative to Plan M, we also investigate the demand for Plan M
relative to Plan L coverage to provide suggestive evidence on the validity of Assumption 1. To do this, we use
the limited variation in the (relative) premium for Plan M compared to Plan L to estimate the demand for Plan
M coverage. Specifically, we estimate the relative demand for Plan M by estimating the following equation:
M
P lanM orHit = I(rπ (0.6, 0.5|ϕ) ≥ pM
it ) = θ0 + θ1 pit + φXit + eit ,

(36)

where P lanM orHi indicates that the individual chose Plan H or Plan M coverage and pM
it is the price of Plan
M relative to Plan L (as pL
it = 0).
Table A2 displays the Plan M demand estimates as well as the baseline Plan H demand estimates for reference. There are two important things to note about the Plan M demand estimates as compared to analogous
estimates for Plan H coverage. First, while the negative premium coefficient estimates in Panel A columns
(3) and (4) suggest that the demand for the incremental coverage provided by Plan M is price-sensitive, the
coefficient estimates and the corresponding mean implied willingness-to-pay for coverage are much less precisely estimated than the analogous estimates for Plan H coverage. The difference in precision across these
estimates is not surprising given the limited variation in Plan M premiums during the sample period relative
to the variation in the Plan H premium (see Table 2). Second, though the Plan M demand estimates are statis-

Appendix

tically imprecise, the general pattern of the mean implied willingness-to-pay estimates is consistent with the
assumption we use to derive a lower bound on the total welfare (Assumption 1). Assumption 1 implies that an
individual’s willingness-to-pay for incremental coverage is decreasing in the replacement rate of the baseline
coverage, and thus an individual’s willingness-to-pay for Plan M is weakly greater than his/her willingnessto-pay for Plan H.70 Consistent with this assumption, the estimate for the mean willingness-to-pay for Plan
M coverage is higher than the estimated mean willingness-to-pay for Plan H coverage, though the Plan M
estimates are imprecise enough that these estimates are not statistically distinct. While the baseline welfare
analysis in the text uses the more precise (and more conservative) Plan H demand estimates, Appendix D
reports the analogous welfare measures based on the Plan M demand estimates for comparison.

D

Additional Robustness Analysis

In addition to the robustness analysis presented in the text, we examine the robustness of the results to additional alternative specifications. Table A3 displays the results of this additional analysis. Panel A displays the
implied lower bound on the value of public coverage based on the alternative specifications, and Panel B displays the underlying regression estimates for the alternative specifications. Each row represents the results of a
distinct specification. For reference, row (1) displays the baseline estimates and implied welfare bounds (based
on Table 5 Panel A column (1)). Rows (2) through (4) display the estimates and implied welfare bounds using
alternative specifications of the cost measures. The baseline analysis uses the present discounted value of costs
using an interest rate of 4%, where we use the maximum potential duration for spells censored at five years (as
described in the text, Section 2). Row (2) displays an alternative specification where costs are measured only
through the first five years following the year of disability onset (the years for which we have complete claims
data). This specification yields a less conservative bound than the baseline analysis. Rows (3) and (4) display
specifications where costs are defined as the present discounted value of the maximum potential duration for
truncated spells, using alternative interest rates to calculate the present discounted value. Comparing these
specifications to the baseline estimates, we see that the analysis is not very sensitive to the chosen discount rate
within a range of reasonable interest rates.
The baseline welfare analysis utilizes the demand for Plan H, estimated based on the variation described
in Table 2. Leveraging the modest amount of variation in Plan M premiums, we can repeat the welfare analysis
using the implied Plan M demand curve. Table A3 row (5) displays an alternative specification that relies on
the Plan M demand estimates. As discussed above, the implied mean valuation of Plan M exceeds that of
Plan H, so this alternative specification provides a less conservative lower bound on the value of disability
coverage. However, as discussed above, the relatively small amount of variation in Plan M premiums limits
the statistical precision of welfare analysis based on the Plan M estimates as compared to the baseline welfare
analysis which leverages the Plan H estimates.

E

Tax Treatment of Premiums and Benefits

For the LTD plans offered at this employer, premiums are paid by employees with pre-tax dollars, and the
benefits individuals receive from their LTD policy in the event of a disability are taxable. In contrast, SSDI
benefits are largely exempt from tax. Because it is not clear that employees know the differential tax treatment
of each of these, premiums and the benefits are treated symmetrically in the baseline specification. Robustness analysis reported in the text explores an alternative specification that reflects the tax treatment of premiums and benefits, where we assume LTD premiums are paid with pre-tax dollars, LTD benefits individuals
receive are taxable, and public SSDI benefits are not taxable (effectively raising the mean SSDI replacement
rate from 34% to 52%). For simplicity, we assume that the same marginal tax rate is applicable to premiums
and benefits, and we use a marginal tax rate of 35%, roughly the average marginal tax rate among individuals in this sample accounting for state and federal income taxes. While accounting for the tax treatment
of LTD premiums and benefits leads to a lower implied surplus for a fixed extension of LTD coverage, accounting for the tax treatment of public SSDI benefits (and the effectively higher after-tax replacement rate)
exactly offsets this giving us the same lower bound on the welfare of public disability insurance as in the
baseline specification. To see this, suppose that individuals face a constant marginal tax rate τ . In addition, suppose that compulsory public insurance benefits are not taxable and LTD benefits are taxable. Let
W elf areExtnτ (10 × (1 − τ )) denote the estimated welfare associated with a (10 × (1 − τ )) percentage point
increase in the disability replacement rate of compulsory government insurance (relative to no incremental
70 Under

Assumption 1 used to calculate the welfare bound (from Proposition 1), π(w, α + δ, α|ϕ) is decreasing in α.

Appendix

coverage) given that LTD premiums are paid with pre-tax dollars and the marginal tax rate is τ . To account
for the tax treatment of premiums, the mean willingness-to-pay should be scaled down by (1 − τ ) relative to
the baseline estimates if the tax treatment is salient to consumers, and the baseline estimates for the government’s costs should be symmetrically scaled down by (1 − τ ) to reflect costs associated with the incremental
coverage net of tax revenue. Thus, it is easy to see that accounting for taxation leads the welfare associated
with a (10 × (1 − τ )) percentage point extension of the replacement rate of government provided disability
coverage to be a scaled version of the baseline estimates of an extension not accounting for the tax treatment:
W elf areExtnτ (10 × (1 − τ )) = (1 − τ )W elf areExtn0 (10). The lower bound on the value of government
provided coverage is unchanged. To see this, let W elf areP ublic(α, τ ) represent the welfare associated with
the inframarginal public coverage accounting for the tax rate τ and the public insurance is of generosity α.
Assuming public benefits are tax-exempt, it is easy to show that the lower bound on welfare is invariant
τ (10×(1−τ ))
=
to accounting for the tax treatment: {Lower bound on W elf areP ublic(α, τ )} = α W elf areExtn
10×(1−τ )
elf areExtn0 (10)
0 (10)
α (1−τ )W10×(1−τ
= α W elf areExtn
= {Lower bound on W elf areP ublic(α, 0)}.
)
10

Appendix

Figure A1: Numerical Example: Surplus Ratio and Baseline Coverage Generosity

20
Assumptions 1A
Assumptions 1B
Assumptions 2A
Assumptions 2B
Assumptions 3A
Assumptions 3B
Assumptions 4A
Assumptions 4B
Assumptions 5A
Assumptions 6A

18

16

14

Surplus Ratio

12

10

Generosity of baseline compulsory coverage
in numerical example where underlying
parameters were calibrated.

8

6

4

2

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

Generosity of Baseline Compulsory Coverage,

60

70

80

90

100

Notes: This figure displays the surplus ratio (defined in the text) as the baseline coverage generosity varies, holding the underlying
parameters fixed based on the calibration depicted in Figure 3 and Table 1.

Appendix

.01

Figure A2: Selection: Alternative Estimation Approaches

AC Curve (marginal price variation)
MC Curve (marginal price variation)
AC Curve (implied by population average cost)

0

Relative Premium, Plan H
.005

MC Curve (implied by population average cost)

0

.2

.4
.6
Fraction Enrolled, Plan H

.8

1

Notes: This table displays linear cost curves associated with Plan H coverage, where the curves are inferred using two different
methods. The first method for estimating the average and marginal cost curves follows Einav and Finkelstein (2011) and uses variation
in prices and the induced variation in the fraction of the population with Plan H coverage to trace out how the average expected cost
of those on Plan H varies. The second method for inferring the average and marginal cost curves is to assume there is no moral hazard
and interpolate between the average cost if the whole population were insured and the average cost of the actual insured population.
These approaches are represented in the figure by the gray and blue lines, respectively. The gray circles represent the mean costs by
year for those with Plan H coverage; the black triangles represent the mean costs of those with Plan H and everyone in the population,
pooling data across the entire sample period. The blue diamonds represent the observed pairs of Plan H premium and enrollment by
year (the variation used to estimate demand).

Appendix

Table A1: Moral Hazard and Selection

Costs
(1)
Plan H
PlanMorH

-0.0071
(0.0105)
-0.0155
(0.0190)

Panel A: Moral Hazard
Realized Costs of All Employees (2SLS)
Costs
I(LTD Claim)
I(LTD Claim)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.0024
(0.0236)
-0.0530
(0.0844)

-0.0339
(0.0201)
-0.0599
(0.0414)

-0.0358
(0.0375)
-0.0524
(0.1590)

Relative Premium Plan H
Premium Plan M
Constant

0.0180
(0.0197)

Time Trend Included

0.0427
(0.0582)

0.0724
(0.0397)

x

Realized Costs of All Employees (Reduced Form)
Costs
Costs
I(LTD Claim)
I(LTD Claim)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

0.0675
(0.1120)

0.16
(0.58)
3.41
(3.57)
-0.0044
(0.0057)

x

0.03
(1.22)
4.08
(5.15)
-0.0052
(0.0068)

1.10
(0.97)
13.11
(6.78)
-0.0184
(0.0106)

x

2.57
(1.94)
5.44
(10.15)
-0.0092
(0.0137)
x

Dep Var
Mean
SD

0.0011
0.0302

0.0011
0.0302

0.0032
0.0561

0.0032
0.0561

0.0011
0.0302

0.0011
0.0302

0.0032
0.0561

0.0032
0.0561

N

47,884

47,884

47,884

47,884

47,884

47,884

47,884

47,884

Costs
(1)
Relative Premium Plan H

0.018
(0.839)

Panel B: Selection
Realized Cost of Employees on Plan H
Costs
I(LTD Claim)
I(LTD Claim)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.609
(1.486)

1.110
(1.580)

3.738
(2.374)

Premium Plan M
Constant

0.002
(0.001)

Time Trend Included

0.001
(0.002)

0.003
(0.002)

x

Realized Cost of Employees on Plan M or Plan H
Costs
Costs
I(LTD Claim)
I(LTD Claim)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

-0.002
(0.003)

4.529
(4.327)
-0.006
(0.007)

x

4.154
(5.397)
-0.005
(0.008)

13.490
(8.075)
-0.017
(0.012)

x

15.020
(9.981)
-0.019
(0.015)
x

Dep Var
Mean
SD

0.0015
0.0358

0.0015
0.0358

0.0041
0.0636

0.0041
0.0636

0.0013
0.0329

0.0013
0.0329

0.0037
0.0606

0.0037
0.0606

N

30,306

30,306

30,306

30,306

38,227

38,227

38,227

38,227

Notes: This table displays the moral hazard and selection estimates which leverage the premium variation for LTD plans. Panel
A displays the results related to moral hazard, where columns (1) through (4) display the IV results and columns (5) through (8)
display the reduced form results. Panel B displays the selection estimates, where columns (1) through (4) focus on selection into Plan
H. In addition, columns (5) through (8) focus on selection into at least Plan M coverage (relative to Plan L) leveraging the modest
amount of variation Plan M premiums. The outcome variables considered in these regressions are two different cost measures: the
present discounted value of costs (relative to annual earnings) incurred using the maximum potential duration for truncated spells as
described in the text (“Costs”, the baseline cost measure used in the text), and an indicator for having any LTD claim (“I(LTD Claim)”).

Appendix

Table A2: Demand and Cost Estimates: Comparing Plan H and Plan M

Panel A: Demand Estimates
Plan H
(1)
Relative premium Plan H

Plan H
(2)

PlanMorH
(3)

PlanMorH
(4)

-91.19
(38.30)
0.95
(0.06)

-38.15
(35.34)
0.87
(0.05)

-71.26
(11.77)

-64.93
(12.21)

0.72
(0.03)

0.70
(0.02)

x

x
x

x

x
x

0.63
0.48

0.63
0.48

0.80
0.40

0.80
0.40

47,884

47,884

47,884

47,884

0.00310
(0.00032)

0.00328
(0.00034)

0.00481
(0.02792)

0.00936
(3.75262)

Ln (relative premium Plan H)
(Relative) premium Plan M
Constant
Controls
Time Trend
Individual Fixed Effects
Dep Var
Mean
Std dev
N

Implied Mean WTP for Incremental Coverage, $/annual
earnings
Estimate
Std Error

Panel B: Mean Costs
Plan H
Mean

Std Error

Mean

PlanMorH
Std Error

Per capita cost, $/annual earnings
All
Do Purchase incremental coverage (dep var=1)
Do not purchase incremental coverage (dep var=0)

0.00111
0.00155
0.00036

(.00014)
(.00021)
(.00013)

0.00111
0.00133
0.00023

(.00014)
(.00017)
(.00016)

Relative premium, $/annual earnings

0.00124

(1.09E-06)

0.00154

(1.95E-07)

Notes: The above table displays the demand and cost estimates. Panel A columns (1) and (2) display the results of estimating a linear demand
specification for Plan H coverage, without individual fixed-effects (column 1) and with individual fixed-effects (column 2). For comparison, Panel A
columns (3) and (4) display estimates of the demand for Plan M coverage (relative to Plan L coverage). The bootstrapped standard error on the mean
implied willingness-to-pay for the incremental coverage (relative to annual earnings) is calculated using 10,000 bootstrap samples. Panel B displays
the mean cost estimates for everyone and separately for those who do and do not purchase the plan corresponding to each column. As discussed in
Section 4, the mean cost reported here is the mean present discounted value of disability claim costs relative to annual earnings scaled to represent
a 10% replacement rate. For reference, the relative premium for the plan corresponding to each column is listed below the mean cost estimates.

Appendix

Table A3: Additional Robustness Analysis

Panel A: Lower Bound on Value of Public Coverage Based on Alternative Specifications
Lower Bound on Mean WTP
Lower Bound on Per-Capita Welfare
relative to annual
% of mean cost scaled by 65K
relative to annual
% of mean cost scaled by 65K
earnings
earnings
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Est
Std Err
Est
Std Err
1. Baseline
Robustness to Alternative Cost Measures
2. Alternative Cost Measure, truncated at five years
3. Alternative Cost Measure, discounted at 2%
4. Alternative Cost Measure, discounted at 6%
Robustness to Using Plan M Demand (instead of Plan H)
5. Plan M Demand (time trend included)

0.01053

0.00110

279%

684

0.00677

0.00119

179%

440

0.01053
0.01053
0.01053

0.00110
0.00110
0.00110

430%
222%
265%

684
684
684

0.00817
0.00600
0.00673

0.00112
0.00126
0.00119

334%
126%
170%

531
390
437

0.01636

0.09402

416%

1,063

0.01259

0.09403

320%

818

Panel B: Parameter Estimates from Alternative Specifications
Demand
Relative Premium
Coeff
Std Err
Coeff
(1)
(2)
(3)
1. Baseline
Robustness to Alternative Cost Measures
2. Alternative Cost Measure, truncated at five years
3. Alternative Cost Measure, discounted at 2%
4. Alternative Cost Measure, discounted at 6%
Robustness to Using Plan M Demand (instead of Plan H)
5. Plan M Demand (time trend included)

Mean Cost
Constant
Std Err
(4)

Mean
(5)

Std Err
(6)

-71.26

(11.77)

0.72

(0.026)

0.00111

(.00014)

-71.26
-71.26
-71.26

(11.77)
(11.77)
(11.77)

0.72
0.72
0.72

(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.026)

0.00069
0.00134
0.00112

(.0001)
(.00021)
(.00017)

-91.19

(38.3)

0.95

(0.060)

0.00111

(.00014)

Notes: This table displays additional robustness analysis (beyond that displayed in Table 7). Panel A displays the implied lower bound
on the value of public coverage based on the alternative specifications (analogous to that reported in Table 6 Panel A row 2); Panel B
displays the underlying demand and mean cost estimates. As discussed in Section 4, the mean cost reported here is the mean present
discounted value of disability claim costs relative to annual earnings scaled to represent a 10% replacement rate. Panel A reports
bootstrapped standard errors using 10,000 bootstrap samples. Each row represents the results of a distinct specification. For reference,
row (1) displays the baseline estimates (from Table 5 column 1) and implied welfare bounds (from Table 6 Panel A row 2). Rows
(2) through (4) display the estimates and implied welfare bounds using alternative specifications of the cost measure. The baseline
analysis uses the present discounted value of costs using a 4% interest rate in this discounting, where we use the maximum potential
duration for spells censored at five years (as described in the text, Section 2). Row (2) displays an alternative specification where costs
are measured only through the first five years (the years for which we have claims data); rows (3) and (4) display specifications where
costs are defined as the present discounted value of the maximum potential duration for truncated spells, using alternative discount
rates. Row (5) displays an alternative specification that relies on the less precise Plan M demand estimates (rather than the baseline
Plan H demand estimates) to value disability insurance.

