NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NOMINALLY DENOMINATED SOVEREIGN
DEBT, RISK SHIFTING, AND REPUTATION

Herschel I. Grossman
John B. Van Huyck

Working Paper No. 2259

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in Economic
Fluctuations and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #2259
May 1987

Nominally Denominated Sovereign Debt, Risk Shifting, and Reputation

ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes a reputational equilibrium in a model in which
nominally denominated sovereign debt serves to shift risk associated with
the unpredictability of tax revenues from the sovereign to its lenders. The
analysis answers the following set of related questions:
Why would a
sovereign refrain from inflating when faced with servicing a large quantity
of nominal debt? If a sovereign does not plan to use inflation to repudiate
its nominal debts, why would it want to issue nominal debt in the first
place? What are the distinguishing features of those sovereigns who are
willing and able to issue nominal debts?

Herschel Grossman
Department of Economics
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912

John Van Huyck
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843

Over the course of history, certain sovereigns——the USA and UK are

rominent examples——have regularly issued debts that are

nominally

denominated in the units of the sovereign's own currency. Although this
practice is far from universal, it is nevertheless a puzzling phenomenon,

because such debt involves promises to pay a fixed number of units of an
asset whose real value the sovereign itself controls through its power to
issue fiat money.

Presumably, a sovereign can issue nominally denominated

debt only if lenders believe that the sovereign will not use its power to
inflate in order to repudiate its debts, in practice, sovereign issuers of

nominally denominated debt regularly validate this belief, even to the
extent of deflating in periods, typically postwar periods, following the
issuance of large quantities of debt.

These observations suggest the following set of related questions:
1.

Why would a sovereign refrain from inflating, or even deflate,

when faced with servicing a large quantity of

nominally

denominated debt?
2.

If a sovereign does not plan to use inflation to repudiate its
nominally denominated debts, why would it want to issue such debt
in the first place?

3.

What are the distinguishing features of those sovereigns who are
willing and able to issue nominally denominated debt?
To answer these questions, this paper develops a theory that focuses on

the unpredictability of tax revenues, net of nondiscretionary expenditures,

and the desirability of shifting some of the associated risk from the
sovereign to its lenders.

If contracts contingent on net tax revenues are

sufficiently, costly to write, verify, and enforce, shifting risk by making

debt servicing directly contingent on net tax revenues is not feasible. In

2

this situation, if the price level and real output are inversely related and

real output and net tax revenues are positively related, then nominally

denominated debt can help to achieve the desired risk shifting.

This

advantage of nominally denominated debt, however, requires that lenders

expect the sovereign to refrain from attempting to produce unexpected
inflation in order to repudiate its debts.

The analysis assumes that, because monetary policy is verifiable,
lenders can differentiate unexpected inflation that is associated with
negative shocks to aggregate output from unexpected inflation that would
result from a sovereign's efforts to repudiate its nominally denominated
debts.

In this theory, the choice by the sovereign to validate lender

expectations about monetary policy——by, for example, maintaining or resuming
convertibility to an external standard like gold——depends on the sovereign's

concern for its trustworthy reputation.

A trustworthy reputation is

valuable because it serves as collateral that provides continued ability to
issue nominally denominated debt.

The analysis derives a reputational equilibrium in which the amount of

nominally denominated debt is such that the short—run benefits to the
sovereign from deliberately creating unexpected inflation are smaller than

the long—run costs from the loss of a trustworthy reputation.

Any

unexpected inflation that occurs in the reputational equilibrium is the
result of negative shocks to aggregate output and serves to shift risk from

the sovereign to its lenders.

The analysis shows that, depending on such

factors as the probability of the sovereign's surviving in power and the
probability of the lenders' forgetting a repudiation, the equilibrium amount

of nominally denominated debt can be adequate to permit efficient risk

3

shifting or can be constrained to limit risk shifting.

In extreme cases,

reputational forces can fail to support anything other than a trivial
equilibrium with zero nominal debt.

In the existing literature on nominally denominated sovereign debt,
Lucas and Stokey (1983) develop a normative model of debt as a device to
shift risk. In their model, efficiency requires that the sovereign commit

itself to service its debts according to a contingent nominal servicing
schedule and also commit monetary policy to achieve a specific price path.
Such commitments would effectively convert nominally denominated debts into

real contingent claims. Neither Lucas and Stokey nor the further discussion

in Lucas (1986) explores the implications of the unenforceability of such
commitments.

In contrast, Bohn's (1985) analysis of nominally denominated debt as a
device to shift risk emphasizes the potential time inconsistency of monetary

policy commitments. To rationalize a finite inflation rate, Bohn assumes

that sovereigns are averse to inflation, whether expected or not, and

derives a myopic equilibrium in which the expected inflation rate is

sufficiently high and the amount of debt sufficiently small that the
marginal cost of unexpected additional inflation equals the marginal benefit

from reduced real debt servicing.

Bohn's analysis does not consider the

possible role of reputational forces in supporting a larger amount of debt.
In another related paper, Grossman and Van Huyck (1987), we develop the

idea of sovereign debt as a contingent claim that allows excusable default

in verifiably bad states of the world, and we derive a reputational
equilibrium in which the sovereign always chooses to meet its contingent
real servicing obligations rather than to repudiate its debts. The present

4

paper considers a complementary problem in which claims that are directly

contingent on net tax revenues are assumed not to be feasible.

This

infeasibility motivates the issuance of nominally denominated debt and the

associated use of inflation that is unexpected, but not deliberate, to
enforce the contingent claim.

I. Analytical Framework
To simplify the analysis, assume that the sovereign's lenders are risk

neutral and that all of the sovereign's debts are nominally denominated

claims that mature in one period.

The use of loans as a device to

facilitate risk shifting allows the prepayment of indemnities and permits a

large agent like a sovereign to draw on the resources of many small and
anonymous insurers, with whom it would be costly to write and to enforce
contracts requiring the payment of an indemnity after a bad realization. In

the present case, the prepayment of indemnities as loans with nominal
servicing commitments allows the execution of the insurance contract without
requiring the lenders to verify the state of the world.

The sovereign's objective in period r is to maximize the expectation of

the present value of current and future utility over an horizon of h
periods, which corresponds to the prospective longevity of the sovereign's

survival in power. This expectation, U, is given by

r+h
(1)

U

u(c T) + E

E

r t=r+1

t—r
fi

with u'(c) > 0, uh'(c) < 0, u'(O) —

, and

0 <

1, where E is an

operator that denotes an expectation conditional on information available in

5

period r, c is a measure of discretionary public expenditures in period t,

c

0, and

reflects the sovereign's constant rate of pure time

preference.

The analysis assumes that h is a random variable defined over the
positive integers, and, for simplicity, assumes that in any period the
probability that the current sovereignty will terminate is l—-y, where

o

-y

1.

Thus, h has the geometric probability distribution [h,q(h)},

where q(h) = -ys_l(1_7)

The probability that h will turn out to be less

than s+l periods is 1_),S, Because h is unbounded, evaluating U requires a

calculation of expected utility over an infinite horizon, with utility at

date t discounted to reflect the probability that h would turn out to be
less than t.

Specifically, equation (1) and the geometric distribution for

h imply

(2)

The

U =

analysis

E ()t_TE [u(c)].
u(cr) +t=r+l
T

assumes that lenders know fi, -y, and the function u(c), as well

as all other aspects of the structure of the model.

[Note that, if the

probability of termination, 1—7, is positive, then U is defined even if 8
equals unity.]

Current discretionary public expenditure equals current net real tax
revenue plus the net real revenue from borrowing contracted in the previous
period——that is,
l+i
(3)

c =

+ (1÷ —
l+1r

) b1,

6

where

is real net tax revenue in period t, p is a constant risk—free one—

period rate of return,
contracted in period t—i,

is the nominal interest rate on borrowing
is the rate of change in the price index for

real national product from period t—l to period t, and bi is the real
value of the amount borrowed in period t—l.

[Note that equation (3) does

not consider the possibility of financing current expenditures out of
savings or out of current borrowing. This abstraction allows us to avoid
the difficult and yet unsolved technical problem of formulating a tractable

model of reputation with multiple state variables.

Backus and Driffill

(1986) consider the general properties of such a model. The important point

is that, given that feasible limits on savings and accuniulated debt are

finite, these devices alone could not facilitate complete smoothing of
expenditures. As an analytical device, the randomness of n can represent

the net variability of net tax revenues after allowing for net current
saving.]

Current real net tax revenues, the first source of financing for

current discretionary expenditure, depend positively on current real
national product,

(4)

Specifically,

Y1),

with f'(y) strictly positive and continuous.

Real national product is a

continuous stationary exogenous random variable whose realizations are

bounded according to 0 <

<

< max

distribution is p(y). Denote the mean value of n as

and whose probability

7

One possible interpretation of this setup is that n represents tax
revenues net of the minimal level of public expenditures essential for law,

order, and national security, that c represents additional expenditures on

public services, that U represents the utility of a representative
individual, and that f(s) represents an optimal tax policy.

Another

possibility, which maybe more realistic, is to regard the sovereign as a
proprietor and to interpret c as the proprietor's consumption and U as the
proprIetor's utility.

In this case, n would represent the proprietor's

maximum revenue from taxes and other sources net of expenditures that is
consistent with its survival as sovereign with probability -y.
extension of the analysis would be to model

[A possibile

and the implied value of -y as

choice variables.] On either interpretation, the concavity of

u(c)

motivates the sovereign to want to issue and to service debt in such a way
that it can stabilize c in the face of variations in n. As stressed above,

however, the analysis assumes that shifting risk by making real debt
servicing directly contingent on net tax revenue is not feasible.

Given the nominal interest rate contracted in period t—1, the net
borrowing proceeds, which are the second source of financing for current
discretionary expenditure, depend positively on the current inflation rate.

The current inflation rate depends, in turn, on current monetary policy and

on the current realization of real national product.

Assume, for

simplicity, that the instrument of monetary policy is the exchange rate,

denoted by x, x 0, and defined as the value of a nominal monetary unit
in units of a monetary standard. For example, x could be the gold value or

the yen value of a dollar. A critical element of the information structure

is that lenders can readily observe x and thereby verify the sovereign's

8

monetary policy.
The decision rule governing monetary policy has the general form,

(5)

x =

where At_l is a vector of all relevant predetermined variables, which
include x1, i1, and bi. The function M(.) allows the possibility that
the choice of x depends on the realization of real national product, and
hence of real net tax revenue, as well as on predetermined variables, which
include the nominal debt servicing obligation contracted in period t.-l.

For a given ratio of x to x1, the inflation rate depends on the
movement in the terms of trade. Specifically, let i/vt represent an index
of the value of a unit of national product in units of a monetary standard,

for example, gold. Given these definitions, we have

(6)

1

1 +

xt V
Assume that the interaction of demand and supply in world markets
causes the value of a unit of national product, i/vt, to vary inversely with

the level of real national product. Specifically,

(7)

where g'(y) is strictly positive and continuous.
realization of v as

Denote the mean

9

The supply of loans is a critical constraint on the sovereign's
choices.

Given competition among the sovereign's lenders, who are risk

neutral, market clearing implies that if btl is positive, the expected real

interest rate on sovereign borrowing equals the alternative risk—free real

rate of return, p. Accordingly, for b1 > 0 the nominal interest rate,
must satisfy

l+i
(8)

Et— l

1

l+p,

l+7r

where Ei(.) E(.JAti). To see the implications of equation (8) for the
nominal interest rate, observe that equation (6) implies

—l

(9)

E1(xv)

E1[(1-i-7r)

xt—lvt—l

and that, using equations (5) and (7), we can write

(10)

Eti(xv) JMe(y;A1)g(y)p(y)dy

where the function Ne(.) describes the decision rule that lenders believe
governs the sovereign's monetary policy——that is, the sovereign's choice of

x1. The final component needed to complete the model is the determination
of Me(.).

II. An Irrevocably Committed Monetary Policy

Suppose that in each period t—l the monetary authority acting as an

10

agent of the sovereign could irrevocably commit itself to set a specific

announced positive exchange rate in period t.
exchange rate as
implicit.

Denote this announced

This announcement could be either explicit or

For example, it could take the form of a generally understood

commitment to return to a historical monetary standard, like gold, at the
historical parity.

Given that it is irrevocable, such a commitment would determine the ex-

pectation that lenders form in period t—l about x. Specifically, such a
commitment would imply that the function M(.) governing monetary policy,
given in general by equation (5), has the special properties,

(11)

x M(y;A1) —1

for all y and At_l,

that the function Me(.) corresponds to the function N(.), and that, from
equation (10),

(12)

E1(xv) t—l'

Substituting equation (12) into equation (9), and substituting equations
(9), (8), and (6) into equation (3) yields

(13)

c =

+

(l+p)(l_v/)bi

The essential property of equation (13) is the dependence of current
discretionary expenditure, through unexpected inflation, on the deviation in

the terms of trade from its expected value.

For example, if because of a

11

low realization of national product, the gold value of units of national
product, l/v, turns out to be higher than expected, then the inflation rate

is also unexpectedly high, the real value of the sovereign's nominal
servicing obligation is reduced, and net revenue from borrowing is larger
than expected. The important observation is that this windfall would serve
to indemnify the sovereign for the unexpectedly poor realization of net real

tax revenue resulting from the low realization of national product. For a

given realization of y, and hence of v and n, the size of this indemnity
depends positively on the real value of the amount borrowed,

b1.

Note that equation (13) does not involve the actual exchange rate.

Given that x is predetermined and positive, its actual value is not
important because the nominal interest rate incorporates any expected
inflation.

[Note also that this simple model lacks sufficient structure to

pin down the inflation rate.

Although the sovereign's utility depends on

unexpected inflation, it does not depend separately on either expected
inflation or actual inflation.

In order to determine the inflation rate,

the model would have to be extended to include separate effects of expected

or actual inflation either directly on the sovereign's utility or on the

sovereign's revenue, as, for example, in the model of seigniorage and
reputation analyzed in Grossman and Van Huyck (1986) or in the generic model
of monetary policy and reputation analyed in Grossman 1987).]

With the exchange rate predetermined and positive, given that

y is

stationary and that debt matures in one period, the problem of maximizing U
reduces to the choice in each period t—l of the value of bi that maximizes

Et1u(c).

Substituting equations (4) and (7) into equation (13) and

applying the operator Etl yields

12

(14)

Etiu(c) Ju{f(y) +

(1+P)[1_g(y)/]b1)p(y)dy.
A

The time—invariant critical value for this problem, denoted by b, satisfies
the first—order condition,

(15)

Jut tf(y) +

(l+p)[1-g(y)/]b)[l-g(y)/]p(y)dy

0.

The assumptions that u'(•), f'(.), and g'(.) are strictly positive and
continuous and that u"(.) is strictly negative imply that a positive value
A

of b exists. Moreover, the second—order condition,

Jufl(.)[1_g(y)/J2p(y)dy < 0,

implies that this critical value is unique and yields maximum expected
A

utility. In this sense, the real value of borrowing given by b implies an
efficient amount of risk shifting from the sovereign to its lenders.

Equation (15) is satisfied if c and, hence, u'(.), the marginal
utility of discretionary expenditure, is independent of y. To obtain a

closed—form solution for b, assume that

and v have a correlation

coefficient equal to one or, equivalently, that f(y) is an affine
transformation of g(y): f(y)

,c +

pg(y).

Given this assumption, the real

amount of borrowing given by
A

(16)

b=

fl—K

l+p

makes u'(.) independent of y and, hence, satisfies equation (15).

13

Equation (16) says that, under appropriate simplifying assumptions, the
sovereign would borrow in each period a real amount in the form of nominally

denominated debt equal to the discounted expected value of its real net tax

revenue less a constant.
complete,

In this case, efficient risk shifting would be

In other words, c would be independent of

and its value,

denoted c, would be equal to n, the mean value of real net tax revenues.
[For a correlation coefficient between n and v less than one, efficient
risk shifting with a predetermined exchange rate would not be complete.]

III. An Opportunistic Monetary Policy

In reality, monetary policy, including exchange rate policy, is not

subject to irrevocable commitments.

Indeed, the power to abrogate

commitments without having to answer to a higher authority is an essential

property of sovereignty and, hence, of economic policy.

Accordingly,

although providing a useful benchmark, the preceding case in which a
committed monetary policy supports efficient and complete risk shifting does

not provide, an empirically relevant analysis of nominally denominated
sovereign debt.

To consider another useful benchmark case, suppose that, in addition to
being incapable of making irrevocable policy commitments, the sovereign sets

the current exchange rate without regard either for its own exchange rate
announcements or for any effect that its actual current monetary policy has

on expectations about its future monetary policy. Instead, in period r the

sovereign opportunistically chooses the current exchange rate, x, to
maximize U, taking the lenders' expectation about future exchange rates as
given.

Because a decrease in x

,

by equations (3) and (6), increases c

and U, the solution to this problem would be to set x equal to zero——that

14
is,

to repudiate any outstanding nominally denominated debt through

devaluation and inflation.

Assuming that lenders correctly perceive that the sovereign would face

the same problem and would obtain the same solution in the next period,
lenders would anticipate repudiation through inflation of any nominally
denominated debt in the future.

Accordingly, the condition for a positive

supply of loans, given by equation (8), could not be satisfied for any
finite nominal interest rate and, hence, b1 could not be positive.

In

other words, an opportunistic monetary policy would imply an autarkic
equilibrium.

The sovereign would be unable to issue any nominally

denominated debt and it would be unable to shift any risk.

IV. A Reputational Equilibrium

The analysis in the preceding sections assumed either that the
sovereign irrevocably commits its monetary policy, in which case the
quantity of nominally denominated debt would be sufficient for efficient

risk shifting, or that the sovereign makes monetary policy

op-

portunistically, in which case it could not issue any nominally denominated
debt.

To develop a more general analysis, suppose that, although the

sovereign cannot irrevocably commit its monetary policy, it can influence
lenders' expectations about future monetary policy by its choice of current
monetary policy.

The linkage between current monetary policy and lenders' beliefs about
the decision rule that governs monetary policy is the sovereign's reputation

for trustworthiness.

Given this linkage, a rational sovereign would

consider how its current monetary policy is likely to affect its reputation

and how its reputation affects its ability to issue nominally denominated

15

debt now and in the future. Only a sovereign that irrationally ignored its
reputation would behave opportunistically.

[Assuming that the process by

which it appoints and removes the individual policymakers who constitute the

monetary authority permits the sovereign to translate its objectives into

policy, reputation resides with the sovereign and not with individual
policymakers.]

The sovereign's reputation depends on the announcement in each period

t—1 of a specific positive exchange rate for period t and the subsequent
validation, or repudiation, of this announcement.

Denote the announced

exchange rate again as _ix, but in this section this announcement,
whether explicit or implicit, is not an irrevocable commitment.
In a reputational equilibrium, the amount of nominally denominated debt
is such that for any realization of y the expected value of the sovereign's

utility is at least as large if the sovereign validates its announced
exchange rate by setting x equal to

were to set x equal to zero.

as it would be if the sovereign

Using their knowledge of the sovereign's

objectives and constraints, lenders are able to derive the set of amounts of

debt that satisfy this condition.

Given the stationary structure of the

model, this set is time invariant. The maximal element in this set, denoted
bm,

is the largest amount of nominally denominated debt for which the

condition for a positive supply of loans, given by equation (8), could be
satisfied with a finite nominal interest rate.

To analyze the determination of bm, assume that all sovereigns always
behave rationally, except for an infinitesimal fraction,

c,

of sovereigns

who inexplicably lose the rational ability to resist the temptation to
behave opportunistically.

Such a loss of rational restraint could result

16

either from idiosyncratic irrationality or from a breakdown in the process
by which the individuals who compose the sovereignty reach their decisions.

Either infirmity, however uncommonly it occurs,

is intrinsic and

irreversible.

Knowing this pattern of sovereign behavior, lenders, when dealing with

a specific sovereign, attach probability l—E, which equals approximately

unity, to rational and, hence, trustworthy behavior as long as this
sovereign has not behaved opportunistically within the memory of these
lenders. In this case, the sovereign could issue nominally denominated debt
up to the amount bm with a contracted nominal interest rate that implies an
expected real rate of return equal to p.
If, alternatively, this sovereign has used devaluation and inflation to

repudiate its nominally denominated debts within the memory of current
lenders, these lenders would expect such opportunistic behavior in the
future.

In this case, the supply function of loans would imply that this

sovereign would be unable to issue any nominally denominated debt.

Note

that this outcome would depend only on the expectations of atomistic lenders
and would not require or involve collusive strategic behavior by lenders.

Denote the length of time over which current lenders would remember a

repudiation to be k periods, where 0

k

.

The analysis assumes that k

is a random variable and, for simplicity, assumes that in any period the
probability that lenders would permanently forget a past repudiation is a

constant 1 —

6, where 0

6

1.

Thus, k has the geometric probability

distribution [k,q(k)], where q(k) equals 65_l(l_6). The probability that k
would turn out to be less than s + 1 periods is 1 —

&. If 6 equals unity,

then k is infinite and a sovereign would never recover a trustworthy

17

reputation once it has been lost.

Given that the sovereign has a trustworthy reputation in period r — 1,
these assumptions about the sovereign's reputation and lenders' expectations

imply that

r, Me(yt;Atl) _1 and bi

b'1', and

for r ÷ h t >r, either Me(y;A1) —

and

for t —

(17)

if x

.x

.

for

.

t—j —l t—j

t—J

or bti —

0

all j

I ...

bt_l b

k,

otherwise.

Taking account of reputation, the rational sovereign's problem in period

r

is to choose a program (be, X, tct÷1) to maximize U, as given by
equation (2), subject to equation (3) and conditions (8) and (17).

The

solution to this problem describes a reputational equilibrium.

The

important feature of this equilibrium is the program for

b. Given the

stationary structure of the model, this program, denoted by b*, is time
invariant.

To derive b*, define V to be the expected value of the sovereign's
utility over an horizon that corresponds to either the prospective longevity

of the sovereign's survival in power or the prospective longevity of
lenders' memories of a repudiation, whichever is shorter——that is

(18)

VF = u(c ) ÷
F

r+min(h,k)

E

F

t=r+1

t—r

u(c).

Only at most the next k periods are relevant, because the sovereign's

18

utility after period r + k is independent of the decision regarding
repudiation in period r. Given the geometric probability distributions for
h and k, equation (18) implies

(19)

Vr = u(c) + E

(Th,S)t_T

t=r+l

E[u(c)].

According to equation (19), the contribution of expected utility in period t

to V is smaller the larger is t, the larger is the sovereign's rate of pure

time preference, the larger is probability that in any period the current
sovereignty will terminate, and the larger is the probability that in any
period lenders would forget a past repudiation.

The definition of b* implies that b* is less than or equal to bm and,
hence, is a member of the set of amounts of debt that satisfy

(20)

V' V° for all possible realizations of

y,

where V is the expected utility associated with borrowing b* and setting

equal to 1x for all t

x

r and V° is the expected utility associated with

borrowing b* and setting x equal to zero. Condition (20) says that b* is

such that for all possible realizations of y a plan that for all t
involves validating lenders' expectations that

r

x will equal _1 would

generate in period r higher expected utility for a rational sovereign than
would a decision to repudiate.

Given that, if the sovereign set X equal to

1x, lenders do not

change their expectations, any value of b* that satisfies condition (20)

19

also satisfies the analogous condition for period r + 1 and, by extension,
for every subsequent period.

Therefore, the sovereign's plan to keep its

trustworthy reputation in the future is time consistent.

In the reputational equilibrium, as in the hypothetical case of an
irrevocably committed monetary policy, the expected and actual exchange
rates are equal. Accordingly, equation (13) gives the equilibrium relation

between discretionary expenditures, denoted by c, and the real value of

borrowing, b*. Thus, to calculate V, set b1 equal to b* and substitute
equation (13) for c into equation (20). Given the probability distribution
p(y), this calculation yields

(21)

V — u[n + (1 + p)(i— v/)b*]
+

—atJu[n

+ (1 + p)(l —

1—a

where a

s8Y6.

—*

v/v)b

]p(y)dy,

To calculate V°, observe that by repudiating its debts in

period r, the sovereign would obtain discretionary expenditure in period r

equal to n + (1Ip)b*.

At the same time, by condition (17) repudiation

would cause the sovereign to lose its trustworthy reputation.

Consequently,

in the next h or k periods, the equilibrium under anticipated

repudiation,

analyzed in Section III, would obtain. In this equilibrium, the sovereign

would be unable to borrow and, accordingly, would obtain

discretionary

expenditure equal to n. Substituting these terms into equation (19) yields

(22)

V0r — u[nr

*+ —
atIu(n)p(y)dy.

+ (1+p)b I

1—a j

20

V. Does Reputation Support Efficient Risk Shifting?
The analysis in Section II presented an example in which risk shifting

is efficient and complete, the implied time—invariant real amount of
A

borrowing, b, is equal to (I—ic)/(l+p), and the associated time—invariant
A

A

discretionary expenditure, c, is equal to n.

A

The combination of b and c

yields the highest value of 13r subject to x equals _1 for all t

r.

Thus, if condition (20) is satisfied for b equal to b——that is, if b is not

larger than bm__then the sovereign would borrow b, and b and c are the

If, alternatively, condition (20) is not

reputational equilibrium.
A

*

satisfied for b equal to b, lenders would not permit the sovereign to
A

borrow b.

Such a constraint would prevent the sovereign from achieving

efficient and complete risk shifting.
A

A

To analyze the conditions that determine whether b and c are the
reputational equilibrium, it is necessary to evaluate condition (20) for b*
A

equal to b. Making the appropriate substitutions in equations (21) and (22)
gives

(23)

(24)

V*I*A
V0

u(i) +

u(i)

and

a r

* A
Tbb

u(n + n — ,c) +

1—a J

u(n)p(y)dy.

Comparison of equations (23) and (24) shows that current considerations

favor repudiation because n is smaller than n7 + — ,ç, whereas
future considerations discourage repudiation because,— u(i) is
larger than 5_-

fu(n)p(y)dy.

Looking more closely at future consider—

21

ations, the factors that weigh against repudiation are a larger value of a,
which implies less discounting of future events, and greater concavity (risk

aversion) of the function u(.) and a larger variance of the stochastic
variable y, both of which make risk shifting more important. Looking more
closely at current considerations, the incentive to repudiate is larger the

larger the realization of y and, hence, of n and v. The effect arises
because, for a given exchange rate, the larger is real national product, the

lower is the price level, and larger is the real cost of servicing the
existing nominally denominated debt.

Comparison of equations (23) and (24) reveals that if condition (20) is

satisfied for max' then condition (20) will be satisfied for all possible

realizations of

Suppose, however, that b does not satisfy condition

(20) for large realizations of y. In other words, suppose that b is so big

that for a large enough realization of y. a sovereign that had borrowed b
would choose to repudiate its debt through devaluation and inflation rather

than to keep its trustworthy reputation.
A

In that case, b* would be less

than b.

To confirm this result, observe that for large values of y equations
(21) and (22) imply

(25)

*
8(VT — V0)

*

öb

* A — (l+p)[u'(i)(l—v/)

b—b

—

u'(n+j—,c)] < 0.

A

Equation (25) says that, if b is not the reputational equilibrium, then,
with lenders forming expectations according to condition (17), the supply
constraint given by equation (8) might be consistent with a smaller amount

22

of borrowing. Of course, this smaller amount of borrowing implies less than

efficient and complete risk shifting.

In extreme, but perhaps frequently

realistic, cases——for example, cases in which the sovereign has a low value
of cr——the equilibrium amount of nominally denominated debt can be zero.

VI. Summary
This paper has analyzed a reputational equilibrium in a model in which,

because net real tax revenue and unexpected inflation are inversely related,

nominally denominated sovereign debt serves to shift the risk associated
with net real tax revenue from the sovereign to its lenders.

The model

assumes that lenders can differentiate unexpected inflation that is

associated with negative shocks to aggregate output from unexpected

inflation that would result if a sovereign set its exchange rate
opportunistically, without regard for its announced exchange rate policy, in

an attempt to repudiate its debts.

In the reputational equilibrium, the

amount of nominally denominated debt is such that the short—run gains from

repudiation of the debt through unexpected devaluation and inflation are
smaller than the long—run costs from the loss of a trustworthy reputation.
Accordingly, the sovereign always resists the temptation to repudiate.

The equilibrium amount of debt can be sufficient to permit efficient
and complete risk shifting or it can be constrained in a way that limits
risk shifting.

The factors that tend to produce such a debt constraint

include a high rate of pure time preference for a sovereign, a high
probability per period that the sovereign will not survive in power, a high

probability per period that lenders would forget a past repudiation,Alow
risk aversion for the sovereign.

23

REFERENCES

D. Backus and J. Driffill, "The Consistency of Optimal Policy in Stochastic
Rational Expectations Models," unpublished, May 1986.

H. Bohn, "Why Do We Have Nominal Government Debt?" Stanford Graduate'School
of Business, Research Paper No. 860, December 1985.

H.I. Grossman, "A Generic Model of
Reputation."

Monetary Policy, Infation, and

NBER Working Paper No. 2239, May 1987.

H.I. Grossman and J.B. Van Huyck, "Seigniorage, Inflation, and Reputation,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 18, July 1986.

H.I. Grossman and J.B. Van Huyck, "Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim:
Excusable Default, Repudiation, and Reputation," NBER Working Paper No.
1673, revised January 1987.

R.E. Lucas, Jr., "Principles of Fiscal and Monetary Policy," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 17, January 1986.

R.E. Lucas, Jr. and N.L. Stokey, "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an
Economy Without Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, July 1983.

