                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              EXECUTIVE LAWYERS:
                       GATEKEEPERS OR STRATEGIC OFFICERS?

                                         Adair Morse
                                          Wei Wang
                                         Serena Wu

                                      Working Paper 22597
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22597


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016


We thank Andres Almazan, Shashwat Alok, Jennifer Arlen, Paul Calluzzo, Qiang Cheng, Carola
Frydman, Todd Gormley, E. Han Kim, Byungjin Kwak, Ross Levine, Kai Li, Nan Li, Yinghua
Li, Ulrike Malmendier, Steve Salterio, Scott Schaefer, and seminar participants at Auburn
University, Harvard University, Queen’s University, Simon Fraser University, Stanford/Berkeley
joint seminar, Tsinghua University (PBC School), University of Alberta, University of
Amsterdam, University of Minnesota, Yale University, Econometric Society Meetings at the
AEA Meetings, Canadian Law and Economics Association annual meetings, Conference on
Empirical Legal Studies (CELS), NBER Law and Economics meetings, Northern Finance
Association annual meetings (NFA), Singapore Management University Accounting Symposium,
Washington University Corporate Finance Conference, Financial Intermediation Research
Society (FIRS) Conference, Western Finance Association (WFA) Conference, China
International Conference in Finance (CICF) as well as our team of dedicated research assistants,
including Any Ung, Lindsay Carter, Elise Craig, Jun Lee, Erin Shin, Ahrun Thiyagarajah, and
Peter Willett. We thank Blair Morrison, Chief Compliance Officer and Deputy General Counsel
of BMO Financial Group for useful conversations. Wang and Wu thank Queen’s School of
Business Research Program for their generous funding support The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Adair Morse, Wei Wang, and Serena Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Executive Lawyers: Gatekeepers or Strategic Officers?
Adair Morse, Wei Wang, and Serena Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 22597
September 2016
JEL No. G32,G34,J33,K22,M52

                                          ABSTRACT

Lawyers now serve as executives in 44% of corporations. Although endowed with gatekeeping
responsibilities, executive lawyers face increasing pressure to use time on strategic efforts. In a
lawyer fixed effects model, we quantify that lawyers are half as important as CEOs in explaining
variances in compliance, monitoring, and business development. In a difference-in-differences
model, we find that hiring lawyers into executive positions associates with 50% reduction in
compliance breaches and 32% reduction in monitoring breaches. We then ask whether firms’
optimal contracting of lawyers into strategic activities implies less lawyer gatekeeping effort.
Using a design comparing executive lawyers hired from law firms to lawyers poached from
corporations, we find that lawyers hired with high compensation delta (indicative of the
importance of strategic goals in compensation contracts) do less monitoring, preventing 25%
fewer breaches than are typically mitigated by having an executive gatekeeper. Reassuringly,
lawyers do not compromise compliance.


Adair Morse                                                  Serena Wu
University of California, Berkeley                           Goodes Hall Queen’s University
545 Student Services Bldg, #1900                             143 Union St.
Berkeley, CA 94720                                           Kingston, ON, Canada K7L 3N6
and NBER                                                     swu@business.queensu.ca
morse@haas.berkeley.edu

Wei Wang
Queens University
Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6, Canada
wwang@business.queensu.ca
        “Lawyers are what today we call crucial gatekeepers, responsible for safeguarding
                                   shareholders’ interests.”
                           – Former SEC Chairman Christopher Cox 1

 “I have been there at the beginning of an idea, I have helped implement the idea, and on those
   occasions where an idea has turned out poorly, I was there to help clean up the mess, too.”
  – Peter Bragdon, SVP, General Counsel, and Secretary of Columbia Sportswear Company 2


I. Introduction

        The general counsel (or chief legal officer) is arguably the most important internal

governance actor in the firm. This top internal lawyer now sits among the top five (in pay rank)

executives in over 44% of U.S. public corporations. Conditional on being in the inner suite,

executive lawyers earn 35% as much compensation as CEOs. What makes these executive

lawyers unique in firm leadership is their dual role as strategic officers and gatekeeping agents.

Our goals are to quantify the importance of executive lawyers on these dimensions and then to

explore whether the call to add strategic input into business development affects executive

lawyers’ gatekeeping effectiveness.

        The legal literature describes the strategic and gatekeeping roles of executive lawyers

(Demott, 2005; Duggin, 2007; Heineman, 2012; Sorkin, 2012). This literature makes a

distinction between two aspects of gatekeeping: SEC financial compliance (specifically,

gatekeeping tasks that require a lawyer to sign off) and monitoring. For our purposes, this is a

helpful distinction for a number of reasons. First, our agenda builds on an important accounting

literature documenting the SEC financial compliance (hereafter, compliance) role of lawyers.

Jagolinzer, Larcker, and Taylor (2011), Krishnan, Wen, and Zhao (2011), Kwak, To, and Suk



1 Address to the Corporate Counsel Institute, March, 8, 2007
2
  See Dubey and Kripalani (2013) – page 42.


                                                                                                  1
(2012), Choudhary, Schloetzer, and Sturgess (2013), Hopkins, Maydew, and Venkatachalam

(2015), and Goh, Lee and Ng (2015) collectively study the effect of the lawyer on the likelihood

of compliance breaches to accounting and insider trading regulations. Second, the signing-off

function sets apart compliance because the lawyers faces personal exposure to liability, which

surely affects behavior. In the surveys of Deloitte (2011) and KPMG (2012), roughly two-thirds

of general counsels cite maintaining compliance as their greatest concern. Monitoring covers a

large breadth of activities that lawyers guard for potential breach of law or contract, including

antitrust, disclosure, affiliated transactions, and contract infringements. 3 Although these potential

legal exposures are important, the general counsel has much more flexibility in choosing how to

use her time to monitor and mitigate risks across this broader set of legal exposures. By contrast,

compliance is a mandatory function. Third, monitoring warrants a stand-alone examination,

given the increasing importance of internal governance for the firm, following hostile takeovers

of the 1980s, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) in the early 2000s, the Dodd-Frank legislation

subsequent to the financial crisis starting in 2008, and most recently, shareholder activism.

        In their third role, that of strategic officers, executive lawyers offer their legal expertise as

an input into business development and strategic risk management (Sorkin, 2012). As

motivation, imagine being a CEO or director of a company such as Tesla, Google or Ford. Surely

one would want legal expertise in the strategic team to consider consumer liability as these firms

consider capital expenditure and R&D investments in the self-driving car market. Russell

Reynolds Associates (2013) analyzed their database of 3,000 assessments of corporate

executives and found that “contrary to conventional wisdom, the legal executives go well beyond

spotting legal issues to helping the business actually take risks and find creative solutions.”

3
 We build off the important work of Kwak et al. (2012), who provide evidence for monitoring by executive lawyers
by including the appointment of a new general counsel as a factor in predicting litigation risk.


                                                                                                               2
       With these roles in mind, we conduct two sets of empirical analyses. First, we gauge the

importance of executive lawyers in these multiple tasks, providing empirical support for the legal

literature on the role of corporate lawyers (e.g., Nelson and Nielsen, 2000; Coffee, 2003;

DeMott, 2005; Heineman, 2012; Sorkin, 2012). We begin with the individual fixed effects

model of Bertrand and Schoar (2003), which uses movement of executives across firms to

estimate how much variation in outcomes of firms is due to individual managers. The premise of

this methodology, originally applied to CEOs, is that if individual lawyers explain some of the

variations of an outcome over and above firm fixed effects, then one can infer that individual

differences across lawyers are relevant to the firm’s success, and thus the position of general

counsel is important to the firm.

       To implement the individual fixed effects method, we measure compliance failures with

Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Releases (AAERs) and SEC allegations of insider

trading. We measure monitoring failures with securities fraud, securities lawsuits purged of

AAERs, and general lawsuits, and we measure business development with capital expenditure

intensity, R&D, business segments, and filing of patents. Across U.S. public corporations, we

find that lawyer fixed effects increase adjusted r-squared by 0.045 for compliance, 0.072 for

monitoring, and 0.018 for business development, over and above firm and year fixed effects and

after controlling for the firm-specific time trend. This average r-squared increment explained by

lawyers is about half as large as the r-squared increment explained by CEO fixed effects, and

thus very material.

       The individual fixed effects methodology has a limitation in generalizability in that

identification comes from the selection of individuals that move. Thus, we implement a second

methodology, running propensity-score-matched, difference-in-differences tests around the



                                                                                                3
hiring of an executive lawyer into the firm. We find that firms hiring executive lawyers exhibit a

50% reduction of compliance failures and a 32% reduction of monitoring failures relative to their

propensity score matched firms that do not hire executive lawyers. We argue that the bias on

these results is likely to be conservative since, all else equal on observables, firms expecting

future governance strains are likely to select into hiring gatekeepers.

       The two designs complement each other in mitigating other bias concerns. On one hand,

the lawyer fixed effects analysis may err on estimating only within the set of executive lawyers

who move from one corporation to another, but it is free from the biases related to the decision to

hire. On the other hand, the propensity score matched difference-in-differences analysis may err

on not being able to control for all unobservables in the decision to hire, but this analysis is free

from the selection bias by including all potential outside hires (not just movers among public

corporations). We argue that taken together, consistency in the estimates across methods

suggests robust evidence of the importance of lawyers in gatekeeping and business development.

       Our second agenda is to ask whether executive lawyers trade off some of this gatekeeping

when they have incentive contracts designed to reward business development effort. We are not

saying that effort toward business development is suboptimal from a firm’s perspective, but

rather that the title of general counsel may become window dressing for society looking for full

gatekeeping assurances. The theoretic intuition behind our multi-task story is the following

setup. Imagine an executive lawyer is paid with salary and equity incentives, has limited time,

and faces the possibility of a career-ending governance breach. A governance breach also has

dire consequences to firm value, but otherwise, gatekeeping creates no firm value. Motivated by

the accounting compliance literature, we assume that the probability of a governance breach

grows convexly large as gatekeeping time decreases, but is relatively insensitive to gatekeeping



                                                                                                   4
time once the lawyer is already a somewhat diligent gatekeeper. By contrast, when executive

lawyers spend time in business development, the effort always generates firm value. Thus, equity

incentives will tilt executive lawyers toward business development in most settings. Firms

heterogeneously choose optimal amounts of equity incentives to achieve their optimal mixture of

gatekeeping time and business development time. This intuition aligns with our understanding of

firm processes. However, we need not assume this optimal contracting intuition. An alternative

interpretation is that a lawyer may be distorted away from optimal gatekeeping with equity

incentives that the firm is forced to offer in the labor market for lawyer officers. Either story fits

with our empirical design, but we use the optimal contracting terminology.

        Our identification exploits a comparison of two sets of corporations hiring executive

lawyers. The first set poaches existing corporate lawyers from other companies (treated), and the

second set hires executive lawyers from law firms (control). Our key assumption is that equity

incentives are initially less likely to divert newly-hired law firm lawyers away from gatekeeping,

compared to their corporate hired peers. The intuition is that law firm lawyers (i) exhibit loyalty

to their professional association (Goode, 1957; Hall, 1968; Wallace, 1995), (ii) must go through

a learning curve to understand the business development strategy of the firm, (iii) must change

their habit as a lawyer and learn to be more comfortable with risk, a contrast to their training to

practice risk-aversion (Dubey and Kripalani, 2013), and (iv) must be willing to step away from

their stock of reputational capital.

        We use this assumption in collapsed, double and triple differenced designs that allow us

to assert a plausible casual identification of the effects of equity incentives on gatekeeping. Both

the treated and the control are firms hiring executive lawyers; we therefore avoid the endogeneity

of whether or not an executive lawyer is hired. The source of hiring, however, is endogenous.



                                                                                                    5
We use propensity score matching within year-industry buckets to level treated and control firms

on observable predictors of past and future needs for compliance, monitoring and business

development

       A residual identification concern is that the level of equity incentives is correlated with

our outcomes in a way systematic to hiring source. Contract theory predicts that firms may vary

in the level and sensitivity of optimal incentives for a host of reasons. The choice of corporate

versus law firm hires may be spuriously correlated with the optimal contracting of incentives due

to the nature of the firm. Thus, we further implement a triple differencing, differencing around

CEO equity incentives. Any residual effect identified should result through the mechanism of the

lawyer. The interpretation could either be that firms use equity incentives to allocate executive

lawyers’ time among tasks (an optimal contracting equilibrium) or that equity incentives distort

lawyers’ allocation of time among tasks. We do not distinguish between these interpretations.

       We find that higher equity incentives imply materially lower monitoring performance.

Corporations providing executive lawyers with one standard deviation higher equity incentives

have 1.3 percentage points higher likelihood of securities fraud. We interpret the magnitude

relative to the benefit of having an executive lawyer gatekeeper: when firms strongly contract

executive lawyers to be strategic officers, lawyers do less monitoring, preventing 25% fewer

breaches than are typically mitigated by having an executive gatekeeper.

       On the flip side of the tradeoff of executive lawyers’ time, we find some, but weak,

evidence that equity incentives induce executive lawyers to exert more effort on business

development such as capital expenditure, R&D spending, and the filing of a patent. We interpret

this evidence with caution. We find no support for equity incentives affecting compliance,




                                                                                                6
consistent with the literature we cite herein on the dire consequences of compliance infractions

for corporate lawyers.

        Our study contributes to the new internal governance literature of Acharya, Myers, and

Rajan, (2011), Kim and Lu (2012), and Khanna, Kim and Lu (2015). Arguably, the largest

internal governance actor or gatekeeper is the general counsel; this important facet of internal

governance warrants a big-picture study that looks at its overall effectiveness as well as its

interaction with equity incentives. A recent legal literature (Duggin, 2006; Rostain, 2008;

Demott, 2012) outlines the compliance and monitoring roles of general counsel. We build on the

legal description of lawyer’s jobs in corporations and test whether the actions of general counsels

are effective. We contribute to a small but growing body of empirical studies on in-house

lawyers (Jagolinzer, et al, 2011; Kwak, et al., 2012; Hopkins, et al, 2015; Goh, et al., 2015),

which focus on the compliance role of the lawyers, by adding evidence on the monitoring role

and strategic development role with a focus on the trade-off between the two. 4

        Our study also adds executive lawyers to the literature on the importance of

characteristics of individuals inside the executive suite (e.g., Bertrand and Schoar, 2003;

Malmendier and Tate, 2009; Custodio and Metzer, 2014). We show that individual lawyers

matter. Concurrently, Krishnan and Masulis (2013) and Karsten, Malmendier and Sautner (2014)

take up this question for external lawyers, asking whether lawyer quality affects acquisition

outcomes.



II. The Roles of Executive Lawyers

II.a. Compliance officer

4
 Our study is also related to Litov, Sepe, and Whitehead (2014), who study the governance effect of lawyers in the
board of directors.


                                                                                                                     7
       Maintaining compliance in financial filings on a daily basis is the compulsory role of

executive lawyers (Lipson, Engel, and Crespo, 2012). Compliance breaches are the greatest legal

risk in the view of most executive lawyers; the top cited concerns include SEC fraud

investigations, insider trading, and financial misrepresentation (Deloitte, 2011; KPMG, 2012).

This is not surprising given the steep reputation costs to infractions of compliance. Desai, Hogan,

and Wilkins (2006) find that 60 percent of earnings restating firms experience a turnover of at

least one top manager within 24 months of the restatement compared to 35 percent among

matched firms. Karpoff, Lee, and Martin (2008) track individuals that the SEC and DOJ identify

as responsible parties for enforcement actions concerning financial misrepresentation. They find

that 93% of these individuals lose their jobs by the end of the regulatory enforcement period.

Most are explicitly fired. Moreover, if managers are alleged to be responsible directly for the

misconduct, they not only lose their jobs and bear substantial financial losses but also can face

criminal charges and even jail sentences. On the flip side, recent papers in the accounting

literature (Jagolinzer, et al., 2011; Kwak, et al., 2012) find that lawyer prestige associates with

more favorable compliance outcomes in insider trading and corporate earnings disclosure,

suggesting, importantly, that compliance reputation is an upward career ladder for corporate

lawyers.



II.b. Internal governance monitor

       Beyond compliance, Demott (2005) describes general counsels’ day-to-day duties as

involving and bearing responsibility for all legal exposure affecting the corporation including

such matters as customs and trade issues, and intellectual property infractions (Dubey and

Kripalani, 2013). General counsels are often responsible for determining the appropriate level of



                                                                                                 8
legal risks to be undertaken by their companies (Rostain, 2008), and have an ongoing role to

assess and control legal risks and assist corporations in a proactive manner to detect actions that

could lead to corporate liability (Lipson et al. 2012). An executive lawyer views herself as “a

guardian of the corporation’s integrity and reputation” (Heineman 2007), perhaps because

historically the SEC has laid governance breach liability on the position of the general counsel.

The SOX Section 307 formalized these monitoring responsibilities by adopting rules whereby

corporate lawyers are not just liable for compliance breaches, but are exposed as the office

responsible for reporting evidence of material violation of securities laws or breaches of

fiduciary duty “up-the-ladder” inside the firm. 5 In addition, SOX endowed the SEC with the

necessary power to discipline corporate lawyers who are deemed to lack integrity or who have

engaged in unethical or improper professional conduct.



II.c. Strategic officer

           “A General Counsel needs to be a business person first and a lawyer
           second—not a lawyer that understands the business, but a business person
           that happens to be a lawyer”
           - Marla Persky, General Counsel, Boehringher Ingelheim Corporation 6


           A lessor understood role of an executive lawyer is as a strategic officer, adding planning

and risk management input into expansion, innovation, and business development. The role of

the executive lawyer has changed dramatically in a world with increasing importance of

intangible assets and the information economy. Bagley (2008) points out that firms characterize

their executive lawyers more as entrepreneurs than policing lawyers. Executive lawyers are

engaged in business development through the work done by the legal department’s intellectual

5
    See http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-8185.htm.
6
    See Dubey and Kripalani (2013).


                                                                                                   9
property teams (Dubey and Kripalani, 2013), from the earliest phases of business development

(Demott, 2005) and throughout the planning and implementation process of investment (Horner,

2007). This view is echoed in practitioner surveys; executive lawyers that receive the best

performance ratings are 11% more willing to take risks than the average executive lawyers, and

they are as likely to take risks as any other executive (Russell Reynolds Associates, 2013).



III.    Data 7

III.a. Executive lawyers and compensation

        To identify the general counsel as a corporate officer, sometimes called chief legal

officer, we look for individuals holding the requisite titles by manually reading executive titles

from 10-K filings (items 4b and 10) or proxy statements for all firm years in ExecuComp, which

covers firms in the S&P large, mid and small cap indices. Over our sample period 1995-2012,

this includes 32,372 firm-year observations for more than 3,000 unique firms. We look for three

key words: “Counsel,” “Legal,” and “Law” or abbreviations or variants. Then we read each

signatory on the filings, as each company should have a lawyer that carries the responsibility of

the legal signatory to the SEC. If such person is not listed as one of the executive officers, and

the name signing the legal certification does not have a general counsel or chief legal officer

designation, it is likely that the lawyer is not an important corporate officer in the firm. We

further look to ExecuComp titles for the same legal recognition, just in case the legal counsel

also holds another title which she uses to sign the SEC documents. 8 In our sample, 70 percent of

firms on average have a general counsel as a corporate officer, relatively stable over time. 9


7
  Appendix Table 1 summarizes all of the variables listed in this section.
8
  ExecuComp often records multiple titles. One issue with Execucomp is in its use of abbreviations of an executive
title. For example, the title of a general counsel could be spelled as “gen cou,” “gncns,” “gen cns,” etc. We add all


                                                                                                                  10
        In the main tests, we impose an additional attribute to designate general counsel in the

inner executive office as executive lawyer (ExecLawyer). We apply a monetary proxy for the

importance of the general counsel in the firm; individuals must be among the top paid officers in

a company in ExecuComp. We force stringency that this proxy is not transitory in requiring that

the officer remain in the top paid executives for three years.

        Our empirical design for examining optimal contracting of equity incentives relies on the

employment history of these ExecLawyers. We look up the full career path of work experience

from law school graduation to prior to becoming ExecLawyer of a firm by hand collecting

ExecLawyer’s bios from corporate filings and online sources such as LinkedIn and law firm

websites. We are able to identify the last work experience before becoming ExecLawyer for

2,446 of the total 2,630 ExecLawyers in our sample.

        We use compensation data from ExecuComp for the ExecLawyer and CEO. We use

TDC1 – total compensation – from ExecuComp to measure executives’ total pay. 10 We follow

Core and Guay (1999) to estimate the sensitivity of the value of the ExecLawyer’s accumulated

equity-based compensation (including both stocks and options) to a one-percent change in the

stock price, which is referred to as “delta”. 11



versions of these words we can find. Further, the initial search of the three key words resulted in many executives
who are not general counsels (e.g. “Special Counsel”, “Former Counsel”). We verify whether the executive officer
identified is in fact a general counsel of the firm through further reading their full executive titles.
9
  Our fixed effects analysis is based on this complete set of generate counsels as corporate officers, and thereby
identifying lawyer fixed effects using all movers within our sample.
10
   TDC1 is comprised of salary, bonus, other annual cash compensation, restricted stock award, LTIP, value of
option grants, and all other compensation for pre-2006 reporting format and it is comprised of salary, bonus, non-
equity incentive plan compensation, grant-date fair value of option wards, grant-date fair value of stock awards,
deferred compensation earnings, and other compensation for post-2006 reporting format.
11
   In order to calculate delta, we require information on the number of shares and both the number and value of
unexercised options held by the ExecLawyer. We find that ExecuComp often does not report the actual share
ownership for non-CEO executives. In such cases, we assume the delta of stock holdings to be zero. Nevertheless,
for robustness purpose, we perform additional multivariate tests by using the sub-sample after dropping delta that
carries missing/zero values.


                                                                                                                11
III.b. Compliance failures

         We measure the failures of compliance in two dimensions, both requiring the signature of

the general counsel on forms – Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Releases (AAERs) and

insider trading. AAERs are issued at the conclusion of an SEC investigation against a company,

an auditor, or an officer for alleged accounting and/or auditing misconduct. We obtain AAERs

data from the Center for Financial Reporting and Management Center at Berkeley Haas. We

code the variable AAER to capture when the alleged accounting misconduct was taking place

(known ex post) rather than when the enforcement action is launched. We exclude AAERs that

are not related to misstatement (e.g., for reasons such as bribery and disclosure). Because it takes

approximately a year and a half for frauds to emerge (Dyck, Morse, and Zingales, 2010) and

another span of a year or two for the SEC to complete an investigation, we truncate analysis to

2009 when studying AAERs given that our sample ends in 2012.

         Similarly, we measure insider trading using alleged cases. We manually collect alleged

insider trading cases from SEC litigation releases and match them with our sample firms. 12 Thus

the two compliance failure measures are both violation based, capturing the actual failure rather

than the likelihood of compliance breaches as seen in prior studies on corporate lawyers (e.g.

earnings management measures, insider trading profit measures, etc.).




12
       The     SEC       litigation    releases      are    publicly      available    on     the     SEC     website:
https://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases.shtml. These releases are summaries issued by the SEC that describe civil
lawsuits brought by the Commission in federal court. We read litigation releases to uncover investigations involving
insider trading as the reason for the suits. If a corporate executive is alleged to have traded his/her own company’s
stock based on insider information or have tipped such information for others to trade, then we code that firm year to
be an insider trading year. A drawback is that the releases often do not record the exact dates when insider trading
took place. We remove these cases.


                                                                                                                   12
III.c. Monitoring failures

         We measure monitoring failures with general litigation and lawsuits. First, we use the

class period (the period in which an alleged fraud was taking place) of securities class action

lawsuits. Securities fraud involves more general misconduct than financial misrepresentation,

with over 40% of securities fraud not related to misrepresentations in reporting but instead

related to other infractions such as omissions in communication, self-dealing or other illegal

activities which hurt shareholders (Dyck, Morse and Zingales, 2010; 2014). 13 Data for these

lawsuits come from the Stanford Law School Securities Class Action Clearinghouse. We cleanse

the securities class actions database of dismissed and unresolved cases. 14 Second, for robustness

we purge the securities fraud measure of those firm-years when an AAER infringement is

occurring. The third lawsuit measure covers breaches of any law, including but not restricted to

securities law. We collect general lawsuits data from Audit Analytics and purge suits that lead to

AAERs and those with zero settlement. 15 Examples of general lawsuits include suits arising from

trademark or patent disputes, product liability, personal injury, labor disputes, commercial

contracts, etc.




13
   See Karpoff, Koester, Lee, and Martin (2013) for a comparison of fraud data.
14
   To construct a securities fraud variable, we collect the class action lawsuits filed during 1995-2012 from the
Stanford Law School Securities Class Action Clearing House and merge them to Compustat. The Stanford Law
School Securities Class Action Clearing house database has been employed by a number of prior studies (e.g.,
Lowry and Shu, 2002; Field, Lowry, and Shu, 2005; Dyck, Morse, and Zingales, 2010; and Hanley and Hoberg,
2012). These securities frauds are alleged rather than proven, in that few cases ever get resolved in trail, but rather
settle out of court, because D&O insurance does not cover the executives with court convictions. There are
altogether 1,187 lawsuits filed against public firms during this period, with 582 cases that were dismissed by the
court and 78 that we remove for being unresolved.
15
   There are altogether 6,929 lawsuits with 5,056 suits with zero settlement during our sample period.


                                                                                                                    13
III.d. Business development measures and other company outcomes

In choosing measures of business development, we focus on organic growth because

corporations almost always hire external transaction lawyers for one-time events such as M&A

or spinoffs (Krishnan and Masulis, 2013). The idea of our business development variables is not

that lawyer is sitting with the scientists and engineers doing the innovation, but that the lawyer is

asked to do an assessment of liability exposure (e.g., for consumer liability exposure in self-

driving cars or patent liability in technology market strategies) prior to an R&D or capital

expenditure campaign. Our measures of business development thus will be somewhat noisy, but

should capture on average these mechanisms, especially if contracts are optimally designed to

induce lawyer effort into these realms.

        The first measure is the ratio of capital expenditure to fixed assets at the beginning of the

fiscal year, capturing investment intensity in tangible assets (Eisdorfer, 2008). The second

measure is R&D expenses scaled by assets as a measure of investment intensity in intangible

assets. The third measure is the number of business segments, capturing expansion in the line of

business. All of these measures are from Compustat data. A final measure is whether the firm is

filing patents or not, in the pre-2006 NBER patent database. 16

        Our analysis also considers three typical measures of corporate governance, not related to

lawyer activity, to consider the mechanism of our results. We use institutional ownership from

Thomson Reuters Ownership Database (13Fs) to measure the strength of external shareholder

monitoring. To strengthen the board, the shareholders may bring in more independent board

16
  We were kindly provided the merged NBER patent data with Compustat by Jin Wang. Admittedly, patents are a
bit problematic as a measure of business development. First is the problem of the [heterogeneous] time lag between
innovation and the filing of a patent. Second is the huge skew in patent data, which is observed even beyond taking
logarithms; we focus on the dichotomous variable “whether the firm is filing a patent” to avoid this concern. Third
and probably most substantially, is the finding by Moser (2013) and others that firms prefer secrecy over patenting
for innovation. Patenting in her historical accounts is more about diffusion.


                                                                                                                 14
members. We gather these data from Riskmetrics. We also obtain the G-index of Gompers, Ishii

and Metrick (2003) from Riskmetrics to measure shareholder rights. A higher value of G-index

indicates weaker shareholder monitoring.



IV.    The Importance of Lawyers

IV.a. Importance of lawyers: Statistics

       Table 1 profiles General Counsel and ExecLawyers based on the ExecuComp sample of

32,372 firm-year observations and tabulated by fiscal years. The second and third columns

respectively report the percentage of firms having a General Counsel as a corporate officer and

having an ExecLawyer, identified in the annual SEC filings and in ExecuComp. In both series,

we document a secular trend upwards. In the year 1995, 66% of the S&P 1,500 index firms had

General Counsel as a corporate officer while 33% of the firm had an ExecLawyer; the

percentage increases to 81% and 44%, respectively by the year 2012.             Our numbers on

ExecLawyer are a few percent lower than those reported in Kwak, et al. (2012), who document

this pattern with the addition of legal affairs officers and some other variations such as legal or

political officers. Conditional on having an ExecLawyer, the remaining statistics in Table 1

report that ExecLawyer compensation has increased from $631 thousand to $1.85 million while

the CEO compensation has increased from $2.41 million to $6.4 million in constant 2012 dollars

from 1995 to 2012. Executive lawyers’ pay as a fraction of CEO pay remains about 37% in our

sample period. For every 1% increase in shareholder value, ExecLawyers make another $55,000

in equity income on average, a much smaller fraction (6%) of wealth performance sensitivity




                                                                                                15
compared to the CEOs’ delta. 17 About one third of the ExecLawyer deltas are zero, a point we

re-visit empirically.



IV.a. Importance of lawyers: Methodology

        To measure to what extent differences among individual general counsels matter, we use

a lawyer fixed effect model, following Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Malmendier and Tate (2009)

and Custodio and Metgzer (2014). Bertrand and Schoar use the movement of executives across

firms to gauge how much variation in the performance metrics of relevant firms is due to

individual managers. A recent accounting literature applies this methodology to document

significant top mangers’ individual effects on firms’ voluntary disclosures, tax avoidance, and a

wide range of financial reporting choices (Bamber, Jiang and Wang, 2010; Jiang, Petroni, and

Wang, 2010; Dyreng, Hanlon and Maydew, 2010; Ge, Matsumoto and Zhang, 2011).

        We use this methodology to accomplish two goals. First, individual lawyer fixed effects

analysis allows us to test for importance of lawyers across the multi-task dimensions of

compliance, monitoring and business development. Second, the analysis allows for a relative

quantification metric – comparing the importance of individual lawyers across firms relative to

the importance of CEOs.

        In our implementation, we use all general counsels, not simply those we classify as being

in the top executive offices by salary, because, not being constrained to have compensation data,

we can more cleanly identify true moves of lawyers across firms. We limit the sample to lawyers

who move among firms. Our estimating equations are a sequence as follows, with yijt being some


17
   Our estimates of CEO delta are very close to those in Core and Guay (1999) and Chava and Purnanandam (2010).
In fact, Chava and Purnanandam (2010) show CFO’s delta has a mean of $71 thousand in their sample, which is
slightly higher than our delta estimates for executive lawyers.


                                                                                                             16
compliance, monitoring or business development outcome for individual manager i in firm j at

time t:

   (i)    y ijt = Firm fixed effects + Firm fixed effects × Year
   (ii ) y ijt = Firm fixed effects + Firm fixed effects × Year + Lawyer fixed effects
   (iii ) y ijt = Firm fixed effects + Firm fixed effects × Year + Lawyer fixed effects + CEO fixed effects

The main inference from this method comes from calculating the increase in adjusted r-squared

moving from equation (i) to (ii). Because a lawyer fixed effect may be spuriously correlated with

CEO effects, which the literature finds to be robustly important, we follow Ge et al. (2011) in

including equation (iii) to test whether the economic and statistical significance of lawyer effects

holds in the presence of CEO effects. Also, particular for our analysis of lawyers, firm-level

trends in outcomes may be spuriously correlated with the role of lawyers, the importance of

which has been growing over time in firms. Thus, we include firm-level linear trends which are

captured by the interactions of firm fixed effects and year in the estimation. One should take

caution in interpreting the magnitude of CEO fixed effects in equation (iii) because we restrict

the sample to general counsel movers but not CEO movers. We provide a better magnitude

comparison in Appendix Table 2, which reports the CEO fixed effects estimation using a CEO

mover sample.



IV.b. Importance of lawyers: Results

          Table 2 reports the lawyer fixed effects results, mimicking the layout of Bertrand and

Schoar (2003). The table reads down by rows, with the first row under each variable reporting

the adjusted r-squared for a model with just firm fixed effects and a linear trend. For the

compliance measures, these adjusted r-squareds for AAERs and insider trading are 0.785 and

0.342 respectively. The addition of a lawyer fixed effect (the second row) increases the r-squared


                                                                                                              17
to 0.82 and 0.397, representing an average improvement of 0.045 (4.5 percentage of variation

explained in increment). The F-tests for the joint significance of the lawyer fixed effects have p-

values of <0.01. These results are robust to the addition of CEO fixed effect (the third row).

        In terms of monitoring, the lawyer fixed effects improve r-squared by rather consistent

increments of 0.079, 0.072 and 0.066 (7.9, 7.2 and 6.6 percentage of the variation) in the three

litigation variables.

        The lawyer fixed effects explain smallest increments in the business development

variables. The r-squareds increase by 0.008 (capital expenditures), 0 (R&D), 0.046 (business

segments), and 0.019 (filing a patent). Together, including the zero effect for R&D, these

increments on average represent a smaller 1.8 percentage change over the r-squared without the

lawyer fixed effects. 18 As noted in the data section, these business development variables are

noisy measures of the effort of lawyers in strategic planning and strategic risk management, and

thus we find the lower importance of lawyers here to be intuitive.

        To put these magnitudes into perspective, we compare the increments in r-squared

explained by lawyers to that explained by CEOs in a CEO mover analysis presented in Appendix

Table 2. We are cautious in interpreting specific line items because, for example, individual CEO

fixed effects also have moderate contribution to r-squared for business development, making the

lawyer fixed effects look very strong in business development as a comparison. Instead, taking a

simple average of r-squared increments across all variables reported, we find that lawyer fixed

effects explain 51% as much variation as CEO fixed effects. We interpret it as suggesting that

lawyers are 51% as relevant in these domains as CEOs.



18
   Neither lawyer nor CEO heterogeneity has power in explaining corporate innovation as measured by R&D, which
is consistent with the findings of Cho, Halford, Hsu and Ng (2016).


                                                                                                            18
IV.c.    Importance of lawyers: Hiring methodology

         Interpreting the lawyer fixed effects results with generalizable causality language could

be problematic if lawyers that move among firms are mobile because of the individual’s

capability in compliance, monitoring, or business development. Thus, we implement a second

approach that identifies off the decision of hiring executive lawyers. We ask whether firms that

hire an ExecLawyer experience changes in compliance, monitoring, and business development

that are different compared to those not hiring, using a propensity score matched difference-in-

differences approach. This approach has endogeneity issues of its own: even after propensity

matching firms on observables, unobservables such as the future need for an executive lawyer

may determine the hiring decision. The sign of the bias should be conservative for compliance

and monitoring: if a firm has a future need for governance, it is likely that the firm is entering a

phase of increased pressure on their governance, thereby biasing downward any positive effect of

hiring an ExecLawyer on such outcomes. 19 Thus, even though this approach cannot be

ascertained to be free of selection, it imposes an opposite selection compared to the previous

methodology – looking at all hires compared to none (here) versus looking among

heterogeneities within the hires and fires (the lawyer fixed effects method). Thus, if the two

methods produce similar results, the inference is quite suggestive of lawyers being important on

these dimensions.

         For our tests, we define the treated firms to be those that hired executive lawyers who

stayed for at least three years and had no executive lawyers in the prior two years, and control

firms to be those that had no executive lawyers from two years prior to two years after. For each


19 We cannot make this conservative claim for business development, and in fact our instincts are that the bias
would likely be anticonservative. However, we include the results only for parallel reporting of results and
transparency.


                                                                                                                  19
treated firm, we first find the set of matched firm using the year of hiring and one-digit SIC

industry and then draw three nearest neighboring firms using the hiring propensity. The hiring

propensity is estimated by running a logit model with dependent variable taking the value of one

for executive lawyer hiring firms and zero for non-hiring firms. The independent variables

(lagged one year prior to the hiring year) include measures of gatekeeping failures—AAER

fraud, SEC insider trading, securities fraud—as well as the natural logarithm of market

capitalization, market-adjusted returns, leverage, ROA, firm age, capex, R&D, business

segments, time trend, time trend squared, and one-digit SIC industry fixed effects.

       Appendix Table 3 reports the comparison between executive lawyer hiring and non-

hiring firms in compliance and monitoring failures, business development, and other independent

variables used in the propensity estimation model. Prior to the matching procedure, the firms

differ in potentially important dimensions. Firms that hire ExecLawyer tend to have greater

incidence of compliance failures, are smaller in market capitalization, have higher leverage and

more business segments but lower market-to-book, ROA, and R&D expenses. These differences

confirm the need to use a matched sample. Appendix Table 4 model (1) reports the fitting of the

propensity estimation model. The “post-match” columns in Appendix Table 3 show that after

propensity matching, the treated firms and control firms are no longer statistically different in

any of these measures in the year prior to hiring.



IV.d. Importance of lawyers: Hiring results

       Table 3 (Panel A) reports the results of the collapsed difference-in-differences tests with

hiring year and one-digit SIC industry fixed effects. This is the most stringent specification for

this methodology following Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004). The dependent variable is



                                                                                               20
the change in outcome (compliance, monitoring or business development) from the pre-hiring to

post-hiring period. Each firm has one observation, and estimation weights balance the matching.

For example, in this collapsed specification the AAERs dependent variable would be the

occurrence of any AAER (the max over a 0-1 variable) in the two years following the hire,

excluding the hiring year, minus the occurrence of any AAER in the two years prior to the hire.

Our sample comprises 536 firms hiring ExecLawyers and 792 matched non-hiring firms. Odd

numbered columns are the raw difference-in-differences, and even columns include the hire year

and industry fixed effects.

         We find that the two compliance failure measures are strongly significant (both

economically and statistically) in the direction of the executive lawyer being a mechanism in

improving compliance. 20 The incidence of AAERs in hiring firms is 0.029 to 0.033 lower (in

columns 2 and 3 respectively) compared to control firms over the two-year period after the hiring

of ExecLawyer. Using the pre-hiring mean (from Appendix Table 3) as benchmark, these

numbers imply a 44.4 to 50.5 percentage lower annual prevalence of these compliance breaches.

Likewise, firms hiring an ExecLawyer experience a 46.9 to 60.3 percentage reduction in insider

trading breaches. Averaging the improvements over all the compliance columns in panel A of

Table 3, we conclude that hiring an ExecLawyer reduces compliance breaches by 50%.

         Likewise, in Panel B, hiring firms exhibit fewer securities fraud incidents and general

lawsuits. Just focusing on the percentage change rows relative to the pre-hire mean, we find that

hiring an ExecLawyer reduces securities fraud and general lawsuits by 32% on average. The

results for the securities fraud purged of AAERs are in the same direction, yet with less power.



20
  Our findings are consistent with Kwak, et al. (2012)’s and Jagolinzer, et al. (2011)’s studies which find
compliance improvements with the presence of super lawyers in the firm.


                                                                                                              21
          We do not find any effect of hiring an executive lawyer on business development except

for some weak evidence on business segments and on patent filings, working in opposite

directions. We interpret any results with caution here because we cannot sign the selection bias

of these tests. In the case of the gatekeeping results, we believe the bias is conservative in that

firms in need of gatekeeping in the future (and thus hiring) would be ones expecting an increase

in governance breaches.

          To speak to the selection concern that the lawyer may not be the mechanism of

governance improvement, we explore whether the hiring of ExecLawyers reflects an overall

strategy implemented by boards or CEOs to improve governance on many dimensions. We look

to other governance actions taken by the board or shareholders at the same time as hiring an

executive lawyer. Panel D reports the results; we find no effects timed to the executive lawyer

hiring.

          For consistency to our Table 3 results, we also implement collapsed difference-in-

differences estimation for the external hiring of General Counsel (rather than top five paid

ExecLawyers). The dependent variable is the change in outcome variables from pre-hiring to

post-hiring of General Counsel. The results (in both statistical significance and economic

magnitudes) are consistent with those presented in Table 3. We omit reporting these results for

brevity.

          As a final robustness check to our results, we explore, following Desai and Dharmapala

(2006), whether the difference-in-differences results vary in subsamples with different

governance strength. Subsamples are formed using three independent corporate governance

measures. Appendix Table 5 reports collapsed difference-in-differences results in the same

specification as Table 3, but splitting the sample by institutional ownership (in columns (1) and



                                                                                                22
(2)), board independence (in columns (3) and (4)), and the G-index (in columns (5) and (6)). The

split by institutional ownership and board independence is based on the sample median while the

split by G-index is based on whether the value is above nine in the year of ExecLawyer hiring.

The prediction following Desai and Dharmapala (2006) is that governance improvements should

happen where they are needed the most. Firms that have higher institutional ownership, higher

board independence, and lower G-index are supposedly better governed firms.

       Our results in Appendix Table 5 show that poorly governed hiring firms experience

larger improvement in AAER and general lawsuit mitigation than well governed firms,

compared to the matched sample. The same pattern, although without precision in the stringent

collapsed specification, is apparent in general lawsuits. The results on SEC alleged insider

trading, however seem mixed, perhaps due to incentives to do insider trading as related to these

endogenous splits. Although we cannot claim a strong causal interpretation to the story of poorly

governed firms improving the most because of endogeneity of the split, together the total set of

difference-in-differences hiring results do paint a picture of the importance of lawyers for

gatekeeping.



V.     Gatekeepers versus Window Dressing

V.a. Gatekeepers versus window dressing: Methodology

       Our main agenda is to explore whether executive lawyers are induced to trade off

gatekeeping when they have incentive contracts designed to reward business development

efforts. Our identification novelty is a comparison across two sets of firms, both hiring executive

lawyers. One set hires from law firms; the other, from other corporations. Our main identifying

assumption is that executive lawyers hired from law firms are initially less likely to reduce their



                                                                                                23
gatekeeping effort as a reaction to equity incentives than are executive lawyers poached from

other corporations. We first motivate this assumption based on the source of hiring and then lay

out how we can use the source of hiring for a plausibly causal identification.

         Executives that are hired from law firms have built both their human capital and their

reputational capital in lawyering not corporate strategic decision-making. These lawyers have

rarely worked outside law firms. By training and by practice, gatekeeping comes more naturally

than risk-taking, reinforced by the conservative biases of law practice and by the reality that the

newly-hired law firm lawyer has all of her reputation at stake in the event of a gatekeeping

failure. Once inside the firm, the sociology literature on professionalism guides our thinking

about the transformation of lawyers with professional identities. Goode (1957) defines a

professional community (e.g., doctors, lawyers, professors, etc.) as occupations where all

members are bounded by a sense of identity and common values. Hall (1968) documents that

professionals working inside an organization may identify less with the organization compared to

other employees, because of conflicts between administrative imperatives and professional

norms. Consistent with our assumption most directly, Wallace (1995) finds that lawyers working

in corporations are significantly less committed to the legal profession than those working in law

firms.

         Putting these ideas together, law firm lawyers (i) exhibit loyalty to their professional

association, (ii) must go through a learning curve to understand the business development

strategy of the firm, (iii) must change their trained risk-aversion habit as a lawyer and learn to be

more comfortable with risk, and (iv) must be willing to step away from their stock of

reputational capital. All of these factors imply that law firm-hired lawyers should be less likely




                                                                                                  24
on average than corporate-hired lawyers to respond to equity incentives in such a way as trading

off gatekeeping for strategic input.

         Our comparison of the effect of equity incentives on law firm hired-lawyers versus

corporate hired-lawyers does not presume that corporations exogenously choose the source of

hiring. Our design in this section begins by levelling firms on the ex ante propensity to select one

hiring source over the other and then absorbs any ex post outcome differences induced by the

hiring source by interacting the post indictor with the hiring source. Below we lay out these

details, and the exogeneity assumption that we need.

         Our estimating equation for our main test on equity incentives is as follows:

         yit = a1 Postit + a 2CorporateHirei + a 3 Postit CorporateHirei + µ year + µ industry + µ hireyear
              + a 4 ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear + a 5CorporateHirei ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear
              + a 6 Postit ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear + a 7 Postit CorporateHirei ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear + e it   (1)



yit is the outcome measure of compliance, monitoring, or business development. Postit is an

indicator being equal to zero for the two years before a hire and one for the two years following

the hire, excluding the hire year. (Our results hold extending the ex post duration to three years.)

The sample is firms that hire an ExecLawyer externally from either another company (treatment

group:                 = 1)
           CorporateHire               or     a    law      firm      (control       group:      CorporateHire=0).

ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear is the compensation delta of the ExecLawyer i, defined only at the

hiring year to avoid confounding effect of performance. The delta primarily captures sign-on

incentive contracting. Although ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear is in a future time point for the Post =

0 observations, its interaction with CorporateHire allows us to difference out a selection effect.

(Our results hold if we remove this level effect.) Our variable of interest is α 7 , the coefficient on




                                                                                                                      25
the    difference-in-differences         term        interacted   with   the   compensation       delta

Postit CorporateHirei ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear .

        Before we estimate equation (1), we need to propensity-score match firms to deal with ex

ante selection of hiring from a corporation versus a law firm. The idea is that for every law firm

hire, we find matches in the larger pool of firms that hire from a corporation to form a sample

comparable on observables. Appendix Table 4 model (2) reports the results of the logit

propensity estimation with the dependent variable taking on the value of one if a firm hires an

executive lawyer from a law firm and zero if a firm hires from a corporation. The independent

variables are identical to those used to estimate the propensity of executive lawyer hiring

decision as in model (1). For each firm that hires an executive lawyer from a law firm, we first

find the set of matched firm using the year of hiring and one-digit SIC industry and then find

three nearest neighbors in propensity score. Appendix Table 6 compares firm characteristics after

matching for the corporate hire firms and the law firm hire firms in the year prior to hiring,

finding no statistically significant differences by hiring source.

        It could be that the source of hiring is still endogenous to ex post outcomes. However, our

inference comes not from a difference-in-differences estimator but from the difference-in-

difference estimator interacted with delta. That is, we only interpret          Postit CorporateHirei   as

absorbing any ex post selection in hiring from the corporation. De facto, however, after

propensity-score matching and differencing, we find little-to-no evidence for any ex ante or ex

post selection by hiring source.

        Our identification does rely, however, on one exogeneity condition for interpreting our

main variable of interest, α 7 : Had the firm hired an ExecLawyer from a corporation, the firm’s

outcome sensitivity to equity incentives would have evolved similarly as had they hired from a


                                                                                                        26
law firm, once we propensity match, control for both the ex-ante and ex post selection of hiring

from a corporation (CorporateHire, Post, and Post*CorporateHire), and control for selection on

any incentive pay needs of the firm (ExecLawyerDelta, CorporateHire*ExecLawyerDelta). With

so many differencing and interactions, it is perhaps easier to state the opposite – what it would

take for our identification to fail. It could be that the firm’s selection of hiring sources may

reflect some omitted variable correlated with the effectiveness of equity incentives. That is, it is

possible that some unobservable factor could drive both the selection of hiring sources and the

sensitivity of corporate outcomes to equity incentives. To address this concern, we implement a

triple difference form as follows:

yit = a 1 Post it + a 2 CorporateHirei + a 3 Post it CorporateHirei + µ year + µ industry + µ hireyear
     + a 4 ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear + a 5CorporateHirei ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear
     + a 6 Post it ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear + a 7 Post it CorporateHirei ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear
     + a 8 Post it CEODeltai ,hireyear + a 9 Post it CorporateHirei CEODeltai ,hireyear + e it             (2)



We introduce      CEODeltai ,hireyear   into the equation, which is the level of equity incentives of the CEO

in the hiring year of the ExecLawyer. In essence, we are forcing the comparison to difference

around the endogenous use of equity incentives for firms. Contract theory predicts that firms

with different contracting environment vary in levels and sensitivities of optimal incentives.

Studies on executive compensation (e.g. Core, Holthausen and Larcker (1999), Armstrong,

Jagolinzer, and Larcker (2010)) suggest that both innate firm economic characteristics such as

size, complexity, growth, and firm corporate governance characteristics affect managerial

compensation.      CEODeltai ,hireyear   and its sensitivity to outcomes should capture the unobservable

differences in compensation contracting environment between the treatment group and matched

firms, if there are any.



                                                                                                          27
        To deal with the concerns of serial correlation and over-rejection of the null, we adopt as

robustness the collapsed estimation procedure recommended by Bertrand, Duflo, and

Mullainathan (2004). We collapse our time series observation around ExecLawyer hiring into

pre and post periods and calculate the change in outcome measures of the treatment group and

the control group respectively. The form of this estimation equation is given below, where Δ

implies the average in the post period minus the average in the pre period:

Dyt = l1CorporateHirei + l2 ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear + l3CorporateHirei ExecLawyerDeltai ,hireyear
     + l4CEODeltai ,hireyear + l5CorporateHirei CEODeltai ,hireyear + µ industry + µ hireyear + e i    (3)



V.b. Gatekeepers versus window dressing: Compliance results

        Table 4 reports the double and triple differencing results as to whether equity incentives

impact executive lawyers’ effort exerted in compliance. Columns (1) to (3) consider AAER fraud

outcomes, and columns (4) to (6), SEC alleged insider trading. In columns (1) and (4), we find

no difference in ex post compliance by hiring source. The main variable of interest in Table 4 is

Post*CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta), where we have added $10,000 to the delta before

taking the natural logarithm transformation so that we do not simply identify off the skewness.

Columns (3) and (6) add in the further differencing around the equity incentive level of the CEO.

We include a series of fixed effects for industry, year and hiring year, and cluster errors at the

firm-hire level. Overall, we have 414 firm-hires which result in about four times that number of

observations.

        We find little evidence that equity incentives divert or enhance compliance efforts, as

manifested in either AAER fraud or insider trading. The coefficient of interest is insignificant

across all columns. The lack of an effect of incentive pay on compliance outcomes is perhaps to

be expected because of steep reputation costs to infractions (Desai, Hogan, and Wilkins, 2006;


                                                                                                       28
Karpoff, Lee, and Martin, 2008). 21 Likewise, CEO deltas play no role in compliance outcomes in

this setup.



V.c. Gatekeepers versus window dressing: Monitoring results

         Table 5 repeats the exercise of Table 4, but this time for the monitoring aspect of

gatekeeping. We measure monitoring effectiveness in three dimensions – securities frauds,

securities lawsuits excluding AAER, and general lawsuits. Again, we first start by looking at

selection gauged ex post and find no evidence that the hiring source predicts firm monitoring

outcomes. The coefficients on Post*CorporateHire in columns (1) (securities fraud), (4) (AAER

purged securities fraud) and (7) (general lawsuits) are insignificant.

         Turning           to         the         main           results,         the         coefficients           on

Post*CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta) in columns (2), (3), (5), (6), (8) and (9) are all

positive and significant. We defer interpreting any economic magnitude until we show the more

stringent collapsed version of these tests.

         We implement two more stringent specifications: (i) a specification where we focus on

only those lawyers who are hired with positive delta, and (ii) a collapsed specification per

Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullanathan (2004). Table 6 limits our sample to firms that hire

ExecLawyers with positive compensation delta, eliminating lawyers with no sign-on equity

incentives. Even though the number of observations drops by 40%, the coefficient estimates on

the variable of interest Post*CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta) hardly change in our new

specification.


21
  In the monitoring results to be presented in the next section, we include robustness tables, limiting to only positive
executive lawyer delta firms and implementing a collapsed version as well. For compliance, we find no results in
these alternative specifications as well, and thus omit them for space considerations.


                                                                                                                     29
        Finally, Table 7 presents our most stringent specification, a collapsed version of the

difference in differences as in equation (3). The dependent variable is the change of governance

measures from the pre-hiring to post-hiring period, thus each firm has one observation. Our

variable of interest is CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta). As in the prior tables, the

coefficient on this variable is positive and significant for securities fraud and AAER purged

securities lawsuits. The result is not statistically significant for general lawsuits, although as in

the prior two tables, the coefficients across all of these columns are relatively consistent in

magnitude. In sum, under our plausibly causal design, across Tables 5 – 7, our evidence suggests

that the optimal contracting of lawyers into strategic initiatives diverts lawyers away from

monitoring, resulting in an increase in the likelihood of a firm committing monitoring breaches.

        What is the economic significance of the results? We focus on a one standard deviation

higher value of the Log(ExecLawyerDelta) in the cross section at the hiring year, or an

equivalent $22,000 larger ExecLawyerDelta above the mean value. These same lawyers hired

with a $22,000 larger delta at sign-on have an approximately $60,000 larger delta two years after

hiring, which is perhaps the more appropriate way to state the comparison. After considering the

bulk of zeros from the interaction terms Post and CorporateHire 22, we calculate, shown at the

bottom of Table 7, that a one standard deviation larger Log(ExecLawyerDelta) increases the

probability of securities lawsuit by 0.013. We refer to this 0.013 as the magnitude of governance

reduction due to equity incentives. For comparison purposes, we calculate the magnitude of

securities lawsuit prevention associated with the hiring of ExecLawyer, based on Table 3 results,

to be 0.017. We refer to this 0.017 as the magnitude of governance improvement brought by a

typical ExecLawyer. Both numbers (0.013 and 0.017) are then compared to the pre-hiring mean

22
  Alternatively, a one standard deviation increase in Post*CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta) is more than two-
times larger.


                                                                                                            30
of the governance failure measure (Appendix Table 3) to calculate the percentage of governance

improvement associated with the hiring of ExecLawyer and the percentage of governance

improvement unwinded by equity incentives.

       Our results imply that whereas on average the hiring of a lawyer implies a 31.4%

reduction in securities fraud (in column 2 of Table 7), when the lawyer is hired with high equity

incentives, she only reduces fraud by 6.6%. Thus, under our interpretation, the lawyer exchanges

24.8% of the fraud prevention for effort in other endeavors when granted high equity incentives.



V.d. Gatekeepers versus window dressing: Business Development results

       Table 8 reports the triple-difference specifications testing whether a firm’s contracting

with equity incentives impacts executive lawyers’ effort exerted in business development. As

before, we first present a non-interacted specification in columns (1), (4), (7) and (10) to test

whether ex post business development outcomes differ by hiring source. We find no evidence for

this selection. In columns (2), (5), (8), and (11), we present the triple interaction results for

capital expenditure, R&D, business segment and patent filing dependent variables respectively.

We omit the double differencing for brevity because the results look very similar to the triple

differencing. In columns (3), (6), (9), and (12), we report results for the sample dropping

ExecLawyers with zero sign-on equity incentives.

       We find evidence consistent with our intuition that equity incentives should be associated

with a firm contracting the ExecLawyer for business development. Firms that hire ExecLawyers

from other corporations and provide them with a one standard deviation higher sign-on equity

incentive packages exhibit 0.017 more capital expenditures-to-fixed assets (a 5 percentage

change) in the coming two years, relative to those firms hiring from law firms. The coefficient in



                                                                                               31
column (3) is similar to that for column (2), but the estimate is noisier with the smaller sample.

In columns (5) and (6), we find that likewise, equity incentives for ExecLawyers have

implications for R&D going forward, although this is only true for those with non-zero sign-on

incentive contracts. Firms that hire ExecLawyers poached from other corporations and give them

higher sign-on equity incentive packages exhibit 0.005 more R&D expenditures-to-assets (an

almost 8 percentage change per year) in the coming two years, relative to those firms hiring from

law firms with positive incentive deltas. Finally, firms providing equity incentives to lawyers

have a 0.022-0.058 higher likelihood of filing a patent (a 6-15 percentage change) relative to the

control. 23



VI.     Conclusion

        Internal governance is an idea that has grown in popularity among executives, as they

have increasingly become exposed to regulation and punishment for misconduct. In this paper,

we have documented the importance of executive lawyers, arguably the most significant emblem

of internal governance, to the firm in their multiple tasks: compliance, monitoring, and business

development. Prior literature guides our intuition that individual executives matter (Bertrand and

Schoar, 2003; Malmendier and Tate, 2009). Recently, Custodio and Metzger (2014) document

that financial expertise matters inside the firm. We introduce legal expertise into the box,

documenting that general counsels command meaningfully large governance and business

development fixed effects. The work on the importance of external lawyers on M&A



23
  We want to exert caution in interpreting these business development results. The results become less precisely
estimated in a collapsed specification, which we omit from the tables for brevity. Compared to the gatekeeping
measures, measurement of the mechanism of business development effort by lawyers is much less precise. We do
not want to over-claim on our business development tests, but hopefully to encourage more research on this effort.


                                                                                                                 32
negotiations and outcomes by Krishnan and Masulis (2013) and Karsten, Malmendier and

Sautner (2014) is a nice complement and also serves this motivating purpose.

        For our purposes, however, gatekeeping and strategic advisory roles of lawyers in

executive offices together imply a tension of time allocation. We offer evidence that executive

lawyers are incentivized to compromise internal governance monitoring time when faced with

the call to add strategic input; they do not, however, compromise compliance, implying that

these executive lawyers on average remain gatekeepers, at least in some dimensions, even

though corporations use their intellectual property expertise and other legal expertise in business

development planning.

        Coffee (2002) might fairly interpret our results that compensation distorts gatekeeping.

Surely it is difficult to reconcile the duties of an executive agent (Berle and Means, 1932) with

those of a reputation intermediary positioned by owners to prevent managerial wrongdoing

(Coffee, 2006). We have taken a view more in line with optimal contracting, because legal

expertise seems increasingly valuable in strategic decisions in our information economy. We

conclude with the thought that as long as intellectual property continues to be a major part of

production, legal expertise will continue to be needed in decision making, and the lines between

legal value-creators and legal guardians will remain blurry. Intellectual property is not going

away.




                                                                                                33
References
Acharya, Viral V., Stewart C. Myers, and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2011. The Internal Governance of
Firms. The Journal of Finance 66: 689-720.
Armstrong, Christopher S., Alan D. Jagolinzer, and David F. Larcker. 2010. Chief executive
officer equity incentives and accounting irregularities. Journal of Accounting Research 48: 225-
271.
Bagley, Constance E. 2008. Winning legally: the value of legal astuteness. Academy of
Management Review 33: 378-390.
Bamber, Linda Smith, John (Xuefeng) Jiang, and Isabel Yanyan Wang. 2010. What’s my style?
The influence of top managers on voluntary corporate financial disclosure. Accounting Review
85: 1131-1162.
Berle, Adolf A., and Gardiner C. Means. 1932. The modern corporation and private property.
Transaction Publishers, USA.

Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar. 2003. Managing with style: the effect of managers on
firm policies. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1169-1208.

Bertrand, Marianne, Ester Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. How much should we trust
differences-in-differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119: 249-275.

Chava, Sudheer, and Amiyatosh Purnanandam, 2010, CEOs vs. CFOs: Incentives and Corporate
Policies, Journal of Financial Economics, 97, 263-278.

Cho, Chanho, Joseph T. Halford, Scott Hsu, and Lilian Ng. 2016. Do managers matter for
corporate innovation? Journal of Corporate Finance 36: 206-229.

Choudhary, Preeti, Jason D. Schloetzer, and Jason D. Sturgess. 2013. Boards, auditors, attorneys
and compliance with mandatory SEC disclosure rules. Managerial and Decision Economics 34:
471-487.

Coffee, John C. Jr. 2002. Understanding Enron: it's about the gatekeepers, stupid. The Business
Lawyer 57: 1403-1420.
Coffee, John C. Jr. 2003. The attorney as gatekeeper: an agenda for the SEC. Columbia Law
Review 103: 1293-1316.
Coffee, John C. Jr. 2006. Gatekeepers: the professions and corporate governance. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Core, John E., and Wayne R. Guay. 1999. The use of equity grants to manage optimal equity
incentive levels. Journal of Accounting and Economics 28: 151-184.




                                                                                              34
Core, John E., Robert W. Holthausen, and David F. Larcker. 1999. Corporate governance, chief
executive officer compensation, and firm performance. Journal of Financial Economics 51: 371-
406.
Custodio, Claudia and Daniel Metzger. 2014. Financial Expert CEOs: CEO’s Work Experience
and Firm’s Financial Policies. Journal of Financial Economics 114, 125-154.
Deloitte. 2011. Deloitte global corporate counsel report 2011: how the game is changing.
Demott, Deborah A. 2005. The discrete roles of general counsel. Fordham Law Review 74: 955-
982.
Demott, Deborah A. 2012. The stages of scandal and the roles of general counsel. Wisconsin
Law Review 2012: 463-494.
Desai, Hemang, Chris E. Hogan, and Michael S. Wilkins. 2006. The reputational penalty for
aggressive accounting: Earnings restatements and management turnover. The Accounting Review
81:83-112.
Dubey, Prashant, and Eva Kripalani. 2013. The Generalist Counsel: how leading general counsel
are shaping tomorrow's companies. Oxford University Press.
Duggin, Sarah H., 2006. The pivotal role of the general counsel in promoting corporate integrity
and professional responsibility. St. Louis University Law Journal 51: 989-1042.
Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse, and Luigi Zingales. 2010. Who blows the whistle on corporate
fraud? Journal of Finance 65: 2213-2253.
Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse, and Luigi Zingales. 2014. How pervasive is corporate fraud?
Working paper, University of Toronto and UC Berkeley.
Dyreng, Scott D., Michelle Hanlon, and Edward L. Maydew. 2010. The effects of executives on
corporate tax avoidance. Accounting Review 85: 1163-1189.
Eisdorfer, Assaf. 2008. “Empirical evidence of risk shifting in financially distressed firms”. The
Journal of Finance 63: 609-637.
Field, Laura, Michelle Lowry, and Susan Shu. 2005. Does disclosure deter or trigger litigation?
Journal of Accounting and Economics 39: 487–507.
Ge, Weili, Dawn Matsumoto, and Jenny Li Zhang. 2011. Do CFOs have style? An empirical
investigation of the effect of individual CFOs on accounting practices. Contemporary
Accounting Research 28: 1141-1179.
Goh, Beng Wee, Jimmy Lee, and Jeffrey Ng. 2015. The inclusion of general counsel in top
management and tax avoidance. Working paper, Singapore Management University.
Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii, and Andrew Metrick. 2003. Corporate governance and equity
prices, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1007-155.



                                                                                               35
Goode, William J. 1957. Community within a community: The professions. American
Sociological Review 22: 194-200.

Hall, Richard H. 1968. Professionalization and bureaucratization. American Sociological Review
33: 92-104.

Hanley, K. W., and G. Hoberg. 2012. Litigation risk, strategic disclosure, and the underpricing of
initial public offerings. Journal of Financial Economics 103: 235-254.

Heineman, Ben W. 2012. The rise of the general counsel. http://blogs.hbr.org/2012/09/the-rise-
of-the-general-counsel/.

Hopkins, Justin J., Edward, L. Maydew, and Mohan Venkatachalam. 2015. Corporate general
counsel and financial reporting quality. Management Science61: 129-145.

Horner, Clay. 2007. The changing role of the general counsel. The Osler Outlook.

Jagolinzer, Alan D., David F. Larcker, and Daniel J. Taylor. 2011. Corporate governance and the
information content of insider trades. Journal of Accounting Research 49: 1249–1274.

Jiang, John, Kathy R. Petroni, and Isabel Y. Wang. 2010. CFOs and CEOs: who has the most
influence on earnings management. Journal of Financial Economics 96: 513–526.

Karpoff, Jonathan M., D. Scott Lee, and Gerald S. Martin. 2008. The consequences to managers
for financial misrepresentation. Journal of Financial Economics 88:193–215.

Karpoff, Jonathan M., Allison Koester, D. Scott Lee, and Gerald S. Martin. 2013. Database
challenges in financial misconduct research. Working paper, University of Washington,
Georgetown University, University of Nevada, and American University.

Karsten, Christel, Ulrike Malmendier, and Zacharias Sautner. 2014. M&A negotiations and
lawyer expertise. Working Paper, UC Berkeley.

Kim, E. Han and Yao Lu. 2012. Governance in executive suites. Working paper, University of
Michigan.

Khanna, Vikramaditya, E. Han Kim and Yao Lu. 2015. CEO connectedness within executive
suites and corporate frauds. Journal of Finance 70: 1203-1252.

KPMG. 2012. KMG’s global study of how General Counsel are turning risk to advantage.

Krishnan, C.N.V., and Ronald W. Masulis. 2013. Law firm expertise and merger and acquisition
outcomes. Journal of Law and Economics 56: 189 – 226.

Krishnan, Jayanthi, Yuan Wen, and Wanli Zhao. 2011. Legal expertise on corporate audit
committees and financial reporting quality. The Accounting Review 86: 2099-2130.

                                                                                               36
Kwak, Byungjin, Byung T. Ro, and Inho Suk. 2012. The composition of top management with
general counsel and voluntary information disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics 54:
19-41.

Lipson, Jonathan C, Beth Engel, and Jami Crespo. 2012. Who’s in the house? The changing
nature and roles of in-house and general counsel. Wisconsin Law Review 2012: 237-250.

Litov, Lubomir P., Simone M. Sepe, and Charles K. Whitehead. 2014. Lawyers and fools:
lawyer-directors in public corporation. Georgetown Law Journal 102: 413-480.

Lowry, Michelle, and Susan Shu. Litigation risk and IPO underpricing. Journal of Financial
Economics 65: 309-335.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Geoffrey Tate. 2009. Superstar CEOs. Quarterly Journal of Economics
124: 1593-1638.
Moser, Petra. 2013. Patents and Innovation: Evidence from Economic History. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 27 (1): 23-44.
Nelson, Robert L. and Laura Beth Nielsen. 2000. Cops, counsels, and entrepreneurs: constructing
the role of inside counsel in large corporations. Law and Society Review 34: 457-494.
Rostain, Tanina. 2008. General Counsel in the age of compliance: preliminary findings and new
research questions. Georgetown Journal of Legal Ethics 21: 465-490.
Russell Reynolds Associates. 2013. Becoming the calm risk taker: attributes for success in
today’s new legal environment. Global Leadership.
Sorkin, Andrew Ross. 2012. Big law firms steps into uncertain times. New York Times,
September 24.

Wallace, Jean E. 1995. Organizational and professional commitment in professional and
nonprofessional organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly 40: 228-255.




                                                                                            37
Table 1: General Counsel and Executive Lawyer Characteristics over Time

This table presents General Counsel (GC) and Executive Lawyer (ExecLawyer) characteristics (mean) by fiscal year. Our
sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Statistics reported in (1)-(3) are for the whole sample while
statistics reported in (4)-(9) are for firm years with the presence of ExecLawyer. ExecLawyer is an indicator variable equal to
one if a general counsel appears in ExecuComp as one of the top paid executives. ExecLawyer pay is the executive lawyer's
total compensation (TDC1 in ExecuComp) in constant 2012 dollars. CEO pay is the CEO's total compensation.
ExecLawyer/CEO delta is the sensitivity of the value of the ExecLawyer/CEO’s accumulated equity-based compensation
(including both stocks and options) to a one-percent change in the stock price, in constant 2012 (million) dollars.

            (1)        (2)        (3)                (4)          (5)        (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)
                   Firms with
                     GC as    Firms with            Exec-       Exec-           Exec-                   Exec-
         # of firm corporate     Exec-             Lawyer      Lawyer        Lawyer pay /              Lawyer
Year       years     officer   Lawyer                Age         pay  CEO pay CEO pay                   delta     CEO delta
1995       1,727      0.664      0.328               49.3        631   2,410    0.377                   0.025       0.516
1996       1,926      0.648      0.320               49.5        864   3,471    0.383                   0.034       0.653
1997       1,993      0.656      0.330               49.5        923   4,139    0.387                   0.044       0.898
1998       2,030      0.668      0.353               49.7        992   4,324    0.376                   0.047       0.933
1999       1,928      0.679      0.377               49.9       1,223  5,346    0.413                   0.068       1.351
2000       1,831      0.707      0.398               50.1       1,477  6,750    0.402                   0.064       1.247
2001       1,786      0.713      0.411               50.4       1,378  6,138    0.397                   0.048       0.995
2002       1,821      0.714      0.426               50.6       1,248  5,260    0.391                   0.041       0.821
2003       1,866      0.714      0.429               50.8       1,183  4,643    0.365                   0.057       0.947
2004       1,810      0.731      0.408               51.1       1,313  5,628    0.365                   0.068       0.789
2005       1,697      0.745      0.357               51.8       1,497  6,031    0.359                   0.085       0.921
2006       1,858      0.747      0.377               51.3       1,499  5,807    0.359                   0.097       1.279
2007       1,857      0.753      0.395               51.2       1,424  5,408    0.372                   0.066       1.017
2008       1,790      0.765      0.410               51.2       1,417  5,445    0.353                   0.039       0.509
2009       1,727      0.776      0.412               51.5       1,367  5,031    0.354                   0.046       0.507
2010       1,666      0.794      0.466               52.0       1,529  5,880    0.331                   0.049       0.603
2011       1,593      0.804      0.466               52.4       1,569  6,356    0.335                   0.047       0.705
2012       1,466      0.808      0.440               53.3       1,851  6,398    0.351                   0.059       0.852

All       32,372        0.724          0.393         50.9       1,329       5,324        0.368          0.055        0.865




                                                                                                                        38
Table 2: General Counsel Fixed Effects Estimates of Compliance, Monitoring and Business Development Using General
Counsel Movers

This table presents the general counsel fixed effects. Each row represents a regression for the dependent variable to the left. The sample is limited
to firm-year observations covering general counsel movers. The fixed effects included are: firm fixed effects in row 1; firm and general counsel
fixed effects in row 2; firm, CEO, and general counsel fixed effects in row 3. A firm specific linear time trend is included in all regressions.
Reported in the second and third columns are F-tests for the joint significance of the CEO fixed effects and general counsel fixed effects. For
each F-test, we report the value of the F-statistic, the p-value, and the number of constraints.The final two columns report the adjusted R-squared
and the incremental adjusted R-squared explained by general counsel. Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012.
Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table 1.

                                                       F-tests on fixed effects for                                                  Incremental R-
                                                                                                                                        squared
                                                                                                                                      explained by
                                                                                                                     Adjusted R-        General
                                            General Counsels                          CEOs                  N         squared           Counsels
Compliance Failures
AAER Fraud                                                                                                2,536          0.785
                                         2.50*** (0.0000, 154)                                            2,536          0.820           0.035
                                          1.21* (0.0747, 124)              1.53*** (0.0000, 210)          2,536          0.825

SEC Insider Trading                                                                                       3,172          0.342
                                         1.81*** (0.0000, 190)                                            3,172          0.397           0.055
                                         2.17*** (0.0000, 153)             1.59*** (0.0000, 276)          3,172          0.443
Average increase in Adjusted R-
squared                                                                                                                                  0.045

Monitoring Failures
Securities Fraud                                                                                          3,172          0.498
                                         2.67*** (0.0000, 189)                                            3,172          0.577           0.079
                                         2.09*** (0.0000, 149)             2.15*** (0.0000, 279)          3,172          0.636

Securities Lawsuits Excluding
AAER                                                                                                      3,172          0.474
                                         2.43*** (0.0000, 189)                                            3,172          0.546           0.072
                                         2.15*** (0.0000, 148)             1.98*** (0.0000, 280)          3,172          0.602

General Lawsuits                                                                                          3,172          0.696
                                         2.43*** (0.0000, 190)                                            3,172          0.762           0.066
                                         2.84*** (0.0000, 147)             1.87*** (0.0000, 281)          3,172          0.785
Average increase in Adjusted R-
squared                                                                                                                                  0.072

Business Development
Capex                                                                                                     3,090          0.731
                                         1.29*** (0.0073, 187)                                            3,090          0.739           0.008
                                         1.73*** (0.0000, 143)             2.53*** (0.0000, 275)          3,090          0.798

R&D                                                                                                       3,143          0.449
                                           0.05 (1.0000,187)                                              3,143          0.385              -
                                           0.12 (1.0000,145)                 0.63 (1.0000, 277)           3,143          0.358

Business segments                                                                                         3,172          0.827
                                         4.23*** (0.0000, 189)                                            3,172          0.873           0.046
                                         3.48*** (0.0000, 149)             1.81*** (0.0000, 278)          3,172          0.883

Patent filing                                                                                             1,641          0.819
                                          1.89*** (0.0000, 84)                                            1,641          0.838           0.019
                                          2.02*** (0.0000, 68)               0.57 (0.9997, 107)           1,641          0.825
Average increase in Adjusted R-
squared                                                                                                                                  0.018




                                                                                                                                            39
Table 3: Collapsed Difference-in-Differences Test for the Importance of ExecLawyers

This table presents the collapsed difference-in-differences tests around the external hiring of ExecLawyer. The dependent variable is the change of compliance,
monitoring, business development or other governance measures from pre-hiring to post-hiring period, thus each firm has one observation. The treatment group is
firms hiring ExecLawyers, and the control group is non-hirng firms that are matched within the year-industry-size and by the propensity score of hiring an
ExecLawyer. Post is set to zero for the two years prior to the hiring of ExecLawyer, and one for the two years subsequent to the hiring. The year of hiring is tossed
out. Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table 1. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. Superscripts ***, **, * indicate statistical significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Panel A: Compliance Failures                (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                                          SEC Insider     SEC Insider
                                      AAER Fraud        AAER Fraud         Trading         Trading
ExecLawyer Hiring                      -0.029**          -0.033**          -0.018**         -0.014*
                                        [0.014]           [0.015]           [0.008]         [0.008]
Hire Year and SIC one-Digit F.E.           N                 Y                 N               Y
Observations                             1,089             1,089             1,328           1,328
R-squared                                0.004             0.034             0.004           0.029

Pre-hire mean                             0.033            0.033            0.015            0.015
Scaled annual marginal effect            -44.4%           -50.5%           -60.3%           -46.9%
Panel B: Monitoring Failures                (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)
                                                                          Securities       Securities
                                                                          Lawsuits         Lawsuits
                                                                          Excluding        Excluding        General          General
                                     Securities Fraud Securities Fraud     AAER             AAER            Lawsuits         Lawsuits
ExecLawyer Hiring                        -0.035**         -0.034**           -0.022           -0.02         -0.053***        -0.052***
                                          [0.017]          [0.017]          [0.016]          [0.016]         [0.018]          [0.018]
Hire Year and SIC one-Digit F.E.             N                Y                N                Y               N                Y
Observations                               1,328            1,328            1,328            1,328           1,328            1,328
R-squared                                  0.003            0.017            0.002            0.019           0.007            0.032

Pre-hire mean                             0.054            0.054                                              0.078            0.078
Scaled annual marginal effect            -32.3%           -31.4%                                             -33.8%           -33.2%
Panel C: Business Development               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                                                                            Business         Business        Patent        Patent
                                          Capex            Capex             R&D              R&D           Segments         Segments        filing        filing
ExecLawyer Hiring                         -0.019            -0.008           -0.003           -0.002         0.374**           0.122          -0.030      -0.052*
                                         [0.022]           [0.023]          [0.005]          [0.005]         [0.159]          [0.139]        [0.030]      [0.030]
Hire Year and SIC one-Digit F.E.             N                 Y                N                Y               N               Y
Observations                              1,323             1,323            1,293            1,293           1,328            1,328           778          778
R-squared                                 0.001             0.066            0.000            0.061           0.004            0.251          0.001         0.09
Panel D: Other Governance                   (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)

                                       Institutional    Institutional       Board           Board          Governance       Governance
                                        ownership        ownership       Independence    Independence        Index            Index
ExecLawyer Hiring                         0.389             0.313            0.072            0.069           0.001            -0.003
                                         [0.624]           [0.630]          [0.061]          [0.061]         [0.010]          [0.010]
Hire Year and SIC one-Digit F.E.            N                 Y                N                Y               N                Y
Observations                              1,328             1,328            1,064            1,064            682              682
R-squared                                 0.000             0.13             0.000            0.108           0.002            0.134




                                                                                                                                                            40
Table 4: The Effect of ExecLawyer Equity Incentives on Compliance

This table presents double and triple differencing estimations of the effect of ExecLawyer incentive pay on compliance
failures. The treatment group is firms hiring ExecLawyers from other corporations, and the control group is firms that hire
ExecLawyers from law firms, matched within the year-industry-size and by the propensity score of hiring from law firms vs.
corporations. Post is set to zero for the two years prior to the hiring of ExecLawyer, and one for the two years subsequent to
the hiring. The year of hiring is tossed out. Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Detailed
variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Superscripts ***, **, *
indicate statistical significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                          (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                         AAER       AAER       AAER        Insider     Insider      Insider
                                                         Fraud      Fraud      Fraud       Trading     Trading      Trading

Post                                                      0.019      0.076      0.074     -0.027**     -0.078**     -0.074**
                                                         [0.039]    [0.091]    [0.105]     [0.013]      [0.035]      [0.034]
CorporateHire                                             -0.018     -0.093     -0.093     -0.025*       -0.066       -0.066
                                                         [0.022]    [0.089]    [0.088]     [0.014]      [0.042]      [0.041]
Post*CorporateHire                                        0.011      0.053      0.062      0.022*       0.067*       0.070*
                                                         [0.027]    [0.121]    [0.138]     [0.013]      [0.039]      [0.040]
Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                  0.014      0.013                 -0.023**     -0.023**
                                                                    [0.019]    [0.018]                  [0.011]      [0.011]
Post*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                            -0.026     -0.026                  0.019*       0.020*
                                                                    [0.026]    [0.023]                  [0.010]      [0.011]
CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                    0.029      0.029                    0.014        0.014
                                                                    [0.035]    [0.034]                  [0.011]      [0.011]
Post*CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                              -0.017     -0.015                   -0.016       -0.015
                                                                    [0.046]    [0.043]                  [0.010]      [0.010]
Post*Log(CEODelta)                                                              0.000                                 -0.001
                                                                               [0.008]                               [0.001]
Post*CorporateHire*Log(CEODelta)                                                -0.003                                -0.001
                                                                               [0.010]                               [0.002]


Hire Year F.E.                                              Y          Y          Y           Y            Y            Y
Calendar Year F.E.                                          Y          Y          Y           Y            Y            Y
SIC One-Digit F.E.                                          Y          Y          Y           Y            Y            Y
Observations                                              1,345      1,345      1,345       1,650        1,650        1,650
R-squared                                                 0.106      0.113      0.113       0.059        0.066        0.067




                                                                                                                        41
Table 5: The Effect of ExecLawyer Equity Incentives on Monitoring
This table presents double and triple differencing estimations of the effect of ExecLawyer incentive pay on monitoring failures. The treatment group is firms hiring ExecLawyers from
other corporations, and the control group is firms that hire ExecLawyers from law firms, matched within the year-industry-size and by the propensity score of hiring from law firms vs.
corporations. Post is set to zero for the two years prior to the hiring of ExecLawyer, and one for the two years subsequent to the hiring. The year of hiring is tossed out. Governance
reduction given a standard deviation change in ExecLawyer delta in the hiring year is presented at the bottom of the table. It is then compared to the pre-hiring mean of the governance
failure measure (Appendix Table 3) to calculate the percentage of reduction. Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Detailed variable definitions are
provided in Appendix Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Superscripts ***, **, * indicate statistical significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                                      (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                                                                          Securities      Securities      Securities
                                                                                                          Lawsuits        Lawsuits        Lawsuits
                                                                  Securities   Securities   Securities    Excluding       Excluding       Excluding     General     General    General
                                                                    Fraud        Fraud        Fraud        AAER             AAER            AAER        Lawsuits    Lawsuits   Lawsuits
Post                                                                0.023          0.12        0.035         0.001          0.046            -0.062       0.032       0.102       0.029
                                                                   [0.037]      [0.091]      [0.114]       [0.024]         [0.049]          [0.054]      [0.037]     [0.091]    [0.115]
CorporateHire                                                     -0.044**       -0.076       -0.071        -0.016          -0.059           -0.052     -0.046*        -0.02     -0.017
                                                                   [0.020]      [0.067]      [0.067]       [0.017]         [0.055]          [0.054]      [0.026]     [0.107]    [0.109]
Post*CorporateHire                                                  0.007       -0.184*       -0.091        -0.015         -0.125*           -0.005       0.002     -0.169*      -0.111
                                                                   [0.028]      [0.095]      [0.113]       [0.021]         [0.067]          [0.071]      [0.031]     [0.101]    [0.124]
Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                             -0.019       -0.017                       -0.024*           -0.022                   0.017        0.02
                                                                                [0.019]      [0.019]                       [0.014]          [0.014]                  [0.038]    [0.037]
Post*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                        -0.035      -0.053*                        -0.016         -0.038**                   -0.025     -0.041
                                                                                [0.025]      [0.027]                       [0.013]          [0.019]                  [0.026]    [0.028]
CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                0.011        0.009                        0.015             0.013                   -0.009      -0.01
                                                                                [0.021]      [0.021]                       [0.016]          [0.016]                  [0.038]    [0.039]
Post*Corporate*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                             0.070**      0.086**                       0.040*          0.061**                   0.063*    0.072**
                                                                                [0.031]      [0.033]                       [0.022]          [0.026]                  [0.033]    [0.036]
Post*Log(CEODelta)                                                                            0.025*                                        0.032**                               0.022
                                                                                             [0.015]                                        [0.014]                             [0.015]
Post*CorporateHire*Log(CEODelta)                                                              -0.025                                       -0.032**                              -0.015
                                                                                             [0.016]                                        [0.014]                             [0.020]

Hire Year F.E.                                                         Y           Y            Y             Y               Y               Y            Y           Y           Y
Calendar Year F.E.                                                     Y           Y            Y             Y               Y               Y            Y           Y           Y
SIC One-Digit F.E.                                                     Y           Y            Y             Y               Y               Y            Y           Y           Y
Observations                                                         1,650       1,650        1,650         1,650           1,650           1,650        1,650       1,650       1,650
R-squared                                                            0.094       0.104        0.111         0.077           0.085           0.101        0.112       0.116       0.120

Pre-hire mean (Appendix Table 3)                                                 0.054       0.054                          0.037           0.037                    0.078       0.078
Governance reduction given one s.d. increase in Log(ExecLawyerDelta)             0.013       0.016                          0.008           0.012                    0.012       0.014
Governance reduction as a percentage of the pre-hire mean                        24.6%       30.2%                          20.4%           31.1%                    15.3%       17.5%




                                                                                                                                                                                         42
Table 6: The Effect of ExecLawyer Equity Incentives on Monitoring - Keeping Only Non-Zero ExecLawyer Delta
This table presents double and triple differencing estimations of the effect of ExecLawyer incentive pay on monitoring failures after removing observations with zero ExecLawyerDelta.
The treatment group is firms hiring ExecLawyers from other corporations, and the control group is firms that hire ExecLawyers from law firms, matched within the year-industry-size and
by the propensity score of hiring from law firms vs. corporations. Post is set to zero for the two years prior to the hiring of ExecLawyer, and one for the two years subsequent to the hiring.
The year of hiring is tossed out. Governance reduction given a standard deviation change in ExecLawyer delta in the hiring year is presented at the bottom of the table. It is then compared
to the pre-hiring mean of the governance failure measure (Appendix Table 3) to calculate the percentage of reduction. Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012.
Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Superscripts ***, **, * indicate statistical significance level at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                         (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                                                                             Securities       Securities      Securities
                                                                                                             Lawsuits         Lawsuits        Lawsuits
                                                                     Securities   Securities   Securities    Excluding        Excluding       Excluding     General     General     General
                                                                       Fraud        Fraud        Fraud        AAER              AAER            AAER        Lawsuits    Lawsuits    Lawsuits
Post                                                                     0.03        0.191        0.196        -0.012           0.054            0.023        0.064      0.219*        0.201
                                                                      [0.052]      [0.132]      [0.146]       [0.034]          [0.080]         [0.080]       [0.048]     [0.128]     [0.147]
CorporateHire                                                          -0.025        0.017        0.017         0.004           0.032            0.031        -0.05       0.028        0.027
                                                                      [0.025]      [0.088]      [0.088]       [0.017]          [0.065]         [0.065]       [0.037]     [0.164]     [0.164]
Post*CorporateHire                                                      0.023      -0.259*      -0.266*        -0.006          -0.167*          -0.126        0.006     -0.281*       -0.243
                                                                      [0.040]      [0.140]      [0.149]       [0.027]          [0.088]         [0.092]       [0.045]     [0.157]     [0.171]
Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                                -0.006       -0.006                         -0.005          -0.005                    0.035        0.034
                                                                                   [0.019]      [0.018]                        [0.013]         [0.013]                   [0.049]     [0.047]
Post*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                           -0.051        -0.05                          -0.02           -0.03                    -0.049      -0.055
                                                                                   [0.033]      [0.032]                        [0.020]         [0.023]                   [0.035]     [0.036]
CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                  -0.014       -0.014                         -0.009          -0.009                    -0.024      -0.024
                                                                                   [0.023]      [0.023]                        [0.017]         [0.017]                   [0.050]     [0.050]
Post*CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                            0.091**      0.089**                        0.053**         0.066**                  0.093**     0.104**
                                                                                   [0.040]      [0.040]                        [0.026]         [0.028]                   [0.044]     [0.048]
Post*Log(CEODelta)                                                                               -0.002                                          0.012                                 0.006
                                                                                                [0.014]                                        [0.012]                               [0.019]
Post*CorporateHire*Log(CEODelta)                                                                  0.003                                         -0.015                                -0.013
                                                                                                [0.018]                                        [0.012]                               [0.026]

Hire Year F.E.                                                            Y           Y            Y              Y               Y               Y             Y           Y           Y
Calendar Year F.E.                                                        Y           Y            Y              Y               Y               Y             Y           Y           Y
SIC One-Digit F.E.                                                        Y           Y            Y              Y               Y               Y             Y           Y           Y
Observations                                                             902         902          902            902             902             902           902         902         902
R-squared                                                               0.169       0.181        0.181          0.170           0.176           0.178         0.167       0.175       0.176

Pre-hire mean (Appendix Table 3)                                                    0.054        0.054                          0.037           0.037                    0.078       0.078
Governance reduction given one s.d. increase in Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                0.018        0.017                          0.010           0.013                    0.018       0.020
Governance reduction as a percentage of the pre-hire mean                           32.5%        31.8%                          27.4%           34.2%                    22.9%       25.6%




                                                                                                                                                                                         43
Table 7: The Effect of ExecLawyer Equity Incentives on Monitoring - Collapsed Estimation

This table presents collapsed double and triple differencing estimations of the effect of ExecLawyer incentive pay on monitoring failures. The treatment group is firms hiring
ExecLawyers from other corporations, and the control group is firms that hire ExecLawyers from law firms, matched within the year-industry-size and by the propensity score of hiring
from law firms vs. corporations. The dependent variable is the change of monitoring failure measure from pre- to post-hiring period. Governance reduction given a standard deviation
change in ExecLawyer delta in the hiring year is presented at the bottom of the table. For comparison purpose, we also calculate the magnitude of governance improvement associated
with the hiring of ExecLawyer, based on Table 3 results. Both numbers are then compared to the pre-hiring mean of the governance failure measure (Appendix Table 3) to calculate the
percentage of governance improvement associated with the hiring of ExecLawyer and the percentage of governance improvement unwinded by the equity incentive. Our sample
comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table 1.Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Superscripts ***,
**, * indicate statistical significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.


                                                                              (1)         (2)         (3)     (4)        (5)              (6)           (7)        (8)         (9)
                                                                                                           Securities Securities       Securities
                                                                                                           Lawsuits Lawsuits           Lawsuits
                                                                          Securities Securities Securities Excluding Excluding         Excluding     General    General     General
                                                                            Fraud      Fraud      Fraud     AAER       AAER             AAER         Lawsuits   Lawsuits    Lawsuits

CorporateHire                                                                -0.017      -0.198     -0.115      -0.028    -0.226**       -0.165       -0.016      -0.199     -0.206
                                                                            [0.038]     [0.123]    [0.159]     [0.033]     [0.107]      [0.146]      [0.037]     [0.137]    [0.170]
Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                                     -0.021     -0.034                  -0.024       -0.035                   -0.021     -0.026
                                                                                        [0.023]    [0.026]                 [0.021]      [0.025]                  [0.029]    [0.029]
CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                      0.066*     0.074*                 0.072**       0.078**                    0.067      0.066
                                                                                        [0.039]    [0.042]                 [0.033]      [0.034]                  [0.044]    [0.045]
Log(CEODelta)                                                                                        0.024                                0.02                                0.009
                                                                                                   [0.021]                              [0.020]                             [0.017]
CorporateHire*Log(CEODelta)                                                                         -0.019                               -0.014                               0.002
                                                                                                   [0.026]                              [0.022]                             [0.023]

Hire Year F.E.                                                                 Y           Y          Y           Y           Y             Y           Y           Y          Y
SIC One-Digit F.E.                                                             Y           Y          Y           Y           Y             Y           Y           Y          Y
Observations                                                                  414         414        414         414         414           414         414         414        414
R-squared                                                                    0.065       0.069      0.075       0.099       0.105         0.111       0.092       0.096      0.098

Pre-hiring mean (Appendix Table 3)                                                      0.054       0.054                   0.037        0.037
Magnitude of governance improvement (annualized) associated with the hiring of
ExecLawyer ( Table 3 result)                                                            -0.017      -0.017
Governance improvement in percentage terms (as a percentage of the pre-hiring mean)
                                                                                        -31.4%     -31.4%
associated with having ExecLawyer (Table 3 result)


Magnitude of governance reduction (annualized) given one s.d.larger
Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                                    0.013       0.015                   0.015        0.016
Magnitude of governance reduction in percentage terms (as a percentage of the pre-
hiring mean)                                                                            24.8%       27.8%                   39.2%        42.5%



                                                                                                                                                                                         44
Table 8: The Effect of ExecLawyer Equity Incentives on Business Development
This table presents double and triple differencing estimations of the effect of ExecLawyer incentive pay on business development. Columns (3), (6), (9) and 12 remove observations with zero
ExecLawyerDelta. The treatment group is firms hiring ExecLawyers from other corporations, and the control group is firms that hire ExecLawyers from law firms, matched within the year-industry-
size and by the propensity score of hiring from law firms vs. corporations. Post is set to zero for the two years prior to the hiring of ExecLawyer, and one for the two years subsequent to the hiring.
The year of hiring is tossed out. Improvement in business development given a standard deviation change in ExecLawyer delta in the hiring year is presented at the bottom of the table. It is then
compared to the pre-hiring mean of the business development measure (Appendix Table 3) to calculate the percentage of improvement in business development. Our sample comprises firm years in
ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Superscripts ***, **, * indicate statistical significance
level at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                      (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)
                                     Sample only non-zero deltas?     No        No        Yes       No         No          Yes         No         No         Yes         No          No         Yes
                                                                                                                                    Business Business Business         Patent      Patent      Patent
                                              Dependent variable: Capex        Capex     Capex     R&D        R&D         R&D       segments segments segments         filing      filing      filing
Post                                                                0.055       0.121     0.116   0.023*       0.035      0.083      0.457*       0.176      0.721      0.005      -0.025    0.146
                                                                  [0.072]     [0.131]   [0.187]   [0.013]    [0.031]    [0.051]      [0.249]    [0.897]    [1.043]    [0.067]     [0.162]   [0.294]
CorporateHire                                                       0.006        0.05      0.04    -0.002     -0.029     -0.057       -0.368      0.395      -3.15    0.095*       -0.238     -0.24
                                                                  [0.040]     [0.144]   [0.221]   [0.011]    [0.042]    [0.049]      [0.447]    [2.242]    [2.972]    [0.052]     [0.188]   [0.366]
Post*CorporateHire                                                 -0.025      -0.232   -0.330*    -0.008     -0.019     -0.078       -0.419      1.671      0.997     -0.015       -0.03    -0.467
                                                                  [0.043]     [0.144]   [0.186]   [0.010]    [0.035]    [0.059]      [0.294]    [1.559]    [2.006]    [0.051]     [0.216]   [0.350]
Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                            0.005     0.042               -0.004      0.006                   0.291      0.086               -0.133*** -0.183***
                                                                              [0.041]   [0.049]              [0.008]    [0.007]                 [0.465]    [0.647]                [0.044]   [0.065]
Post*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                                      -0.026    -0.045               -0.001   -0.018***                 -0.153     -0.127                 -0.042    -0.029
                                                                              [0.043]   [0.052]              [0.005]    [0.006]                 [0.257]    [0.305]                [0.039]   [0.051]
CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                             -0.016    -0.012                 0.01      0.017                  -0.268      0.751                 0.126*     0.118
                                                                              [0.047]   [0.064]              [0.013]    [0.015]                 [0.830]    [0.965]                [0.069]   [0.109]
Post*CorporateHire*Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                                       0.092*      0.086                0.008   0.026***                   0.159     -0.006                0.150** 0.313***
                                                                              [0.051]   [0.067]              [0.008]    [0.009]                 [0.423]    [0.503]                [0.061]   [0.087]
Post*Log(CEODelta)                                                              0.002    -0.008               -0.002      0.000                   0.111      0.028                  0.024     0.002
                                                                              [0.009]   [0.011]              [0.004]    [0.005]                 [0.190]    [0.216]                [0.018]   [0.034]
Post*CorporateHire*Log(CEODelta)                                               -0.008      0.01               -0.002     -0.003                  -0.464     -0.247                -0.064*   -0.088*
                                                                              [0.017]   [0.023]              [0.005]    [0.006]                 [0.320]    [0.315]                [0.038]   [0.046]

Hire Year F.E.                                                         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y            Y           Y          Y          Y          Y           Y           Y
Calendar Year F.E.                                                     Y         Y         Y         Y         Y            Y           Y          Y          Y          Y           Y           Y
SIC One-Digit F.E.                                                     Y         Y         Y         Y         Y            Y           Y          Y          Y          Y           Y           Y
Observations                                                         1,642     1,642      898      1,634     1,634         886        1,650      1,650       902        980         980         388
R-squared                                                            0.161     0.163     0.190     0.255     0.257        0.295       0.335      0.339      0.439      0.462       0.483       0.622

Pre-hiring mean (Appendix Table 3)                                             0.352                                     0.064                                                     0.379       0.379
Business growth given one s.d. increase in Log(ExecLawyerDelta)                0.017                                     0.005                                                     0.024       0.058
Business growth as a percentage of the pre-hiring mean                         5.0%                                      7.6%                                                      6.3%        15.2%




                                                                                                                                                                                                  45
Appendix Table 1: Variable Definition, Data Sources and Descriptive Statistics
This table presents the definition and sources of the variables used in the study and shows the summary statistics of the variables.
Variable name                   Variable definition                                                                                        Sources                            N      Mean    Median   Std

ExecLawyer and Compensation
ExecLawyer                      Indicator variable that takes on the value of one if a general counsel appears in ExecuComp as one Execucomp
                                                                                                                                                                            32,372   0.393     0      0.488
                                of the top paid executives.
ExecLawyer pay                  ExecLawyer total compensation (TDC1 in ExecuComp) in constant 2012 dollars.                        Execucomp                                11,151   1,329    890     1,666
CEO pay                         CEO total compensation (TDC1 in ExecuComp) in constant 2012 dollars.                                       Execucomp                        12,144   5,324   3,100    8,280
ExecLawyer pay / CEO pay        Total compensation of the ExecGC to the total compensation of the CEO.                                     Execucomp                        10,760   0.368   0.299    0.319
ExecLawyer delta                Total wealth to performance sensitivities based on stock holdings and unexercised options in               Execucomp
                                                                                                                                                                            12,361   0.055   0.020    0.201
                                constant 2012 (million) dollars following Core and Guay (1999)
CEO delta                       Total wealth to performance sensitivities based on stock holdings and unexercised options in               Execucomp
                                                                                                                                                                            11,793   0.865   0.201    4.501
                                constant 2012 (million) dollars following Core and Guay (1999)
Compliance Failures
AAER Fraud                      Indicator that takes on the value of one if the financial statements of a given fiscal year are restated   Center for Financial Reporting
                                and investigated by the SEC. Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Releases are issued by the                and Management Center at the
                                SEC during or at the conclusion of an investigation against a company, an auditor, or an officer for       Haas School of Business          27,444   0.020   0.000    0.140
                                alleged accounting and/or auditing misconduct. This variable is set equal to missing for fiscal years
                                after 2009.
SEC Insider Trading             Indicator that is one if in a given year a corporate executive traded his/her own company's stock          SEC Litigation Releases on
                                based on insider information or tipped such information for others to trade and later was                  Enforcement Actions on Insider 32,372     0.004   0.000    0.067
                                investigated by the SEC, and zero otherwise.                                                               Trading
Monitoring Failures
Securities Fraud                Indicator that takes on the value of one for fiscal years coinciding with the class period of any          Stanford Law School Securities
                                securities class action lawsuit. Dismissed cases are dropped for defining this variable.                   Class Action Clearing House    32,372     0.029   0.000    0.169

Securities Lawsuits Excluding   Indicator that takes on the value of one for fiscal years coinciding with the class period of any          Stanford Law School Securities
AAER                            securities class action lawsuits excluding those coinciding with AAERs                                     Class Action Clearing House    32,372     0.024   0.000    0.152

General Lawsuits                Indicator that takes on the value of one for fiscal years coinciding with the class period of any   Audit Analytics
                                lawsuits (e.g. breach of any law, including security law, energy law, international law, employment                                         32,372   0.056   0.000    0.231
                                law, etc.) with positive settlement amount.
Business Development
Capex                           The ratio of capital expediture to PP&E at the beginning of the fiscal year                                Compustat                        31,064   0.305   0.202    0.418
R&D                             R&D expenses scaled by assets at the beginning of the fiscal year                                          Compustat                        32,275   0.055   0.014    0.156
Business segments               Number of business segments                                                                                Compustat segments               32,372   5.041   3.000    4.567
Patent filing                   Indicator that takes on the value of one if at least one patent is filed by a firm in a fiscal year.       NBER Patent Database (1995-
                                                                                                                                                                            20,224   0.334   0.000    0.472
                                                                                                                                           2006)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       46
Variable name               Variable definition                                                                             Sources         N      Mean     Median    Std
Firm Characteristics
Marketcap                   Market capitalization in millions of constant 2012 dollars.                                     Compustat     32,127   8,156    1,683    26,757
Market-adjusted returns     Annual cumulative stock returns minus cumulative market (CRSP value weighted) returns over the CRSP
                                                                                                                                          31,712   0.080    -0.006   0.682
                            fiscal year.
Market to Book              The ratio of the market value of assets (market value of equity, plus book value of debt and book Compustat
                                                                                                                                          31,880   1.631    1.139    2.094
                            value of preferred equity, minus deferred taxes) to the book value of assets
Leverage                    The ratio of total liabilities to book assets                                                     Compustat   32,284   0.566    0.560    0.287
ROA                         The ratio of EBITDA to book assets                                                              Compustat     31,527   0.120    0.123    0.143
Firm age                    Number of years since a firm first appears on CRSP (use the median of the sample if missing).   CRSP
                                                                                                                                          31,726   22.687   17.178   18.627
Other Governance Measures
Institutional ownership     Stocks owned by institutional investors                                                         13F           32,372   0.584    0.663    0.319
Board independence          Percentage of independent directors on board                                                    Riskmetrics   25,023   69.292   71.429   16.914
Governance Index            Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003) governance index                                              Riskmetrics   17,512   9.225    9.000    2.644




                                                                                                                                                                       47
Appendix Table 2: CEO Fixed Effects on Compliance, Monitoring and Business Development Using CEO
Movers

This table presents CEO fixed effects with CEO movers. Each row represents a regression for the dependent variable to the
left. The sample is limited to firm-year observations for CEOs that move. The fixed effects included are: firm fixed effects in
row 1; firm and CEO fixed effects in row 2. A firm specific linear time trend is included in all regressions. Reported in the
second column are F-tests for the joint significance of the CEO fixed effects. For each F-test, we report the value of the F-
statistic, the p-value, and the number of constraints. The final two columns report the adjusted R-squared and the incremental
adjusted R-squared explained by CEOs. Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Detailed
variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table 1.

                                       F-tests on fixed effects for
                                                                                                              Incremental R-
                                                                                             Adjusted R-    squared explained
                                                 CEOs                           N             squared            by CEOs
Compliance Failures
AAER Fraud                                                                    2,344             0.524
                                         2.07*** (0.0000, 157)                2,344             0.598              0.074

SEC Insider Trading                                                           2,719             0.303
                                         1.79*** (0.0000, 200)                2,719             0.383              0.080
Average increase in Adjusted
R-squared                                                                                                          0.077

Monitoring Failures
Securities Fraud                                                              2,719             0.409
                                         4.31*** (0.0000, 200)                2,719             0.617              0.208

Securities Lawsuits Excluding
AAER                                                                          2,719             0.381
                                         4.33*** (0.0000, 201)                2,719             0.601              0.220

General Lawsuits                                                              2,719             0.517
                                         2.07*** (0.0000, 157)                2,719             0.535              0.018
Average increase in Adjusted
R-squared                                                                                                          0.149

Business Development
Capex                                                                         2,579             0.358
                                         1.95*** (0.0000, 193)                2,579             0.448              0.090

R&D                                                                           2,703             0.334
                                           0.90 (0.8312, 199)                 2,703             0.322                -

Business segments                                                             2,719             0.809
                                         3.05*** (0.0000, 200)                2,719             0.857              0.048

Patent filing                                                                 1,771             0.793
                                           1.08 (0.3065, 100)                 1,771             0.796              0.003
Average increase in Adjusted
R-squared                                                                                                          0.035




                                                                                                                         48
Appendix Table 3: Summary Statistics for ExecLawyer Hiring Firms vs. No-ExecLawyer Firms
This table presents firm and manager statistics for ExecLawyer hiring firms and firms with no ExecLawyer. For ExecLawyer hiring firms, the statistics are taken
in the year before the ExecLawyer is hired. Firms with no ExecLawyer include firm years where there is no ExecLawyer in a five-year window (i.e., from two
years prior to two years after). Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table
1.
                                                                 Pre-Match                                                Post-Match
                                               ExecLawyer       No ExecLawyer         Difference       ExecLawyer       No ExecLawyer          Difference
# of Obs.                                         574               9,004                                 536               1,354
                                              Mean    Std       Mean      Std           p-value       Mean    Std       Mean      Std            p-value

AAER Fraud                                    0.035 0.184 0.020            0.141        0.019         0.033 0.178 0.034            0.174          1.000
SEC Insider Trading                           0.014 0.117 0.005            0.074        0.010         0.015 0.121 0.012            0.110          0.470
Securities Fraud                              0.057 0.233 0.027            0.162        0.000         0.054 0.226 0.040            0.191          0.204
Securities Lawsuits Excluding AAER            0.040 0.196 0.022            0.147        0.001         0.037 0.190 0.035            0.180          0.848
General Lawsuits                              0.075 0.263 0.046            0.209        0.001         0.078 0.269 0.060            0.234          0.103
Capex                                         0.351 0.506 0.321            0.409        0.101         0.352 0.510 0.340            0.451          0.908
R&D                                           0.062 0.128 0.082            0.212        0.024         0.064 0.131 0.065            0.140          0.528
Business segments                             5.570 4.851 4.970            4.482        0.002         5.519 4.848 5.715            4.967          0.526
Patent filing                                 0.368 0.483 0.346            0.476        0.373         0.379 0.486 0.363            0.479          0.368
Log(marketcap)                                7.592 1.577 7.554            1.680        0.598         7.562 1.549 7.646            1.726          0.589
Market-adjusted returns                       0.163 0.687 0.210            0.786        0.166         0.170 0.701 0.178            0.748          0.677
Market to Book                                1.679 1.738 1.851            2.391        0.093         1.724 1.772 1.748            2.317          0.777
Leverage                                      0.553 0.250 0.518            0.246        0.001         0.545 0.248 0.540            0.221          0.637
ROA                                           0.126 0.113 0.132            0.120        0.261         0.128 0.113 0.133            0.117          0.463
Firm age                                     21.023 17.341 20.742         16.643        0.696        21.089 17.524 22.085         17.630          0.616




                                                                                                                                                                  49
Appendix Table 4: Logit Regression on ExecLawyer Hiring
This table presents the logit regression that predicts the hiring of ExecLawyer. The dependent variable in column (1)
takes on the value of one if a firm hires an ExecLawyer but has no ExecLawyer in any of the two prior years, and zero if a
firm has no ExecLawyer in the current year as well as any of the prior two years. The dependent variable in column (2)
takes on the value of one if a firm hires an ExecLawyer from a law firm, and zero if a firm poaches an ExecLawyer from
another corporation. Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Detailed variable definitions
are provided in Appendix Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Superscripts ***, **, * indicate
statistical significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                     (1)                                         (2)
                                    Dependent = 1 if Hiring ExecLawyer        Dependent = 1 if Hiring ExecLawyer from
                                                                                             Law Firm


AAER Fraud                                         0.320                                        0.450
                                                  (0.263)                                      (0.544)
SEC Insider Trading                                0.281                                        -0.072
                                                  (0.427)                                      (0.858)
Securities Fraud                                  0.559**                                       0.676
                                                  (0.231)                                      (0.485)
Log(marketcap)                                     0.018                                        -0.062
                                                  (0.032)                                      (0.072)
Market-adjusted returns                            -0.044                                      0.295*
                                                  (0.068)                                      (0.160)
Market to Book                                     -0.028                                       -0.045
                                                  (0.032)                                      (0.072)
Leverage                                         0.983***                                       -0.553
                                                  (0.218)                                      (0.473)
ROA                                                -0.424                                       0.226
                                                  (0.393)                                      (0.980)
Firm age                                           -0.005                                       -0.005
                                                  (0.003)                                      (0.006)
Capex                                             0.228**                                       -0.270
                                                  (0.101)                                      (0.229)
R&D                                                -0.603                                       -0.230
                                                  (0.434)                                      (0.809)
Business segments                                 0.024**                                       -0.010
                                                  (0.010)                                      (0.022)
Trend                                            -0.256***                                      0.157
                                                  (0.067)                                      (0.147)
Trend^2                                          0.012***                                       -0.009
                                                  (0.003)                                      (0.007)

SIC One-Digit F.E.                                    Y                                           Y

Observations                                        9,034                                        536
Pesudo R-squared                                    0.025                                       0.045




                                                                                                                       50
Appendix Table 5: The Importance of ExecLawyer - Governance Splits

This table presents the collapsed difference-in-differences tests around the external hiring of Execlawyer using subsamples split by govenance
strength. The dependent variable is the change of compliance and monitoring from the pre-hiring to post-hiring period, thus each firm has one
observation. The treatment group is firms hiring ExecLawyers, and the control group is non-hirng firms that are matched within the year-
industry-size and by the propensity score of hiring an ExecLawyer. Post is set to zero for the two years prior to the hiring of ExecLawyer, and
one for the two years subsequent to the hiring. The year of hiring is tossed out. Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to
2012. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Appendix Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Superscripts ***, **, *
indicate statistical significance level at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                               (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)                (5)              (6)
                                           Institution      Institution         Board          Board
                                          ownership <      ownership >     Independence < Independence >        Governance      Governance
                                             median           median           median         median            Index <=9        Index > 9
                                                                                Panel A: AAER Fraud
ExecLawyer Hiring                           -0.057***          -0.009           -0.018         -0.029              -0.014         -0.049**
                                              [0.022]         [0.020]          [0.021]        [0.026]             [0.021]          [0.020]

Hire Year and SIC one-Digit F.E.                Y                Y                Y                Y                 Y               Y
Observations                                   551              538             485               424              498              591
R-squared                                     0.101            0.037            0.05             0.082            0.048            0.054

                                                                           Panel B: SEC Insider Trading
ExecLawyer Hiring                             -0.02            -0.006        -0.027**          -0.013            -0.042**           -0.001
                                             [0.013]          [0.009]         [0.014]         [0.015]             [0.017]          [0.009]

Hire Year and SIC one-Digit F.E.                Y                Y                Y                Y                 Y               Y
Observations                                   670              658             545               569              471              857
R-squared                                     0.047            0.036           0.054             0.053            0.056             0.03

                                                                              Panel C: Securities Fraud
ExecLawyer Hiring                             -0.033           -0.025           -0.037           -0.018            -0.05            -0.032
                                             [0.022]          [0.025]          [0.026]          [0.026]           [0.033]          [0.020]

Hire Year and SIC one-Digit F.E.                Y                Y                Y                Y                 Y               Y
Observations                                   670              658             545               569              471              857
R-squared                                     0.054            0.052           0.055             0.045            0.048             0.03

                                                                   Panel D: Securities Lawsuits Excluding AAER
ExecLawyer Hiring                             -0.011           -0.022          -0.016           -0.013        -0.023                -0.024
                                             [0.022]          [0.023]         [0.024]          [0.025]       [0.030]               [0.019]

Hire Year and SIC one-Digit F.E.                Y                Y                Y                Y                 Y               Y
Observations                                   670              658             545               569              471              857
R-squared                                     0.042            0.052           0.052             0.053            0.047             0.03

                                                                             Panel E: General Lawsuits
ExecLawyer Hiring                           -0.052**           -0.041         -0.065**          -0.029           -0.076**         -0.041**
                                             [0.023]          [0.025]          [0.027]         [0.027]            [0.034]          [0.021]

Hire Year and SIC one-Digit F.E.                Y                Y                Y                Y                 Y               Y
Observations                                   670              658             545               569              471              857
R-squared                                     0.069            0.066           0.082             0.048            0.053             0.04




                                                                                                                                           51
Appendix Table 6: Summary Statistics for Firms with ExecLawyers Hired from Corporations vs. Those with
ExecLawyers Hired from Law Firms
This table presents statistics for two matched groups of firms that hire ExecLawyers from different career sources. The
treatment group is firms hiring ExecLawyers from law firms, and the control group is firms that hire ExecLawyers from
other corporations. The two groups are matched within the year-industry-size and by the closest propensity score of hiring
from a law firm. This table presents firm and manager statistics after matching, taken in the year bofore the the ExecLawyer
is hired. Our sample comprises firm years in ExecuComp from 1995 to 2012. Detailed variable definitions are provided in
Appendix Table 1.
                                                  Corporate Hire                  Law Firm Hire               Difference
Obs. (unmatched)                                       361                            213
Obs. (matched)                                         227                            189
                                                Mean           Std              Mean          Std               p-value

AAER Fraud                                      0.048           0.181            0.028           0.166           0.387
SEC Insider Trading                             0.000           0.000            0.005           0.073           0.318
Securities Fraud                                0.056           0.185            0.069           0.254           0.694
Securities Lawsuits Excluding AAER              0.040           0.147            0.058           0.235           0.524
General Lawsuits                                0.095           0.271            0.106           0.308           0.771
Capex                                           0.339           0.470            0.313           0.351           0.607
R&D                                             0.041           0.056            0.055           0.171           0.325
Business segments                               5.648           5.027            5.952           4.948           0.583
Patent filing                                   0.364           0.496            0.366           0.484           0.980
Log(marketcap)                                  7.671           1.459            7.610           1.589           0.736
Market-adjusted returns                         0.173           0.707            0.176           0.658           0.972
Market to Book                                  1.478           1.473            1.734           1.857           0.132
Leverage                                        0.576           0.243            0.549           0.222           0.326
ROA                                             0.112           0.124            0.116           0.224           0.802
Firm age                                       24.152          17.083           21.443          17.280           0.175




                                                                                                                         52
