                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE U.S. ECONOMY IN WWII AS A MODEL FOR COPING WITH CLIMATE
                                 CHANGE

                                           Hugh Rockoff

                                       Working Paper 22590
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22590


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2016




This paper was prepared for “Coping with Scarcity: Energy Shortages, Food Crises, Drought, and
Critical Materials in the Modern World (c. 1800 to the present),” a conference at Caltech, November
15-16, 2014, organized by John Brewer and Frank Trentmann. I thank the participants in the conference
for many helpful suggestions and stimulating questions. I also thank my colleague Hilary Sigman for
a discussion of the issues involved in trying to make use of the wartime model. Jessica Jiang provided
excellent research assistance. I am responsible for the remaining errors. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The U.S. Economy in WWII as a Model for Coping with Climate Change
Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 22590
September 2016
JEL No. N42

                                             ABSTRACT

During World War II the United States rapidly transformed its economy to cope with a wide range
of scarcities, such as shortfalls in the amounts of ocean shipping, aluminum, rubber, and other raw
materials needed for the war effort. This paper explores the mobilization to see whether it provides
lessons about how the economy could be transformed to meet scarcities produced by climate change
or other environmental challenges. It concludes that the success of the United States in overcoming
scarcities during World War II without a major deterioration in living standards provides a basis for
optimism that environmental challenges can be met, but that the unique political consensus that prevailed
during the war limits the practical usefulness of the wartime model.


Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu
                   1. War as an analog for environmental catastrophe

        The question of how best to respond to the scarcities that are likely to be

produced by global warming and pollution sends social scientists and policy makers in

search of historical analogies. There are many examples of droughts, floods,

deforestations, and so on, from which much can be learned. But wars can also help us

understand how economies respond to extreme challenges. Wars will be especially

useful analogs if climate change or pollution reach “tipping points” when conditions

worsen dramatically in short periods of time. In this paper I explore the transformation of

the American economy in World War II as a model for understanding how to cope with

scarcities produced by climate change and pollution. 1

        Often in everyday conversation terms such as scarcity or shortage are used

simply to refer to a commodity that is available in amounts smaller than what was

typically available in the past – amounts below “normal” – or smaller than what is

considered adequate given ethical concerns. By these definitions the United States did

not suffer from many shortages in World War II. With a few exceptions – most

importantly rubber – commodities were available in amounts that exceeded prewar

domestic production or imports. 2 Again, to use a different definition, there were many

scarcities in the sense that prices were very high because of increases in demand

and/or decreases in supply. There were also many shortages in the economist’s sense

1
  Wartime mobilizations are frequently invoked as models for dealing with other problems. It was a staple
of the Roosevelt administration during the New Deal (Leuchtenberg 1966), and since then we have had
the war on poverty and the war on cancer. Recently, Bill McKibben (2016) addressed climate change with
the WWII analogy in an article in the New Republic.
2
  Supplies of silk (and luffa brushes!), were also cut by Japanese military expansion. Silk had been used
for parachutes, but was replaced by nylon.

                                                        3
that demand exceeded supply at the market prices because prices were often fixed by

the federal government to try to prevent inflation. In these cases the allocation of

available supplies had to be accomplished by some form of non-price rationing:

favoritism, queuing, or formal ration tickets. The adoption of non-price rationing in

conjunction with price fixing is infrequent in peacetime, but might be used in the future

to deal with emergencies produced by atmospheric warming, the exhaustion of fossil

fuels, and related problems. The war years, in other words, although brief and aberrant

in some ways, have much to teach us about how to deal with environmental challenges.

Shortages, by whatever definition, were often addressed by attempts to increase

supply, and that often meant huge infrastructure projects.

        In some respects the European and Japanese experiences in World War II are

better analogs for an economy weakened by environmental stresses than the American

experience. Bombs dropped by enemy aircraft are, perhaps, a better analog for severe

weather events produced by global warming than the distant challenges faced by the

United States in World War II. But the American experience is also relevant. The United

States faced many supply challenges and did so as a functioning democratic state in

which non-war concerns although subordinate continued to influence policy. In other

words, the process of decision making in the United States was much closer to the

peacetime norm than it was in Europe or Japan during World War II. 3 It is also true that


3
  There is a large literature that describes the mobilization. Donald Nelson was the head of the War
Production Board and his memoir (1946), although often criticized for its efforts to rationalize his
decisions, remains the most important of the memoirs written by one of the participants. Janeway (1951)
was the first attempt to explain the economics of the mobilization and draw out the implications for
economic policy that received widespread attention. Koistinen (2004) is the best description of the
political economy of the mobilization. Klein (2013) and Hyde (2013), the latter restricted to the automobile
industry, are recent histories that do a good job of describing the scale and scope of the mobilization.
Wilson (2016), in a book that will undoubtedly come to be regarded as a classic, provides a detailed
overview of the war economy.

                                                         4
some environmental challenges could be met by investing a small proportion of national

product year-after-year over a long period of time. Geoffrey Heal (2016), for example,

recently estimated the cost of reducing greenhouse gas emissions 80% by 2050. A

smaller war such as the Vietnam War or the Iraq War would be a better analog for this

sort of policy than World War II.

       In section 2 I describe the state of the economy on the eve of U.S. entry into the

war. In section 3 I consider the attempts to augment supplies of crucial materials with

massive infrastructure projects, such as the construction of a synthetic rubber industry.

Global warming may require similarly large infrastructure projects such as construction

of alternative power sources or desalinization plants. In section 4 I look at population

movements. Considerable numbers of workers moved to production centers to produce

munitions and to increase supplies of materials and transport. Global warming and other

environmental challenges may require large population movements, for example from

low lying coastal areas or from drought-ridden farming areas. Again, the war has much

to teach us about how this can be accomplished quickly.

       Despite successful efforts to increase supply, the growth of demand often

outpaced supply, and the government, faced by the prospect of a wage-price spiral,

turned to price controls and rationing. This issue is explored in section 5. Most of the

responses to wartime scarcities required money, in most cases great heaps of money.

Section 6 describes the monetary and fiscal policies that raised the needed funds.

Progressives hoped that the mobilization would be seen as a hugely successful

experiment with big government and that as a result the postwar period would

experience a strong left turn in American politics. However, this was not to be. Section 7



                                                5
explores some of the reasons why the war experience was not interpreted by the

general public as Progressives had hoped. Section 8 summarizes the main themes.



                           2. The U.S. Economy in December 1941

        It is often assumed that mobilization was facilitated by a high level of

unemployment of both workers and capital that was still present at the onset of the

mobilization. There is some truth in this claim, but it is easily exaggerated. The U.S.

economy was expanding rapidly in 1940 and 1941, partly as a result of increases in

U.S. and foreign military expenditures. During 1941 the rate of unemployment, as

shown in Table 1, averaged 6.0 percent, a rate more typical of postwar recessions than

the dark days of the Great Depression. 4 Pearl Harbor and the intensification of the

mobilization that followed then pushed unemployment rates to very low levels and hours

worked to very high levels (Vernon 1994). The drafting of large numbers of young men,

a group that normally has a high rate of unemployment, makes direct comparisons of

the wartime and peacetime unemployment rates problematic, but there can be no doubt

that the qualitative conclusion, that unemployment had reached very low levels, is

surely right. The effect of these trends on the amount of labor available is shown in

Figure 1 which plots total hours worked per week from January 1940 to August 1946.

Hours worked per week increased steadily during 1940 and 1941 a trend that continued

after Pearl Harbor. Hours worked peaked in the summer of 1943.

        One category of workers was readily available for the military or work in

munitions factories: federal emergency workers. To address unemployment during the

4
 The three highest rates in the 1950s were 6.8 percent in 1954, 7.1 percent in1958, and 5.9 percent in
1959.

                                                       6
depression the federal government established several programs to create jobs for

unemployed workers including the Civilian Conservation Corps and the Works Projects

Administration. Although these agencies undertook projects that could be defended on

grounds of productivity, such as planting trees in national parks, the main purpose was

mainly to create jobs. The extent of this effort can be seen in Table 1. The second

column shows the unemployment rate at key dates. In this column emergency workers

are counted as employed, although at the time official statistics counted them as

unemployed to emphasize the severity of unemployment. Unemployment on average

for the year 1939 was 11.3 percent of the civilian labor force, and as shown in column 2,

emergency workers constituted another 5.9 percent of the labor force. Both groups

included many workers willing and able to move into the armed forces or war

production. By 1944 unemployment was down to 1.2 percent, and the emergency work

programs had been eliminated.

       That the economy had recovered a good deal of the ground lost during the

depression by time Pearl Harbor was attacked probably was a plus for further rapid

conversion. In peacetime it may be easier to open a closed factory than to convert one

which is going full blast. Financial incentives may be sufficient to convince owners of the

closed factory to open it and for managers and workers to show up for work. The same

financial incentives may not convince the owners of the factory going full blast to

produce a new product. The new product may appear to be more profitable, but why

take a risk if things are going well? It may be thoughts about the opening of closed

factories as opposed to changing production in a factory that is already profitable in

peacetime that lead observers to think that unemployment facilitates conversion.



                                                7
        But during World War II risk was taken off the table with the use of cost-plus

contracts, rapid depreciation of war related investments, and other measures. The

incentive effects of these contracts were reinforced by limitation orders 5 and patriotism.

With risk off the table, another consideration comes to the fore. If a factory is going full

blast, workers and managers are already in place, all that needs doing is tearing out old

production lines and putting in new ones. The closed factory can also be brought online,

but there may be delays in assembling workers and managers. Executives in the auto

industry made use of this argument when, before Pearl Harbor, it was being pressured

to begin some limited production of weapons. Partial conversion, they claimed was

inefficient. Let us have full civilian production runs, and then when we have to, we will

be able to convert rapidly to war production. The argument was self-serving, but not

without logic.



                                        3. New Infrastructure

An impressive array of new infrastructure was built in the United States during World

War II. Production of raw materials, of course, had to be multiplied substantially to meet

the needs of the armed forces, and this required expanding existing facilities and

constructing new ones. The peak for ingot steel was in March 1944 when 93.8 million

long tons were produced, an annual rate about 1.8 times the amount produced in 1939.

Aluminum production increased by a factor of 6.9, and magnesium production by a

factor of 72 (Dewhurst 1947, 778).




5
 Beginning in the summer of 1941 government orders first limited and then prohibited production of
automobiles, trucks, refrigerators, and many other consumer durables.

                                                       8
        Robert J. Gordon in a famous paper estimated that about $29 billion, including

both private and public money, was spent on manufacturing structures and equipment

during the war (Gordon 1969, 228). This would be about $442 billion in today’s money

using the CPI as the inflator, about $781 billion using the unskilled wage, and about

$3.04 trillion using nominal GDP. 6 Many of the projects completed during the war would

be the subject of intense public attention and consuming political and legal controversy

if undertaken today. A list of these projects includes the Big Inch and Little Big Inch

pipelines, the Alaska Highway, new factories to produce aluminum and magnesium, the

synthetic rubber industry, an expanded fleet of ocean transport, and the Manhattan

Project which built the atomic bomb.

        The rapid completion of these projects – which was accomplished without

substantially endangering current living standards – suggests that large infrastructure

projects designed to cope with climate change or other environmental challenges could

be completed quickly provided adequate funding was available and the usual array of

legal obstacles could be overcome. In each of these cases – the Manhattan Project is

the exception – the project made use of known technologies. Projects designed to cope

with the effects of climate change that require the development of new technologies

cannot rely on the wartime analogs as evidence that they could be accomplished

relatively easily. 7 There are many papers and monographs that are devoted to these

projects. Here I will provide brief summaries of four that together convey a sense of the

scope, speed, and diversity of the projects undertaken.

6
  I used the inflators available at www.measuringworth.com (accessed April 21, 2016) and assumed that
the expenditures were all made in 1942.
7
 Field (2008) showed that despite many claims to the contrary total factor productivity did not ratchet
upwards over the war period.

                                                         9
      (1) The synthetic rubber industry is perhaps the clearest example of the creation

of a new industry to resolve a wartime scarcity. In this case the term scarcity can be

given a conventional definition of a severe reduction in the amount of a commodity

available. Before World War II most of America’s rubber came from plantations in the

Far East. Those supplies were cut off by the outbreak of the war with Japan. There had

been attempts before the war to create a stockpile of rubber, but those efforts were

limited. Adequate funding to lay in a stock of raw materials that were then in abundant

supply, but would not be if the United States became involved in a war that most

Americans did not want to join, was not forthcoming either from the automobile tire

industry (the main user of rubber) or the government. Figure 2 shows the amount of

rubber consumed by type during the war: natural rubber, reclaimed, and synthetic. The

Figure shows the dramatic fall in the consumption of natural rubber. By 1945

consumption of natural rubber was only about 14 percent of what it had been in 1941.

      As can also be seen in Figure 2, the contribution of reclaimed rubber to total

production remained roughly constant during the war. The exception is 1943 when

consumption was about 16 percent higher than it had been in 1941. After Pearl Harbor

automobile tires were rationed to limit hoarding and gasoline was rationed to limit

driving and conserve the existing stock of tires. Part of the increase in consumption of

reclaim was due to the efforts of the general public who responded enthusiastically to a

highly publicized salvage campaign. The reclaim industry, however, had been well

established before the war and continued to supply most of the reclaimed rubber from

traditional sources. The efforts of patriotic Americans to find rubber by rummaging for

old tires, rubber mats, and so on, made a modest contribution, despite the inspiring



                                               10
news stories about the nationwide search for used rubber. Much of the salvaged rubber

could not be turned into tires, the most pressing need. Although helpful, the contribution

of the salvage campaign was mostly to morale. The fears of children in particular could

be assuaged by making them feel that they were helping to win the war.

       Another salvage campaign, incidentally, that was less important in economic

terms than it was in political and social term was the fat salvage campaign. Americans

were encouraged to save cooking fat and turn it in to the local butcher. Fat was needed,

Americans were told, to make explosives. The truth, however, was rather different. The

amount of fat needed for munitions was only a small fraction of U.S. production.

Explosive makers could be sure that they would get their share. The fat salvage

campaign was funded by the soap makers. They were concerned that if soap was

rationed, some consumers would get used to using less, and that as a result postwar

market for soap would be spoiled.

       The real answer to the rubber shortage was synthetic rubber. 8 Automobile tires of

high quality had been made successfully from neoprene, a synthetic developed in the

United States, as early as 1934. But the molecule finally chosen to be the workhorse of

the synthetic rubber program was Buna-S which had been developed by I.G. Farben

and Standard Oil. I.G. Farben had invented the molecule; Standard Oil’s contribution

was scaling up the laboratory process for mass production. Attempts had been made to

convince the tire companies to invest in synthetic rubber before the war, but these

efforts had been frustrated by the low price of natural rubber. To contemporaries the

synthetic rubber program seemed to be slow in getting off the ground. One problem was


8
 Bisio and Herbert (1985) provides an excellent overview of the program. Howard (1947), a Standard Oil
chemist and executive provides an informed participant’s view and a defense of Standard Oil’s role.

                                                      11
to decide on the type of synthetic rubber that would form the basis of the program. A

committee appointed by President Roosevelt and headed by Bernard Baruch, the head

of the War Industries Board in World War I, solved that problem by picking Buna S. A

further delay was caused by Standard Oil’s attempt to receive long-run recognition of its

patent rights. But once these issues were settled facilities were created and came

online rapidly. The Baruch Committee reported in September 1942. By May of 1943,

Standard Oil had its Butadiene plant (a key feedstock for synthetic rubber) up and

running. By 1944, as shown in Figure 2, the shortfall in consumption of natural rubber

had been offset by production and consumption of synthetic rubber. The synthetic

rubber program, however, was only one of many infrastructure projects.

       (2) The Big Inch and Little Big Inch pipelines were completed in 1943 and 1944.

Before the war much of the oil going from Texas oil fields to East coast refineries had

been carried by ocean tankers. German submarines, however, successfully attacked

the oil tankers, creating the need for safer supply lines. Pipelines were the obvious

answer. Pipes had been used for many years to transport oil. But sustainable pressures

were low and the oil moved slowly. In the 1930s techniques were developed to create

large diameter pipes that could transport oil under high pressure. The government

provided the funding for the pipelines through subsidiaries of the Reconstruction

Finance Corporation. Contracts for the Big Inch, the first of the lines, were awarded In

July 1942, the first pipes were laid in August, and oil was flowing by February of 1943.

       Over the years the oil pipe line industry had been faced with many legal

challenges from the government for monopoly pricing. On December 23, 1941 the

Justice Department launched a suit against a number of oil and affiliated pipe line



                                               12
companies, with a potential penalty of $1.5 billion (about $162 billion in 2015 dollars to

maintain a constant share of GDP). But this suit was quickly settled by a consent decree

that imposed few penalties because the companies argued that they couldn’t respond to

wartime demands for new construction with this penalty hanging over them. Further

investigations of the industry by the Justice Department and Interstate Commerce

Commission were postponed for the duration of the war (Dillard 1944), a good

illustration of the elimination of legal constraints on infrastructure investment produced

by the war. After the war the pipe lines were converted to natural gas and sold to private

firms.

         (3) Aluminum was needed in large amounts for aircraft, and so the United States

undertook a major expansion program. New plants were financed by the government

through the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Before the war the Aluminum

Company of America had a monopoly and had been charged with violating the antitrust

laws. After the war several West Coast plants were sold to Henry Kaiser, creating

Kaiser Aluminum and competition for the Aluminum Company. Production of aluminum

as shown in Figure 3 more than quadrupled between January of 1941 and the peak in

1943.

         One sometimes finds references in general histories of the war to the fact that

the government needed to ration steel, copper, and aluminum. The story is complex.

There was considerable concern during the early phase of the war that the armed

forces were letting too many contracts. Producers, it was feared, would be working on

too many half-finished projects and the economy as a whole might deteriorate because

too many resources were devoted to the production of munitions and not enough to the



                                                 13
production of goods for the civilian sector. A number of plans were tried to deal with this

problem. One, borrowed from World War I, was the priority system. The idea was that

each contract would be given a rating by the War Production Board – A, B, C, and so on

– and producers would be required to finish higher rated contracts first. It sounded

good, but in practice it foundered on “priorities inflation.” Major producers were given

the authority to pass on their high priorities to subcontractors and they tended to use the

highest justifiable priority. The productive system was flooded with high priorities. The

War Production Board responded by introducing higher priorities, but these new and

higher priorities soon flooded the system as well. The priorities system clearly was not

working.

       Eventually, the War Production Board settled on the “controlled materials

program” (CMP). Under this system the Board would give the agencies awarding

contracts for munitions allotments of steel, copper, and aluminum (the three “controlled

materials).” Contracts could only be awarded if there were enough of these materials

available for its completion. The CMP has been heralded as a great success. One

enthusiastic historian, of the war effort, Elliot Janeway (1951) claimed that the CMP

“flooded the fighting fronts with firepower.” His claim has been repeated often by

historians of the war effort. For one thing, the name of the plan may have appealed to

historians anxious to find successful examples of government planning. But consider

Figure 3 which plots monthly production of steel, copper, and aluminum, and shows the

dates on which the CMP was announced and the CMP became mandatory. Although

there were modest increases in steel and copper production, they were dwarfed by the

increase in aluminum production which was needed in vast amounts for aircraft. But as



                                                14
shown in Figure 3 by the time the CMP went into effect the problem created by a

shortage of aluminum had been solved. Production of airframes was soon cut because

the supply of planes coming on line was more than adequate. The limiting factor was

pilots rather than planes. And with the cut in airframe production came the cut in

aluminum production. There is also some evidence that the Army Air Force ignored the

CMP for a time even after it became mandatory – telling the War Production Board one

thing and the aircraft manufacturers something else. The end of this policy of “double

book keeping,” as it has been referred to, was more or less coincident with the peak in

aluminum production.

       (4) The most stunning example of what could be accomplished by the

government in a short period of time when financial and legal constraints were removed

was the atomic bomb. American progress toward a bomb can be dated from the

delivery to President Roosevelt in October 1939 of the famous Einstein–Szilárd letter

warning that Germany might build an atomic bomb and urging that the United States

build one. Although the general idea of how an atomic bomb would work was

understood by physicists, the methods by which one could be constructed were not.

The solution was to set several teams to work exploring alternative means of collecting

fissionable material and alternative ways of constructing a bomb from those materials.

General Leslie Groves, who had supervised construction of the Pentagon, assumed

command of the Manhattan Project in September 1942 and acquisition of land at Oak

Ridge Tennessee, one of the key sites for the production of the raw material for the

bomb began at that time. J. Robert Oppenheimer became the supervisor of the

scientific work in July 1943.



                                               15
       There were local objections to the acquisition of land at Oak Ridge and the

displacement of local residents. There was even a brief congressional investigation. But

the urgency of war meant that local resistance would not be allowed interfere. Work on

the site at Los Alamos in New Mexico, where the scientists worked and where the bomb

would be assembled, began in December 1942. Only about two and one half years

elapsed from the breaking of ground at Los Alamos and the explosion of the first bomb

in July 1945, evidence of what can be accomplished when an external threat creates a

national consensus.

       The best estimate of the cost of the Manhattan Project, at least in an accounting

sense, is about $2 billion in wartime dollars (O’Neill 1998, 60). In some ways, this

appears to be a relatively small sum, a lot of “bang for the buck” as one commentator

noted. If we inflate with the consumer price index we get a sum of about $26 billion in

today’s (2015) dollars. But this is not, to my mind, the best way of inflating the cost of

the Manhattan Project because many of the expenditures were made for highly trained

personnel, and specialized equipment and materials, whose cost has probably risen

more rapidly than the consumer price index. Inflating by GDP per capita gives a figure

of $68 billion. Or, to take a third approach, expenditures of $2 billion amounted to about

0.8 percent of GDP in 1945, or about $157 billion in 2015 dollars. 9 The same project,

however, is likely to cost still more today. A large scale project today that inflicted costs

on local interests would face much more effective legal and political resistance with

correspondingly higher costs. It was also possible in World War II to get many of

America’s leading scientists and engineers to put their academic careers on hold while


9
 The inflation factors were taken from the website www.measuringworth.com accessed November 5,
2014.

                                                   16
they worked on the Manhattan Project. Today assembling a team of similar eminence

would be far harder and far more costly, even if it was for the worthy goal of addressing

climate change. Some engineers and executives working on the project, moreover, may

have been dollar-a-year men (their salaries were paid by the corporations that

employed them in peacetime) and so the costs of their services may not be adequately

accounted in the conventional figure. All in all, the largest figure cited above, $139

billion, in other words may well be an underestimate of what it would cost today to do

something similar. Nevertheless, the history of the Manhattan Project suggests that

much can be accomplished in a short period of time, even when the technology cannot

simply be taken off the shelf, when the project is sufficiently urgent.

       These examples do not by any means exhaust the list of projects undertaken to

meet the unique demands of the war economy. Cargo ships including the famous

Liberty ships, machines for decoding the German enigma machines, a highway to

Alaska, factories for producing magnesium, and many others could be named. The

range was extraordinary.



                           4. Redistribution of the population

       Global warming is likely to produce the need for the redistribution of the

population, for example from low-lying coastal areas to safer ground, or from agricultural

regions that are no longer productive because of persistent drought to regions where

global warming has increased agricultural productivity, or at least left productivity

unchanged. The war experience suggests that given the right incentives this can be

accomplished quickly and, given the challenges, relatively smoothly. Figure 4 shows


                                                17
interstate migration of the civilian labor force between April 1, 1940 and November 1,

1943. The region that was changed the most was the Pacific Coast which gained 1.8

million people from other regions. There were, moreover, substantial population

movements among the states within these regions, and movements within states. The

city that appears to have been affected the most by the war was Los Angeles. One

estimate is that 780,000 people moved into the Los Angeles area between April 1940

and April 1944 (Verge 1994, 303).The redistribution of the labor force was

accomplished mainly through financial incentives: There were high-paying jobs to be

had in war production centers. William Bendix starred as Chester Riley, a riveter at a

California aircraft factory, on a hit radio and TV series in the 1940s. The show’s title

“The Life of Riley,” meaning an ordinary guy living the good life, became a much used

catchphrase in the 1940s.

       The federal government attempted to smooth the redistribution by creating

agencies and programs to ease the difficulties produced by mass population

movements. A perusal of a list of government wartime agencies reveals the efforts: the

Defense Housing Coordinator, the Office of Defense Health and Welfare Services, the

Office of Community War Services, and the Committee for Congested Production

Areas. Undoubtedly, programs were created in many other agencies to deal with the

problems created by mass population movements. One of the motives for price and rent

controls, for example, was to prevent profiteering aimed at workers moving into

congested production centers. The war experience suggests that financial incentives

can produce a rapid redistribution of the population, but also suggests some ways that

the government can ameliorate the problems created by mass population movements.



                                                18
Some studies of how and how well these agencies coped with population movements

are available and more would be valuable.

       The American experience with population redistribution may not be generally

relevant. Americans have been moving west since the first years of European

settlement. Many Americans probably viewed the war as a favorable occasion to make

a move that they had long contemplated; a favorable occasion in other words to act on

Horace Greeley’s famous admonition to “Go West Young Man, and Grow up with the

Country.” Some perspective on the long-run trends can be obtained from Figures 5 and

6. Figure 5 shows by census years the percentage of non-white Americans residing in

states or territories that were different from the state or territory in which they were born.

The largest increase occurred in the war decade 1940-1950. But that increase was also,

as can be seen in Figure 5, part of a longer-term trend. The exception in this Figure is

the slight decrease between 1930 and1940, reflecting the lack of incentives to move.

White migration is shown in Figure 6. Here again there is a large increase in the war

decade, but again it appears to have been part of a trend that continued into the 1960s

and 1970s.



                              5. Rationing and Price Control

       In the introduction, I used the phrase “without seriously damaging contemporary

living standards” to convey my sense of how Americans fared during the war, a formula

that I think would be shared by most historians of the war. It is deliberately vague

because the standard of living during the war is a contested issue. Some statistics if

taken at face value actually show that Americans were better off during the war than


                                                 19
they were in the relatively prosperous years that followed. But Robert Higgs (1992) is

surely right that the statistics are misleading because there were fundamental

differences between the war economy and the peacetime economies that followed.

Production of many consumer durables, for example, was cut off during the war. Prices

of products that were available, moreover, are hard to measure because of quality

deterioration, black markets, and so on. One example that illustrates these difficulties is

a problem that was perhaps the major problem facing price controllers during the war,

but one which is hardly remembered today: forced uptrading. Manufacturers faced with

booming demand and price controls would discontinue production of low-quality-low-

priced lines because these were typically the low-profit-margin items produced in bulk.

But discontinuing these lines were a burden on low-income consumers who were forced

to “trade up” to higher priced lines. The people compiling the price indexes were aware

of this problem, but it was not easy to deal with. There have been many attempts to

correct the standard price indexes for these problems. The best known is Friedman and

Schwartz (1982, 107). Others include (Barro 1978, 502, Rockoff 1978, and Mills and

Rockoff 1987). The number of attempts and the range of estimates obtained suggest

the difficulty of the problem.

       On the other side of the ledger, there were jobs to be had, something that had

not been true for a decade. But they were often dangerous jobs, and getting them often

meant moving to a congested war production zone with primitive services. New

consumer durables were not available, but one could save and plan on buying those

goods after the war. The expectation that prices would fall after the war, as the




                                                20
economy fell back into depression, may have made wartime savings seem more

valuable at the time than they turned out to be.

       But the basics were there. American civilians were well fed during World War II.

Consumption of sugar and coffee were reduced somewhat below prewar levels

because ocean transport had to be diverted to the war effort. Civilian consumption of

meat, on the other hand, which did not require ocean transport, was higher during the

war than it had been before (Rockoff 1984, 130). The main reason for rationing food

was that demand (pushed up by stimulative monetary and fiscal policies) substantially

exceeded supply at the prices set by the Office of Price Administration. Price control, it

was felt, was necessary to prevent a dangerous “wage-price spiral.”

       One can think of the wartime equilibrium as a bargain agreed to by three parties:

labor, management, and government. The unions – then an important factor in labor

markets – agreed to a “no strike” pledge that became the de facto basis for the

establishment of the War Labor Board. Employers agreed to “no lockout” pledge. And

the government agreed to enforce the bargain by fixing prices and wages. Fixing prices

without formal ration coupons would have produced forms of non-price rationing that

would have been inherently unfair. Queuing would have been common, and then

available supplies would have gone to the person who was lucky enough to be in the

right line at the right time. Price controls without formal rationing, moreover, would have

made it easy to divert supplies to the black market. Rationing increased the fairness of

the distribution system, and diminished the incentive of people to violate price controls.

Everyone would get something. Even so, some pressure to evade the system would

remain. Some consumers would get ration tickets for smaller amounts than they wanted



                                                21
to buy at the Office of Price Administration price and some consumers would get more.

One suggestion frequently made by economists is that the authorities permit the

organization of a gray market in which consumers could sell excess ration tickets. This

makes a lot of sense, but was not tried, as far as I am aware in World War II. Perhaps it

was felt that allowing the sale of excess ration tickets would undermine the moral of the

story behind rationing: sacrifices must be endured for the good of the country.

       Although price control and rationing was fairly successful during the period of

national unity produced by the war, problems began to develop as the war progressed

that might be expected to be pervasive in a system that was in place for a long time,

especially in a fluid democracy such as the United States. One was evasion through

quality deterioration and black markets. Some examples of quality deterioration were

straightforward: the candy bar shrank and the recipe was altered to use less desirable

ingredients. Landlords deferred maintenance on rent controlled properties. A subtler

form of evasion was known as “forced uptrading.” Manufacturers of products as different

as clothing and steel discontinued low-priced, low-quality, low-profit-margin lines.

Purchasers were then forced to “trade-up” to high-price-high-profit margin lines.

Manufacturers could claim that they were selling these high priced lines at the official

price, but now they could sell far more of these high priced items. Low income families,

however, complained that they were “forced up” to lines of merchandise that they did

not want to buy and did not have to buy before the war. The Office of Price

Administration found dealing with this clever evasion a major headache.

       Open black markets were less common, but still a problem. Some supplies of

meat, for example, moved in clandestine channels from producers through black market



                                                22
slaughter houses to wholesalers and restaurants where it was sold at prices far above

the official prices set by the Office of Price Administration. Black market meat was also

sold in meat easies (after the speak easies of prohibition) where one could buy meat

without a ration ticket. The black market in meat deepened as the war progressed and

undermined support for controls.



                                   6. Financing the War

      The rapid transformation of the American economy was made possible by

money, lots of it. Elsewhere I have referred to the wartime economy as the “gold rush of

1942” (Rockoff 2012, 191-93). In 1849 Americans discovered gold in the rivers of

California and the rush was on. People quit their jobs in the East and raced to California

to pan for gold. The key to the gold rush was the commitment of the federal government

to mint gold coins containing a fixed amount of gold out of any amount of gold offered,

more exactly to buy any amount of gold offered and to pay $1.00 for every 25.8 grains

of pure gold. Something similar was true in 1942; the federal government was willing to

pay high prices for bullets, planes, tanks, and factories to produce synthetic rubber and

aluminum. Again the rush was on. Indeed, in some respects the deal offered munition

producers in World War II was better than the deal offered the gold miners. The gold

miners might rack up costs that exceeded the value of the gold they produced, and end

up losing money. But in World War II, munition producers were offered cost-plus

contracts. Higgs (1993) describes the switch to cost-plus contracts, and the long-run

consequences for military procurement. This is not an interpretation invented many




                                               23
years after the war. During the war many observers recognized what was happening

and referred to it as a “second gold rush.”

       Figure 7 shows an index of real after tax nonfinancial corporate profits. 1929 was

a very good year for corporate profits. But that level was equaled in 1940 and exceeded

in every following year through 1944. The high level of corporate profits during the war

shouldn’t be taken to mean, however, that there were no restraints on profits. Federal

agencies, as shown by Wilson (2016, chapter 4), made valiant efforts to prevent or claw

back excessive profits, and there was an effective excess profits tax. To some extent

corporations may have welcomed these efforts from patriotic motives and to forestall

charges of profiteering. Still, these were very good years. There was essentially no risk

in taking federal contracts because they were cost-plus. Much of the long-term capital

was financed and owned by government, but operated by private firms. Government

ownership spared the operators the risk of investing in long-term capital that might

prove uneconomical to run after the war, while giving them the inside track if these

plants were returned to private ownership, say through an auction, after the war.

       It might have been different. Progressives, including many prominent New

Dealers, believed that the way to maximize production and minimize the damage to

civilian living standards was through detailed planning by federal agencies. Indeed,

many such agencies were created: the National War Labor Board, the Office of Price

Administration, the Defense Plant Corporation, the War Production Board, the War

Shipping Administration, the Petroleum Administrator for War, the War Food

Administration, the Committee for Congested Production Areas, and so on. But while

these agencies and their activities – such as the controlled materials plan discussed



                                               24
above -- may have helped smooth the rough edges of the mobilization most of them

launched their programs too late to affect the basic outline of activity that had been laid

down during the gold rush.

       The Progressive idea that received the most attention early on was the “Reuther

Plan,” put forward by Walter Reuther, a rising star in the United Auto Workers Union, in

late 1940. Reuther’s plan would have had the entire auto industry convert to the

production of military aircraft. The auto companies would pool their efforts: one would

produce engines, another would make other parts, and a third would assemble the

planes. The military would have the lead in deciding who produced what, but industrial

councils that included workers would play a prominent role in organizing production. If

adopted it would have been a long step toward socialism and might have had, certainly

its proponents hoped it would be, a step that would leave its mark on the postwar

economy. But the Reuther plan was proposed before Pearl Harbor. It was discussed for

a time, but nothing on this scale could be done until Pearl Harbor, and after Pearl

Harbor it was largely forgotten (Brinkley 1995, 205-9).

       There are always entrepreneurs willing to produce and sell to a rich customer.

But the skills needed to excel in winning government contracts were not identical with

the skills needed to win contracts from private firms. In World War II the entrepreneur

who excelled above all others in winning the races for government contracts was the

legendary Henry Kaiser who built ships, and factories to supply steel, magnesium, and

aluminum for the war effort. Kaiser had forged strong ties with the Roosevelt

administration before the war, but the war provided the range of challenges, and the

funds, to turn him into a household name (Adams 1997).



                                                25
      To an unprecedented degree the war was financed by raising taxes. Higher

personal income taxes, higher corporate taxes, and an excess profits tax financed

almost fifty percent of the war expenditures. But the government also relied heavily on

borrowing. To some extent financing the war by issuing debt made economic sense.

After all, this was rightly regarded as a temporary emergency. Debt could be repaid

after the war was over. In the modern parlance taxes could be smoothed over time

through wartime borrowing rather than being allowed to spike during the war as would

have happened if they had been raised to the extent necessary to finance all of the war.

This logic, however, does not work so well when it comes to meeting scarcities arising

from environmental damage because this sort of damage is likely to be of long duration

or permanent. I also believe that the reliance on borrowing was motivated in part by a

desire to hide the cost of the war and to minimize inevitable unpopularity of a

government that imposed higher taxes. There were also concerns by conservatives in

Congress that extremely high tax rates – some administration proposals of this sort

were rebuffed – might persist after the war.

      The contrast with depression era finances was stark. Criticism of the Roosevelt

administration’s deficit spending during the 1930s was intense and persistent.

Roosevelt believed that a deficit might be necessary in an emergency, but that deficits

should be kept as small as possible, and that every effort should be made to return to a

balanced budget as quickly as possible, a belief on which he acted on several

occasions by cutting spending or raising taxes. Once the war began, concern about the

deficit evaporated, and the United States ran deficits that would have been

inconceivable a few years earlier. This is shown in Table 1. In 1939 a highly



                                               26
controversial deficit was 2.8 percent of GDP; by 1949 the deficit was 22.5 percent of

GDP. The change in federal and state and local spending is shown in Figure 8. It shows

clearly that although New Deal spending seemed revolutionary to contemporaries, it

was dwarfed by spending during World War II.

      Keynes recognized that war was the one occasion on which American politics

would allow “Keynesian policies” of deficit finance to be used. This was the point that he

made in his famous “open letter” to Roosevelt in 1933. There Keynes pointed to the

prosperity produced by deficit spending in World War I and urged Roosevelt to adopt

the same policy to meet the Great Depression. Another indication of the recognition that

the war fundamentally altered the public’s attitude toward the role of government in the

economy can be found in Simon Kuznets work on the measurement of national product.

Kuznets (1945, 3-31), America’s pioneer estimator of GDP, wrestled with the how to

measure national product in wartime. He concluded that while peacetime GDP

estimates should be based on the assumption that there was one final purpose for

economic activity, satisfying the demands of the public, estimates of GDP in a major

war had to be based on two final purposes, satisfying the demands of the public and

producing war goods.

      Although considerable reliance was placed on taxation and borrowing during the

war, the government also turned to the printing press. The reason seemed to be a fear

of high interest rates on government debt. High rates would have increased the long-run

costs of government debt, would have been seen as a sign that the U.S. economy was

weakening under the strains of war, and would have imposed costs on civilian

borrowers as high rates spread through financial markets. Federal Reserve purchases



                                               27
of federal debt (today we call it quantitative easing and think of it as something new)

directly added to bank reserves. Increased expansion of lending by the banks then

produced further purchases of government debt by banks and their customers. The net

result was that nominal rates were held down during the war, the stock of money rose

rapidly, and the price level rose, more than doubling. The use of borrowing and

especially money creation tended to hide the full cost of the war from the average

American. Inflation would be blamed on war profiteers rather than on the government’s

financial policies.



                        7. The Rejection of Wartime Socialism

       Progressives might well have hoped that the success of the mobilization would

produce a consensus that big government, in the sense of government ownership of the

means of production and detailed planning of prices and production, “worked.” The

rhetorical question, in other words, was “if socialism works in war, why not in peace?”

True, I have argued above that the success of the mobilization owed more to the “gold

rush” produced by a flood of no-risk-high-profit contracts than it did to central planning.

But Progressives might well have hoped that, whatever might be argued against it, the

public would see the war as proof of the enormous capacity of the state to do good

things, and would support increased regulation of private enterprise and increased

public ownership of the means of production after the war.

       The reality, however, proved very different. Republicans recovered the House in

1946. Truman defeated Dewey in 1948, but was defeated by Eisenhower in 1952. In

general the 1950s are remembered for their conservatism, not for progressive policies


                                                28
rooted in a continuation of wartime socialism. Several interrelated factors can be

suggested to explain the failure of the wartime socialism to make the case for

peacetime socialism. Together, these factors also suggest some reasons why the

wartime model may have limited contemporary applicability.

      (1) The undoing of the Progressive interpretation of the war experience, in the

sense of successful detailed control of the economy by the federal government, began

well before the war. As Alan Brinkley demonstrates in The End of Reform (1995) the

public began to lose confidence in New Deal Progressivism, in this sense, during the

1930s. The National Industrial Recovery Act had won few friends for detailed planning.

The recession of 1937-1938, moreover, undermined claims that the New Deal was on

the right track economically, and the court packing episode undermined the claim that

the New Deal was on the side of democracy.

      (2) The main problem for the wartime model, however, was the unraveling of

wartime controls that occurred after the war ended. The transition to the peacetime

economy went badly. One of the main problems was a wave of strikes that hit the

economy after VJ day, including strikes by autoworkers, steel workers, miners, railroad

workers, petroleum industry workers, and even Hollywood actors.

      Labor unions had made a no-strike pledge (matched by a no-lockout pledge by

employers) that was the de facto basis for the War Labor Board. There were, to be sure,

many so-called wildcat strikes during the war, many of which prompted seizures of firms

by the government; and John L. Lewis’s mine workers were particularly defiant. But on

the whole unions kept to their pledge. But that pledge was understood to mean for the

duration of the war (Dunlop 1947). Once the war was over, the no-strike pledge could



                                               29
no longer be counted on to deter strikes. Wage controls, the unions argued, had been

strictly enforced, while producers found numerous ways around price controls. Above

we mentioned forced uptrading, the elimination of lower-priced lines of merchandise.

This form of evasion was particularly irksome to the labor unions, because it was their

members who bought the lower priced lines. The effect of forced uptrading wasn’t

counted properly, they argued, in the price indexes that were then used to determine

allowable wage increases. Workers, in short, felt entitled to wage increases to make up

for these losses, and to gain a fair share of the income being earned by corporations.

       Strikes created painful dilemmas for the agencies regulating prices and wages.

By granting price and wage increases in an industry experiencing a strike, the

government could help end a strike and restore production. The agencies, moreover,

were under great pressure to do just that. The public was anxious to see strikes end

and goods, especially consumer durables that the public had been denied during the

war, made available again. But by making exceptions to its general rule of no increases

in prices and no substantial increases in wages the government undermined the entire

structure of controls and the premise of equality of sacrifice on which it rested. Although

many people inside and outside the government hoped that controls could be

continued, controls quickly disintegrated and were abandoned.

       Labor unions were less important in agriculture, but decontrol of food prices and

the end of food rationing also ended on a sour note. Ranchers could see that price

controls were on the way out, so they had an incentive to keep their animals off the

market until the price of meat was decontrolled. The result was meat shortages that




                                                30
angered the public. Proposals to nationalize the nation’s ranches, although not without

support, clearly went a step too far (Rockoff 1984, 99, 106-07).

       (3) Wartime prosperity strengthened the Keynesian argument that the problem of

the depression had been “merely” a problem of aggregate demand. This meant --

particularly as formulated by Keynes’s American followers such as Alvin Hansen, Abba

Lerner, and Paul Samuelson -- that the main thing was to maintain full employment

through fiscal policy. Keynes had argued in the General Theory that once the problem

of aggregate demand had been solved through fiscal policy, the allocation of resources

among alternative activities could safely be left to the market. In the General Theory

Keynes (1936, 312) put it this way.

       “…, I see no reason to suppose that the existing system seriously misemploys
       the factors of production which are in use. There are, of course, errors of
       foresight; but these would not be avoided by centralising decisions. When
       9,000,000 men are employed out of 10,000,000 willing and able to work, there is
       no evidence that the labour of these 9,000,000 men is misdirected. The
       complaint against the present system is not that these 9,000,000 men ought to
       be employed on different tasks, but that tasks should be available for the
       remaining 1,000,000 men. It is in determining the volume, not the direction, of
       actual employment that the existing system has broken down.”

Keynes’s view was rapidly adopted by an overwhelming majority of American

economists, and was, for the most part, the lesson that the public at large drew from the

war; Detailed planning by government agencies was not needed to counter slowdowns

in private spending; increased government spending or tax cuts were. 10




10
   I have used the gold rush analogy to explain the mobilization rather than referring to Keynesian
economics, because the gold rush is a more specific analogy that connects with a good deal of what was
happening. But a gold rush can be viewed as one way of implementing a Keynesian stimulus. Indeed,
since a good bit of spending was financed by money creation, the gold rush could also be viewed as a
way of implementing a monetary expansion.


                                                      31
       This view was shared even by John Kenneth Galbraith, deputy head of the Office

of Price Administration during part of the war, who became the leading economist

advocating Progressive policies after the war. In A Theory of Price Control (1952)

Galbraith argued that if restrictive monetary and fiscal policies had been imposed after

the war they would have permitted the gradual release of controls without inflation.

Galbraith (1952, 57) added that there was little likelihood of controls becoming

permanent, or at least that permanent controls did not “commend themselves to anyone

who ever undertook to administer them.”

       (4) American manufactures used radio and the print media to push for a free

market economy. Progressives may have wanted these companies to point out the

crucial role played by government finance and direction in wartime production

achievements, but, of course, that is not the story to be found in newspapers,

magazines, or on the radio (Fones-Wolf1999, Griffith 1983, Wilson 2016 chapter 3). In

an advertisement in the Washington Post in April 1945 General Motors touted its

production achievements in 1944 – “total deliveries amounted to $4,300,000,000 …

90.2% were war products … -- and declared that “Victory is Our Business.” In an

advertisement in May 1945 General Motors looked forward to the postwar era. The

advertisement declared that “what is good for our country and our countrymen is good

for General Motors.” 11 And it laid out certain “articles of faith” that should guide

Americans after Japan was defeated, a list that included, not surprisingly, “Faith in the

rightness and benefits of individual freedom and individual enterprise.” Regulation of



11
  In 1953 Charles Wilson of General Motors said something similar during hearings on his nomination for
Secretary of Defense, but his remarks were long remembered as starting with “what is good for General
Motors …” proof of corporate arrogance.

                                                      32
business by government was not included (Washington Post, April 28, 1945, p. 9; May

13, 1945, p. M5).

       (5) Finally, part of the story is what historians Arthur Schlesinger Sr. and Jr.

(1999) identified as the recurring cycle in American life that alternated between “public

purpose” and “private interest.” Americans are willing to sacrifice themselves, according

to the Schlesingers, for the common good – but only for a while. After they have

followed leaders who call for personal sacrifice for the public good there comes a time

when they grow tired of sacrifice and want to pursue their own interests: Liberalism

gives way to conservatism. Wars, inevitably, bring a call for sacrifices for the greater

good. We can, on this argument, expect wars to be followed by conservative eras of

private interest. The era of the Civil War and Reconstruction came to an end and was

followed by a conservative period in American politics, sometimes referred to as the

Gilded Age. The Progressive era included World War I and was followed by a

conservative turn in national politics, remembered for President Harding’s “what we

need now is normalcy, not nostrums.” It is no surprise then, indeed it could have been

predicted, that the same phenomenon would follow World War II.

       The lesson that many Americans took from the depression, war, and postwar

periods taken together was that the success of government planning in wartime was sui

generis. It depended on a willingness to cooperate that was possible only with the

patriotism generated by a major war. Perhaps people recognized the simple

psychological fact, or better assumed fact, that people are endowed with a willingness

to sacrifice, even to the point of giving their lives, for the common good when the enemy




                                                33
is a human enemy who is attacking one's territory. It is not at all clear that the same

willingness to sacrifice can be invoked to fight an enemy that can't be personified.



       8. What does the war teach us about coping with scarcity?
       The American mobilization in World War II provides some reasons for optimism

about the ability of the United States to cope with the challenges posed by climate

change and other environmental challenges, but equally reasons for pessimism. The

optimistic part of the story is that the economy was drastically reorganized in a short

period of time. Production of consumer durables was curtailed and production of

munitions was ramped up. Civilian construction was curtailed and large-scale

infrastructure projects such as the construction of a synthetic rubber industry, the Big

Inch and Little Big Inch pipelines, and the Manhattan project were completed. Large

numbers of workers moved to war production centers. All of this was accomplished

without seriously damaging contemporary living standards although coping with life

during the war was not always easy.

       The basic method behind this transformation was “gold rush economics.” The

federal government was willing to pay high prices for bullets, planes, aircraft carriers,

synthetic rubber plants, and so on, and so people stopped what they were doing and

rushed to produce them. Just as people rushed to California in 1849 because the U.S.

mint was paying a high price for the gold found in California’s rivers, people rushed to

California in 1942 because the US. Army was paying a high price for the war planes

made in California’s aircraft factories. Another important factor was the short-circuiting

of the power of special interests to block projects that were considered to be in the


                                                34
national interest. The mobilization suggests, therefore, that large scale projects

involving the building of alternative energy sources or moving populations from low lying

coastal areas could also be accomplished rapidly once sufficient financial incentives

were provided and probably could be accomplished without seriously endangering

current living standards.

       The pessimistic part of the story, however, is that the rapid transformation of the

economy depended on an overwhelming national consensus that the United States

faced an immediate and existential threat. Concerns about excessive government

spending that had been a political staple during the 1930s disappeared after Pearl

Harbor. There were now, as Simon Kuznets argued, two end purposes to economic

activity. In the United States only major wars have generated the political consensus

needed for federal spending on the scale undertaken in World War II. And even during

the war, fear of adverse political reactions to high taxes led to heavy reliance on

borrowing. And the fear that high interest rates would generate adverse political

reactions in part accounts for the Federal Reserve’s decision to adopt a rigid bond-

support program that produced a substantial increase in the stock of money.

       The war was won in four years. Price control, and to a lesser extent rationing,

enjoyed considerable public support during that period, but were wasting assets. Once

the war was won, and patriotic appeals to cooperate lost their force, severe cracks

appeared in the system of government controls. The wave of strikes after VJ day was

particularly disruptive because they pitted workers and employers together against the

government’s wage and price controllers. Price controls and rationing, while they might

be pressed into service during an environmental emergency, do not appear to be



                                                35
appropriate for dealing with the problem of scarcities produced by global warming and

environmental contamination over the long term.

      The United States, it should be remembered, was an unusual case. It was rich:

Middle class Americans could still live comfortably even with consumer durables

temporarily unavailable, many other commodities subject to rationing, and various

services impaired or unavailable because of the transfer of workers to industrial

production and the military. The United States had, moreover, an unusually flexible

economy. The auto industry, for example, was in the habit of tearing out old production

lines and replacing them with new ones to produce new models. American chemical

companies were in the habit of building new plants in locations far removed from their

home offices. And Interregional labor mobility, in particular moving west, was a long-

running tradition. The ability of the United States to make rapid adjustments in World

War II, although a hopeful sign for rich industrial economies may have less to say about

the adjustment process in poorer, less flexible economies.

      Hopefully, environmental problems will not reach tipping points that require a

massive reorganization of the economy in a short-period of time, but rather can be

solved with less disruptive measures taken over a long period of time. Nevertheless, the

experience of World War II can suggest some of the possibilities and difficulties to be

encountered along the way.




                                               36
                                     References

Adams, Stephen B. 1997. Mr. Kaiser Goes to Washington: The Rise of a Government
  Entrepreneur. University of North Carolina Press.

Anderson, Kevin, and Alice Bows. 2011. Beyond 'dangerous' climate change: Emission
  scenarios for a new world. Philosophical Transactions: Mathematical, Physical and
  Engineering Sciences 369 (1934, Four degrees and beyond: the potential for a
  global temperature increase of four degrees and its implications) (13 January): 20-
  44.

Barro, Robert J. 1978. "Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in the United
   States," Journal of Political Economy. 86 (Aug.): 549-80.

Bisio, Attilio and Vernon D. Herbert. 1985. Synthetic Rubber: A Project That Had to
    Succeed. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press

Brinkley, Alan. 1995. The End of Reform: New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War
   New York, Alfred A. Knopf.

Carter, Susan B., Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead,
  Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright. 2006. Historical statistics of the United States:
  earliest times to the present. Millennial Edition. New York: Cambridge University
  Press.

Dewhurst, James Frederic, and Twentieth Century Fund. 1947. America's needs and
  resources, a twentieth century fund survey which includes estimates for 1950 and
  1960. New York: The Twentieth Century Fund.

Dillard, Dudley. 1944. "Big Inch Pipe Lines and the Monopoly Competition in the
    Petroleum Industry." The Journal of Land & Public Utility Economics 20, no. 2: 109-
    22.

Dunlop, John T. 1947. "A Review of Wage-Price Policy." The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 29, no. 3: 154-60.

Field, Alexander J. 2008. “The Impact of the Second World War on US Productivity
   Growth”. The Economic History Review 61 (3). [Economic History Society, Wiley]:
   672–94.

Fones-Wolf, Elizabeth. "Creating a Favorable Business Climate: Corporations and
  Radio Broadcasting, 1934 to 1954." The Business History Review 73.2 (1999): 221-
  55.

                                              37
Friedman, Milton, and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. 1982. Monetary Trends in the United
    States and the United Kingdom. University of Chicago Press.

Galbraith, John Kenneth.1952. A Theory of Price Control. Cambridge: Harvard
   University Press.

Gordon, Robert J. 1969. “$45 Billion of U.S. Private Investment Has Been Mislaid”. The
  American Economic Review 59 (3). American Economic Association: 221–38.

Griffith, Robert. "The Selling of America: The Advertising Council and American Politics,
   1942-1960." The Business History Review 57.3 (1983): 388-412.

Heal, Geoffrey. 2016. What would it take to Reduce US Greenhouse Gas Emissions
  80% by 2050?” NBER Working Paper No. 22525, August.

Higgs, Robert. 1992. “Wartime Prosperity? A Reassessment of the U.S. Economy in the
   1940s”. The Journal of Economic History 52 (1). Cambridge University Press: 41–60.

_____. 1993. “Private Profit, Public Risk: Institutional Antecedents of the Modern
   Military Procurement System in the Rearmament Program of 1940-1941.” In The
   sinews of war: Essays on the economic history of World War II, eds. Geofrey Mills
   and Hugh Rockoff, pp. 166-98

Howard, Frank A. 1947. Buna Rubber: The Birth of an Industry. New York: D. Van
  Nostrand.

Hyde, Charles. K. 2013. Arsenal of Democracy: The American Automobile Industry in
  World War II. Detroit: Wayne State University Press.

Janeway, Elliot. 1951. The Struggle for Survival: A Chronicle of Economic Mobilization
   in World War II. New Haven, Yale University Press.

Klein, Maury. 2013. A Call to Arms: Mobilizing America For World War II. New York:
   Bloomsbury Press.

Koistinen, Paul A.C. 2004. Arsenal of World War II: The Political Economy of American
   Warfare, 1940-1945. University of Kansas Press.

Kuznets, Simon. 1945. National Product in Wartime. New York: National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Leuchtenberg, William E. “The New Deal and the Analogue of War.” In Change and
   Continuity in Twentieth-Century America, ed. John Braeman, Robert H. Bremner,
   and Everett Walters. New York, Harper & Row, 1966, 81-143.




                                              38
McKibben, Bill. “We Need to Literally Declare War on Climate Change: We’re under
  attack from climate change – and our only hope is to mobilize like we did in WWII.”
  New Republic, August 15, 2016.

Mills, Geofrey, and Hugh Rockoff. 1987. "Compliance with Price Controls in the United
    States and the United Kingdom During World War II." The Journal of Economic
    History, 47 (March): 197-213.

Nelson, Donald M. 1946. Arsenal of Democracy: The Story of American War
   Production. Harcourt Brace.

O’Neil, Kevin. 1998. “Building the Bomb.” In Atomic Audit: The Costs and
   Consequences of US Nuclear Weapons, ed. Stephen I. Schwartz, 33-104.
   Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Rockoff, Hugh. 2012. America’s Economic Way of War: War and the U.S. Economy
  from the Spanish-American War to the Persian Gulf War. Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.

__________. 2007. “Keep on Scrapping: The Salvage Drives of World War II.” NBER
   Working Paper No. 13418. Available at www.nber.org.

__________. 1984. Drastic Measures: A History of Wage and Price Controls in the
   United States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

__________..1978. "Indirect Price Increases and Real Wages during World War II.”
     Explorations in Economic History, (October): 407-20.

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. 1999. The Cycles of American History. Boston: Mariner
  Books.

Verge, Arthur C. 1994. “The Impact of the Second World War on Los Angeles”. Pacific
   Historical Review 63 (3). University of California Press: 289–314.

Vernon, J. R. 1994. “World War II Fiscal Policies and the End of the Great Depression”.
      The Journal of Economic History 54 (4). Cambridge University Press: 850–68.

Wilson, Mark R. Destructive Creation: American Business and the Winning of World
      War II. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016.




                                              39
Year         Unemployment       Federal        Nominal        Federal        Federal
             (percent of the    Emergency      GDP            budget         budget
             labor force)       Workers        (billions of   deficit        deficit
                                (Percent of    dollars)       (billions of   (percent of
                                the Civilian                  dollars)       GDP)
                                Labor
                                Force)
1929                2.9             0.0             103.7          0.7            0.7

1933               20.9             4.3              56.4          -2.6          -4.6

1939               11.3             5.9              92.0          -3.9          -4.2

1940                9.5             5.1             101.3         -2.9           -2.9

1941                6.0             4.0             126.7         -4.9           -3.9

1942                3.1             1.6             161.8         -20.5         -12.7

1943                1.8             0.2             198.4         -54.6         -27.5

1944                1.2             0.0             219.7         -47.6         -21.6

1945                1.9             0.0             223.0         -47.6         -21.3

1946                4.0             0.0             244.4         -15.9          -7.2



Table 1. Unemployment and related variables in the Great Depression and
World War II.

Source: Carter, et al (2006, series Ba470, Ba475, Ba477, Ca10, Ea586,
Ea681).




                                               40
Figure 1. Total Hours Worked per Week, 1940-1946.

Note: Total hours worked per week is measured in millions of hours on the left axis.

Sources: Dewhurst (1947, 690-92, column 14).




                                              41
 1,200



 1,000



  800



  600



  400



  200



    0
             1941           1942             1943               1944   1945

                                Natural   Reclaim   Synthetic




Figure 2. U.S. Consumption of Rubber by Type, 1000s of Long Tons, 1941-1945

Source: Rockoff (2007, Table 3, 53),




                                               42
Figure 3. Production of controlled materials, monthly January 1941 to November 1945,
Production in January 1941 set to 100.

Sources: Steel, NBER Historical Data Series m01135b, Copper, NBER series
m01247b, both available at http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/. Aluminum:
United States Department of the Interior Bureau of Mines, Mineral Industry Surveys,
Primary Aluminum, January 1947.




                                             43
Figure 4.

Interregional Migration of the Civilian Population in the United States, April 1940-
November 1943.

Note. New England: Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island.
Middle Atlantic: New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania. East North Central: Ohio, Indian,
Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin. West North Central: Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, North
Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas. South Atlantic: Delaware, Maryland, Dist. of
Columbia, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida. East South
Central: Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi. West South Central: Arkansas,
Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas. Mountain: Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, New
Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Nevada. Pacific: Washington, Oregon, California.


Source: Dewhurst (1947, 44 - 45).




                                                44
Figure 5. Percentage of Nonwhite Americans residing in a state different from the state
in which they were born, by census year, 1900 – 1990.

Source: Carter et al (2006, Table Ac13-32).




                                              45
Figure 6. Percentage of White Americans residing in a state different from the state in
which they were born, by census year, 1900 – 1990.

Source: Carter et al (2006, Table Ac13-32).




                                               46
.




Figure 7. Real After Tax Profits of Nonfinancial Corporations, 1929 (=100) – 1949.

Source: US. Bureau of Economic Analysis, Nonfinancial corporate business: Profits
after tax (without IVA and CCAdj) [A466RC1A027NBEA], retrieved from FRED, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August 18, 2016. GDP deflator retrieved from
Measuringworth.com, August 18, 2016.


.




                                              47
       .




Figure 8. Federal and state and local spending in the Great Depression and
World War II.

Source: Carter et. al. (2006, Table Ea10-23).

.




                                                48
