NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MISREPORTING TRADE:
TARIFF EVASION, CORRUPTION, AND AUDITING STANDARDS
Derek Kellenberg
Arik Levinson
Working Paper 22593
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22593

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

The authors are grateful to Jordan Marcusse for research assistance, and to the National Science
Foundation (grant #1156170). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Derek Kellenberg and Arik Levinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Misreporting Trade: Tariff Evasion, Corruption, and Auditing Standards
Derek Kellenberg and Arik Levinson
NBER Working Paper No. 22593
September 2016
JEL No. F14
ABSTRACT
In official international trade statistics, annual commerce between every pair of countries is
reported twice: once by the importing country and once by the exporter. These double reports
provide an opportunity for audit. In principle, the two reported trade values should differ
systematically only by transport costs, because the values reported by importers include freight
and insurance. But in practice, after controlling for distance and other standard trade costs, the
remaining gaps between importer- and exporter-reported trade vary systematically with GDP,
tariffs and taxes, auditing standards, corruption, and trade agreements, suggesting that firms
intentionally misreport trade data. These misreports have implications for trade agreements and
domestic fiscal policy, and for empirical assessments of the efficacy of those policies.

Derek Kellenberg
Economics Department
University of Montana
32 Campus Dr. #5472
Missoula, MT 59812-5472
derek.kellenberg@mso.umt.edu
Arik Levinson
Department of Economics ICC 571
Georgetown University
3700 O St., NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
aml6@georgetown.edu

Misreporting Trade: Tariff Evasion, Corruption, and Auditing Standards

I. Introduction
News stories about misreported trade periodically surface in the business press. In 2012
Chinese customs officials detained 50 people for underreporting seafood imports and evading
$11.6 million in tariffs. 1 In 2014 Mexican authorities disrupted a tariff evasion ring that involved
22 customs officers and 197 companies around the world and had cost Mexico $37 million in
unpaid tariffs. 2 And later that same year, Pakistani investigators caught customs officials plotting
with an importer to underreport the value of 110 containers of textiles. 3 Common themes in these
stories include tariff and tax evasion, corruption, regulatory enforcement, and firms and
organizations spanning countries at different levels of economic development. In this paper we
show that this type of trade misreporting is widespread and varies systematically with country
characteristics such as economic development, taxes and tariffs, corruption, and participation in
regional trade agreements (RTAs).
The importance of tariff evasion has not gone unnoticed by economists. Fisman and Wei
(2004) examined the effect of tariff rates on reported trade between China and Hong Kong.
Subsequent papers have applied their approach to other groups of countries: exports from
Germany to 10 transition economies, imports to India, direct exports from China to the United
States, trade between the United States and Canada, imports to Kenya, Mauritius, and Nigeria,
and most recently, Tanzanian imports from three developing country trading partners. 4 And
although global assessments are scarce, one recent study estimated that in 2012, more than $729
billion flowed out of developing countries as the result of trade misinvoicing and tariff evasion
(Kar and Spanjers 2014).
Such reports mostly confirm the Fisman and Wei result that higher tariff rates lead to
more tariff evasion for the samples of countries studied. Like Fisman and Wei, they all identify
evasion by comparing reported product-level tariffs with product-level trade data reported by
exporters and importers between select pairs of countries. As a result, even though the combined
1

www.seafoodsource.com/news/supply-trade/19001-chinese-authorities-arrest-50-for-tariff-evasion.
latino.foxnews.com/latino/news/2014/10/23/mexico-dismantles-textile-industry-tariff-evasion-ring.
3
tribune.com.pk/story/801951/tariff-evasion-customs-seize-dry-port-records-to-probe-rs170-million-scam.
4
See Javorcik and Narciso (2008), Mishra et al. (2008), Ferrantino et al. (2012), Stoyanov (2012), Bouët and Roy
(2012), and Epaphra (2015).
2

1

body of evidence suggests that higher tariffs lead to more misreporting, the results are not
generalizable beyond the specific sets of countries examined. We don’t really know the extent to
which trade misreporting occurs across a broader set of countries or goods, whether it has been
increasing over time, or whether it is more prevalent among rich or poor countries.
More importantly, the focus on tariff evasion disregards other country characteristics that
may reward or penalize firms for misreporting trade. Many of these, like income taxes,
corruption, accounting standards, and capital controls, do not vary across industries within a
country but do vary across countries and over time. So their effects on misreported trade cannot
be identified using isolated pairs of countries. A large panel of trade data and country
characteristics, like the one we have assembled for this project, is necessary to identify the
effects of these country characteristics on misreported trade.
We begin by describing a model in which firms choose how much to misreport their
imports or exports. Those misreports are functions of country characteristics like tariffs,
corruption, taxes, and the strength of auditing and accounting standards. We then use that model,
along with a simple accounting identity, to estimate the effects of those country characteristics
on the gap between total reported exports and imports among pairs of countries, using data on
annual trade among 126 countries from 2002 to 2012.
Our approach using aggregate trade, as opposed to the industry-by-industry measures
used by Fisman and Wei (2004) and others, does come with a trade-off. The aggregate approach
cannot identify trade misreporting that results from misclassifying products, say from high-tariff
to low-tariff categories, because those misreports are netted out in the aggregate. 5 What we
observe is pure misreporting: cases where firms have reported to trade authorities a value
different from the true value transacted. In this sense, our analysis should be viewed as a
conservative estimate of overall trade misreporting.
In return, however, our aggregated approach has several advantages. First, by examining
aggregate trade among many countries, we are able to estimate the effects of policy-relevant

5

For example, suppose metal chairs are being traded but wooden chairs have a lower tariff rate. An exporter may
correctly report $100,000 in metal chairs to the exporting country while the importer reports $100,000 in wooden
chairs to the importing country to evade the higher tariff. This would be an example of tariff evasion through
misclassification. But in aggregate, the misreported value would be zero. Both countries have reported $100,000 in
chairs. If instead the importer reported $50,000 worth of chairs (metal or wooden), then the aggregate misreported
trade gap would be $50,000.

2

country characteristics other than tariffs. These include auditing and accounting standards, 6
corruption, participation in RTAs, and other domestic tax rates. Second, by netting out
misclassification through aggregation and focusing on pure misreporting effects, we avoid
difficult empirical challenges associated with disentangling the two in industry-level analyses.
Third, when we do examine tariffs, our estimation strategy allows us to estimate their average
effect on misreporting across a wide variety of importing and exporting countries. And finally,
by aggregating across industries and using country variables as proxies for misreports, we
account for the potential endogeneity of true unobserved trade volumes and those misreports.
Based on a 126-country, 11-year panel, our empirical results confirm prior findings that
tariffs lead to underreporting of imports. We show, however, that the results are not uniform
across countries. For pairs of countries that are both RTA members, with correspondingly low or
zero tariffs, the measured tariff elasticity of misreporting is zero, as would be expected. For
country pairs that are not RTA members, the tariff elasticity of misreporting is large, and it is
larger for high-income countries than for low-income countries. A 1 percent increase in average
tariff rates leads to a 3 percent increase in relative underreporting by high-income importers but a
1 percent increase in relative underreporting by low-income importers.
As for the country characteristics other than tariffs, we find robust evidence that stronger
auditing and accounting standards decrease the underreporting of exports (relative those same
shipments reported by importers). A one standard deviation increase in an index of those
standards in the exporting country decreases the trade gap by approximately 3.8 percent. This
finding is consistent across both high- and low-income countries and underscores the importance
and economic benefits of strong auditing and accounting standards. We also find that corruption
plays an important role in the degree of misreports for both importers and exporters. A one
standard deviation decrease in an index of exporter corruption corresponds with a 12.5 percent
decrease in the reported trade gap in both high- and low-income countries. Corruption is also
associated with more underreporting of imports by low-income countries. Finally, we find some
evidence that higher domestic tax rates correspond to more underreported trade by exporting
countries.

6

A few papers, such as Javorcik and Narciso (2008) and Mishra et al. (2008), find evidence of greater tariff evasion
in product categories that are more differentiated and therefore harder for customs officials to enforce. However, the
method only indirectly measures enforcement and has only been applied to select product categories and countries.

3

These results are important for two reasons. First, tariff revenue remains an important
source of funds for many governments, particularly in developing nations. Revenues lost to tariff
evasion result in lower government services or higher taxes on capital or labor income (Kim and
Kose 2014) and can result in higher international aid to developing countries (Collier and
Venables 2011). In general, understanding how tariffs, corruption, and auditing standards affect
misreporting can aid and improve enforcement and tariff revenue collection.
Second, although recent research suggests that corruption affects the real value of trade, 7
we show that corruption increases the misreporting of that trade. So some of corruption’s effect
on trade measured previously may be attributable to increased misreporting, not real trade
reductions. Similarly, regarding the trade creation and diversion effects of RTAs, 8 our results
find substantially more misreporting among non-RTA members than among RTA members. So
some of the “trade creation” measured by prior work may be attributable to less underreporting.
Before outlining our firm-level theory of trade misreporting, in the next section we
describe some aggregate statistics that motivate the analysis.

II. A Snapshot of Trade Misreports
In the UN Comtrade data, which contain annual industry-level trade flows among
countries, each annual value is collected and reported twice—once by the exporting country and
once by the importing country. 9 This project is motivated by the fact that the two values appear
to differ, significantly and systematically.
Figure 1 plots the sum of all global trade as reported by importers and exporters
separately. 10 Total trade reported by importers is larger, as expected, because the importer
reports include cost, insurance, and freight (CIF) transport costs. But the difference is tiny,
suggesting little aggregate misreporting. It turns out, however, that the global aggregates mask a
lot of cross-country heterogeneity.
To examine the difference between the trade reported by importers and exporters in more
detail and as a proportion of total reported trade, define the “trade reporting gap” as
7

See Dutt and Traca (2010) or Thede and Gustafson (2012).
Examples include Magee (2008) and Carrére (2006).
9
The Comtrade data can be found at http://comtrade.un.org/db/.
10
Trade data are available for more years than we examine here, but our analysis in later sections is limited to 2002–
2012 by the availability of data on some country characteristics, such as accounting and auditing standards and
organized crime.
8

4

trade reporting gap =

Vxmm − Vxmx
.
Vxmm + Vxmx

(1)

where Vxmm is the annual total trade shipped from exporting country x to importing country m, as
reported by the importer (m), and Vxmx is that exact same annual value, as reported by the exporter
(x). Subscripts denote the exporting and importing countries; superscripts denote the reporting
country. The trade gap in (1) can in theory range from –1 to +1, but in practice Vxmm and Vxmx
should differ only by CIF trade costs, and so the trade reporting gap should be small and never
negative.
Figure 2 plots a histogram of the annual values of equation (1). Each observation is the
annual gap between two countries, and each pair of countries appears twice each year: once for
exports from x to m, and once for the reverse. The mean and mode of the observations are
clustered slightly above zero, as already demonstrated by Figure 1 and as expected by the
importer reports’ inclusion of CIF trade costs. But the spread is remarkable. For a significant
fraction of the annual observations, the importer reports are more than twice or less than half of
the exporter reports. 11 In fact, rather than declining continuously farther from zero, the number
of observations with trade gaps outside ±0.75 is increasing. When the gap is 0.75, reported
imports are seven times as large as exports. Clearly, there are lots of enormous, orders-ofmagnitude differences between the two reports. 12 Our goal in this project is first to examine
whether those trade gaps are all merely accidental reporting errors or whether some represent
intential misreports by importers or exporters seeking to avoid taxes or tariffs, and then to
examine the role that corruption, accounting standards, economic development, and trade
agreements play in exacerbating or eliminating the degree of miseports.
If trade reporting gaps arise from intentional misreports, a natural motive is tariff evasion.
Figure 3 plots the trade gap in 10 deciles organized by the size of the average tariff on those
trades. Surprisingly, the trade gap grows for the first four deciles. Reported imports (which must
pay the tariff) exceed reported exports by more the higher the tariff. Less surprisingly, for the
highest six deciles of the tariff, as tariffs increase, reported imports shrink relative to reported
exports. That hump-shaped pattern may arise from two offsetting forces. The higher the tariffs,
When this happens, the trade gap is outside ±⅓.
In what follows we test several subsamples of our data in which we exclude cases where reported exports exceed
reported imports by orders of magnitude, and vice versa.
11
12

5

the more incentive the importing country has to enforce accurate reporting, and the more
incentive the importer has to underreport imports. In what follows we try to account for this by
controlling for accounting and auditing standards along with tariffs.
Figure 4 presents some evidence that the misreports are correlated with these other
country characteristics. Each panel in Figure 4 plots the average trade reporting gap by quintile
of a different characteristic of the exporting country. For example, the upper left graph in Figure
4 shows that when exporters’ auditing standards are rated more highly by the World Economic
Forum, the trade reporting gap is lower. 13 Since that gap is the importer report minus the
exporter report, we interpret the pattern in Figure 4 as indicating that exporters from well-audited
countries are less likely to underreport (as opposed to importers from well-audited countries
being less likely to overreport, which is mathematically possible but makes less intuitive sense).
Similarly, in the upper right graph in Figure 4, exporters from countries with more corruption are
more likely to underreport. And in the bottom two graphs, exporters from poorer countries
underreport more, and exporters from high tax countries underreport less, though that latter
pattern may be nonmonotonic for reasons similar to tariffs in Figure 3.
Figure 5 plots the same four figures by importer characteristics, displaying some of the
same trends, though the patterns are less stark. And clearly, none of this is anything but
suggestive. Tariffs are correlated with GDP. Both are likely correlated with corruption,
accounting standards, and other country characteristics that affect trade misreports, and all of
those country characteristics have been changing over time. To study how trade reporting
responds to country characteristics more systematically, we need an empirical model that
embodies the incentives for firms to misreport their imports and exports.

III. A Firm-Level Model of Trade Misreporting
Our starting point is a generalized version of the model in Ferrantino et al. (2012). In
each industry i and year t there is a representative exporting firm in country x and a
representative importing firm in country m. The firms privately negotiate and know the true
*
, but this value is not known by customs officials, as
value of free-on-board (FOB) exports, Vxmit

signified by the superscript asterisk (*). This FOB value is the true value of goods when they

13

http://reports.weforum.org/global-competitiveness-report-2015-2016/.

6

arrive at the exporting port before shipping to the importing country. 14 We make no assumption
about the underlying market structures, competitive or otherwise. We simply assume that each
firm chooses prices and quantities to maximize profits given the market structure and
competition they face, resulting in a privately negotiated equilibrium value for (unobserved)
*
.
Vxmit

x
Each exporting firm has to decide how much of its exports to report to authorities, Vxmit
.

Let δx be the proportional deviation from the true value V* that the exporter reports:
*
x
Vxmit
= (1 + δ )Vxmit
. The superscript x denotes that δx is the exporter’s deviation. Firms may choose

to underreport exports (δx<0), report accurately (δx=0), or overreport (δx>0). These deviations
may come in the form of misreporting prices (as with transfer pricing) or quantities. 15
Why would firms misreport exports? Doing so has both costs and benefits. First, firms
may incur product, sales, or service taxes or subsidies on the proceeds of goods exported, giving
them incentives to under- or overreport those exports. Second, in an effort to stabilize currency
and capital accounts, some countries restrict capital exports or imports (Prasad and Rajan 2008).
To evade those capital controls, firms may misreport trade transactions (Patnaik et al. 2012).
Third, firms in countries with more corruption or organized crime may have to pay bribes or face
extortion if they misreport the true value of exported goods (Dutt and Traca 2010). Finally, firms
in countries with stricter accounting and auditing standards may have a harder time misreporting
trade.
Each of these motivations can be represented by a function representing the net benefit of
misreporting:
*
x
=
B x B x (δ x , Vxm
: Z xm
),

(2)

where the industry and year subscripts are suppressed. The benefit (or cost) of misreporting
exports is a function of the size of the misreport δx and the true value of exports V*, both of
which are chosen by the exporting firm, and a set of country characteristics Z. These include

14

For now, we just assume that these trades are negotiated in US dollars. The Comtrade data we use are typically
reported in national currencies and then converted to dollars by the UN using average annual trade-weighted
exchange rates.
15
Ferrantino et al. (2012) assume that the quantity of trade q is fixed and that the two firms negotiate over price p.
Either way, in the next step we take this market-determined value, V=p×q, as given and model the reduced form
x
decision about what fraction of that V to misreport. In our model, it does not matter whether δ multiplies p or q as it
has the same effect on V.

7

taxes, capital controls, auditing standards, and levels of corruption. For any given value of true
exports, V* , firms choose misreporting δx to maximize (2), resulting in an implicit function:
x
δ x = δ x (Vxm* : Z xm
).

(3)

On the importing side, firms face all the same benefits and costs of misreporting as
exporters plus one important additional incentive: tariffs, τm. As with exports, we can think of
importers’ choosing true imports V* and misreports δm to maximize the net benefit (or cost) of
misreporting:
*
m
=
B m B m (δ m , Vxm
: τ xm
, Z mxm ).

(4)

And as with exports, for a given true value of trade, this defines an implicit function for optimal
misreported imports:
m
, Z mxm ) .
δ m = δ m (Vxm* : τ xm

(5)

Obviously we cannot estimate (3) or (5) directly. We don’t observe the true value of trade
V*xm or the misreports δx and δm. But we can use the country characteristics in Z as proxy
variables to estimate the effects of those characteristics on aggregate trade misreporting. So the
next step is to convert (3) and (5) into equations that can be estimated, which we do using a
simple accounting relationship between reported trade and the unobserved true value of trade.
x
Observable reported exports Vxmit
in any industry (i) and year (t) must be equal to the true
x
unobservable trade value times the exporter’s misreport and a random error term ( ε xmit
), which

we assume to be multiplicative and lognormally distributed.

(

)

*
x
x
x
1 + δ xmit
=
Vxmit
Vxmit
ε xmit

(6)

m
Similarly, reported imports Vxmit
must equal the true trade value, adjusted for misreports, an error

term, and CIF trade costs σxmit > 1 that we assume are also multiplicative.

(

)

m
*
m
m
=
Vxmit
Vxmit
σ xmit 1 + δ xmit
ε xmit

(7)

Equations (6) and (7) are simply definitions, but V*, as well as the δs and εs, remain unobserved
in both.

8

To translate (6) and (7) into something we can estimate empirically, we first sum all
industries for each year and pair of countries. Aggregate true (unobserved) trade between any
n

n

i =1

i =1

*
*
two countries in year t is just Vxmt
; aggregate CIF costs are σ xmt = ∑ σ xmit ; and
= ∑ Vxmit

n

n

i =1

i =1

x
x
m
m
aggregate random reporting errors are ε xmt
and ε xmt
. Aggregate reported
= ∑ ε xmit
= ∑ ε xmit

exports in (6) can be rewritten

(

)

x
x
x
*
,
=
Vxmt
Vxmt
ε xmt
1 + δ xmt

(8)

*
x
 Vxmit

ε xmit
x
δ xmit

*
x
i =1  Vxmt ε xmt


(9)

n

x
x
where Vxmt
and
= ∑ Vxmit
i =1

n

x
= ∑
δ xmt

is the average degree of misreporting, weighted by the industry-level exports and reporting
errors.
Similarly, aggregate reported imports in (7) become

(

)

m
*
m
m
=
Vxmt
Vxmt
σ xmt 1 + δ xmt
ε xmt

(10)

n

m
m
= ∑ Vxmit
where Vxmt
and
i =1

*
m
 Vxmit
σ xmit ε xmit
m 
δ xmit

*
m
i =1  Vxmtσ xmt ε xmt

n

m
= ∑
δ xmt

(11)

is the average degree of misreporting, weighted by industry-level imports, reporting errors, and
CIF costs.
Equations (8) and (10) are accounting identities showing that customs officials, and
x
, and CIF
therefore researchers, observe only the reported aggregate values of FOB exports, Vxmt

m
imports, Vxmt
, which are functions of three unobserved country characteristics: (i) the true value

of goods traded, (ii) CIF trade costs, and (iii) a weighted average of exporters’ and importers’
intentional misreports.

9

The final step is to take the ratio of aggregate reported imports in equation (10) to the
aggregate reported exports in equation (8), yielding

(

)

m
m
m
σ xmt 1 + δ xmt
ε xmt
Vxmt
=
.
x
x
x
Vxmt
ε xmt
1 + δ xmt

(

)

(12)

Taking the log of both sides of equation (12) we get

(

)

(

)

m
x
m
x
ln Vxmt
− ln Vxmt
= ln σ xmt + ln 1 + δ xmt
− ln 1 + δ xmt
+ ε xmt ,

(13)

where ε xmt = ln ε xtm − ln ε mtx is now a normally distributed error term for shipments from x to m in
year t. We call the left-hand side of (13) the “log trade gap,” and it forms the baseline for all of
our empirical analyses.
m
x
, and δ xmt
, we could not consistently estimate
In theory, even if we had data on σ xmt , δ xmt
m
x
the log trade gap in (13) because those weighted average misreports ( δ xmt
and δ xmt
) are

themselves still functions of the unobserved true values of trade among industries (see equations
(9) and (11)). To address the fact that we do not observe those δ s , and that even if we could,
they would be endogenous, we rely on a “proxy variable” estimation strategy to obtain consistent
estimates of important characteristics that influence firms’ decisions to misreport (Wooldridge
2010).
As a refresher, proxy variables can mitigate omitted variable bias like that in equation
(13). Consider a variable z to be used as a proxy for one of the missing δs in (13). To be a
sucessful proxy, z must be redundant. That is,
m
x
m
x
E (ln Vxmt
− ln Vxmt
δ , z) =
E (ln Vxmt
− ln Vxmt
δ ).

(14)

Or put differently, the expected trade gap estimated with and without the proxy z is the same,
once we’ve conditioned on the other right-hand variables (X), including the missing one (δ). In
what follows, we describe proxies for the missing δs: country characteristics that change the
costs or benefits to firms of misreporting their exports or imports. These include local taxes,
tariffs, corruption, and accounting standards—the elements of Zm and Zx in equations (3) and (5).
The idea is similar to a standard instrumental variables approach, where instead of having
an endogenous right-hand variable, we have an unobserved endogenous right-hand variable.
Proxy variables, like instruments, must be correlated with the endogenous variable and
10

uncorrelated with the dependent variable except mechanically through the endogenous righthand variable. And the empirical strategy is even simpler than for instruments. We simply
substitute proxy variables for the δ s in equation (13). That leaves us unable to estimate the
direct effect of misreporting on the log trade gap but does allow us to consistently estimate the
effect of the proxy variables on the log trade gap. As an auditing check on the extent of
misreporting, that suffices. If there is no intentional misreporting, the δ s are zero, and the
coefficients on the proxies should be zero.
In our case, the proxies for the δ s are just measures of the country characteristics, Z, that
determine firms’ optimal misreports in (3) and (5): taxes and tariffs, corruption and auditing
standards, and trade agreements. The critical assumption is that these country characteristics, Z,
affect only the left-hand side of (13) through their effect on the δ s . By taking the ratio of
reported aggregate imports to exports, we have canceled out the true value of trade from our
estimating equation, except where it appears in the weighted average of those misreports. But
since we don’t observe the misreports anyway, only proxies for misreports, we can estimate
equation (13) consistently using those proxies in lieu of the δ s .
m
x
x
− ln Vxmt
=+
+ µ xmt
β 0 β1′σ xmt + β′2 Z mxmt − β′3 Z xmt
ln Vxmt

(15)

Equation (15) is essentially an auditing formula. If there is no misreporting, the
difference between the value of trade shipped from x to m should reflect only trade costs (σ) and
a mean-zero random error (μ). That difference should not be a function of tariffs, accounting
standards, taxes, or corruption. The coefficients in β2 and β3 should be zero.
Most importantly, we can estimate equation (15). We have data on components of trade
costs, σ, which are simply the standard elements of a gravity model of international trade such as
distance, common borders, and language. And we have data on measures of country
characteristics, Z. We describe both in the section that follows.

IV. Data and Estimation
Descriptive statistics for all the data we use are in Table 1. With 178 countries over 11
years, there are 346,566 possible annual trade flows in the Comtrade data used. 16 But trade was
reported in only about half of those. Unreported trade occurs either because countries do not
16

178×177×11.

11

trade with each other or because countries fail to report their trade. In no cases was there
commerce reported by the exporter but not by the importer, or vice versa. In what follows, our
analyses include the data only for years and country pairs with reported commerce. This reduces
our potential available observation set to 165,215. We also drop countries with missing audit,
corruption, tariff, or ports data, and we drop cases with too few importers, exporters, or country
pairs to identify country-pair fixed effects. Even without these observations, our final data set of
86,185 observations contains more than 87 percent of the reported imports for the 165,215
potential observations for which we have data during the time period. A detailed accounting of
how we arrive at the 86,185 observations described in Table 1 can be found in Appendix Table
A1. 17
Our proxies for CIF trade costs are the standard components of a typical gravity model of
international trade. 18 These include distance between countries and whether they share common
borders or languages. 19 In addition, we include the quality of port infrastructure in the two
countries, based on survey data from the Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) for the years
2002–2012. 20 The survey question relating to port quality can be found in Appendix Table A2.
Port quality is scaled from 1 to 7, and we define a measure of port quality for each country pair
by multiplying the importer and exporter scores. 21
Weighted average tariff rates for each country and year were obtained from the World
Bank Development Indicators (WBDI). 22 Dummy variables for whether two countries are

17

Trade data are available for many more years than we examine in this paper, but our analysis is constrained to
2002–2012 by the availability of proxy variable data on the strength of accounting and auditing standards and
corruption.
18
See Head and Mayer (2013) for a survey of the gravity model literature and variables used for approximating
transport costs.
19
Distance, common border, and common language are from the CEPII gravity database, which can be found at
http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=8.
20
Country-level characteristics from survey questions from the GCR have been used extensively in empirical studies
on international trade and investment. See Carr et al. (2001), Yeaple (2003), Javorcik and Wei (2004), Eckholm et
al. (2007), and Kellenberg (2012) for a few of many examples.
21
Better or more efficient port infrastructure decreases CIF costs (Clark et al. 2004).
22
Simple unweighted average tariff rates are also available from the WBDI. However, the simple correlation
between unweighted and weighted average tariff rates is 0.93. All the regressions in the following discussion were
also run with the unweighted average tariff rates, with virtually identical results. Thus, we present only the results
using the weighted average tariff rates—theoretically a more accurate measure of countries’ overall average tariff
rates.

12

members of an RTA, which may be a free trade area, customs union, or economic integration
agreement, were generated using a data-generating program described in de Sousa (2012). 23
Like port quality data, country data on average accounting and auditing standards come
from the GCR surveys. The specific questions relating to the strength of auditing and accounting
standards can be found in the second row of Appendix Table A2. This variable is also on a 1-to-7
scale, with higher scores indicating stronger standards. Corruption data come from Transparency
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, 24 which uses annual survey data to measure the
perceived level of public corruption. The index ranges from 0 (very corrupt) to 10 (not corrupt).
Table 2 presents several estimates of equation (15). Column (1) estimates the simplest
version of the basic model where we have included a single proxy variable for each of σ xmt ,
m
x
Z xmt
, and Z xmt
, : port quality, tariffs, and exporter auditing and accounting standards. All three

coefficients are statistically significant and negative, as expected. Higher tariffs increase the
incentive to underreport imports, decreasing the gap between reported imports and exports.
Better ports mean lower trade costs, shrinking the gap between true CIF imports and FOB
exports. And exporting countries’ auditing and accounting standards reduce the ability of firms
to understate exports, shrinking the log trade gap.
In column (2) we add more proxies for trade costs: distance and indicators for common
borders and common languages. All three proxies are statistically significant and of the expected
signs. Distance increases trade costs, increasing the log trade gap, while common borders and
language reduce trade costs with the opposite consequence. In columns (3) through (5) we add
importer accounting standards an indicator for when both countries are members of an RTA as
well as an interaction term between tariffs and RTAs. Better exporter accounting standards
reduce the ability of firms to understate exports, shrinking the trade gap, while better importer
accounting standards results in less underreporting of imports, increasing the trade gap. The
effect of RTAs on the reported trade gap in columns (4) and (5) is negative. The estimates across
all five specifications in columns (1) through (5) are remarkably stable, even as we add
additional proxies to the model. This stability provides a degree of confidence in the reliability of
our proxy variable estimation strategy.
23

The Stata do-files for the RTA program can be found at http://jdesousa.univ.free.fr/data.htm. These files have
been used in several prior studies on RTAs, such as Head et al. (2010), Baghdadi et al. (2013), and Head and Ries
(2010).
24
www.transparancy.org.

13

In column (5) of Table 2 we add the interaction between tariffs and RTAs. The
coefficient is positive and significant, indicating that the effect of tariff evasion on the reported
trade gap is smaller for country pairs that are members of an RTA. At the bottom of column (5)
we calculate the combined effects of tariffs for RTA members (–1.69). 25 A 1 percent increase in
tariffs decreases the reported trade gap by 1.7 percent. Though statistically significant, this effect
is much smaller than the –3.4 coefficient for country pairs that are not members of an RTA. That
is, the tariff evasion effect is smaller between countries that are members of an RTA and
presumably face lower average tariff rates than for country pairs that are not RTA members and
face higher average tariff rates. Once we control for the different effects that RTAs have directly
and through tariffs, the net effect of RTAs is both negative and statistically significant.
Even with a variety of proxies included in the estimation in columns (1) through (5),
unobserved heterogeneity across time or specific country pairs could still bias the estimates. If
there are unobserved country characteristics that influence reporting gaps and happen to be
correlated with one of our proxies, then our estimates may be biased. For example, if stronger
auditing and accounting standards across time happen to be correlated with unobserved
technological advancements in computing and software capabilities in all countries, and this
leads to a decrease in the random error component of misreporting, then our proxy estimates on
auditing and accounting standards may be biased. Likewise, if some trading partners have
cooperated to make sure that the data reported by exporters and importers match, that might
shrink the reported trade gap. 26 To the extent that this cooperation is correlated with other
country characteristics, our estimates may be biased.
In column (6) of Table 2 we control for unobserved time-specific heterogeneity by
including year dummies. Although some of the coefficient estimates change slightly from
column (5), the results are quite similar, indicating that the effect of any bias from unobserved
heterogeneity over time is minimal. In column (7) we add country-pair fixed effects. Two things
are important to keep in mind here. First, all estimates are now identified from changes in
variables within country pairs, as opposed to the cross-country pairs estimates in columns (1)
through (6). Second, since we are controlling for time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity, we
25

The combined effect of tariffs for RTA members is the sum of coefficients for [Importer Tariff ] + [Importer
Tariff x RTA]. For column (5) of Table 2 this is –3.40 + 1.71 = –1.69. An F-test was conducted to determine the
joint significance of the sum.
26
Since 1990 the United States and Canada have exchanged import data and substituted each other’s reported import
data for their own reported export data, which are typically less reliable (Stoyanov 2012).

14

can no longer identify other time-invariant characteristics, such as distance or common borders
and languages, since they are absorbed by the country-pair fixed effects. Only proxies that vary
across time within country pairs can be identified. Moreover, some of the proxies that do vary
over time don’t vary by much, leaving little variance for identification. The coefficients on port
quality, RTAs, and importer accounting standards are no longer statistically significant.
The coefficients in column (7) on tariffs and exporter accounting standards remain
statistically significant, though their magnitudes change somewhat. The effect of tariffs for
countries that are not members of the same RTA is –1.21, but the effect for RTA members is not
statistically different from zero (–0.18). The coefficient on exporters’ auditing and accounting
standards remains negative and significant: a one standard deviation increase in exporters
auditing and accounting standards decreases the trade gap by 5.2 percent.
The regressions in columns (3) through (6) of Table 2 are repeated in columns (1)
through (4) of Table 3, using the corruption index as a proxy for misreporting rather than
auditing and accounting standards. The magnitudes and significance of the coefficients on tariffs,
ports, distance, common language, common border, and RTAs remain nearly identical to the
results in Table 2. Corruption also has statistically significant effects on the trade gap. A one
standard deviation decrease in corruption (i.e., a higher corruption index score) in the exporting
country translates to a 7.7 to 13 percent decrease in the trade gap, whereas a comparable decrease
in corruption in the importing country implies approximately a 2.8 percent increase in the trade
gap. This is consistent with the hypothesis that countries that have less corruption, or do a better
job of controlling corruption, make it more difficult for exporters or importers to underreport true
trade values.
In column (5) of Table 3 we estimate the model with both auditing and accounting
standards and corruption as proxies for misreporting. The results are similar for all variables
except that the signs on the coefficients for the importer and exporter auditing and accounting
variables have reversed. This is a bit strange, but given the high simple correlation of the
auditing and accounting standards variables and the corruption variables (ρ=0.83), and the fact
that the coefficients are identified across country pairs, we suspect a multicollinearity bias. In
column (6) we again incorporate country-pair fixed effects. Here, the coefficients are now
identified within country pairs over time, reducing the collinearity observed across country pairs
in column (5). Both better auditing and accounting standards and less corruption in the exporting
15

country now have the expected negative effect on the the trade gap; the results are positive but
no longer statistically significant for importers. It is important to note that the country-pair fixed
effects regressions in column (7) of Table 2 and columns (4) and (6) of Table 3 have far greater
explanatory power than the regressions without country-pair fixed effects, indicating substantial
unobserved country-pair heterogeneity in the trade gap. In the regressions that follow, we
constrain our analysis to regressions that contain country-pair fixed effects.
In Table 4 we check the robustness of the results with respect to outlier observations.
Recall from Figure 2 that the mean of the reported trade gap is clustered slightly above zero, but
the gap increases again for values ±0.75. To ensure that our results are not driven by the tails of
the distribution, we repeat our most restrictive specification in column (7) of Table 3 using
different cutoff values for the tails of the distribution: we drop observations where the trade gap
is ±0.99 , ±0.75 , and ±0.5. Although the magnitude of the coefficients on tariffs and exporter
auditing and accounting standards and corruption falls as the sample size is further restricted, the
coefficients remain economically and statistically significant, indicating that their effects are not
being driven solely by extreme country-pair observations.

V. WTO Membership, Product Taxes, and Capital Controls
In Table 5 we explore additional versions of equation (15). Column (1) adds a dummy for
World Trade Organization (WTO) membership as well as an interaction with tariff rates to see
whether WTO membership has had similar effects on the trade gap as RTA membership. 27
Although WTO membership does not reduce average tariff rates to the extent a free trade
agreement or customs union might, most-favored-nation status may lower average tariff rates for
members and provide benefits similar to RTA membership. However, 90 percent of the annual
trade flows in our data were between pairs of contries that were WTO members over the entire
sample period, making any WTO effect difficult to identify. This may explain the insignificance
of both the direct WTO coefficient and the WTO effect through tariffs. Nonetheless, the
insignificant net effect of WTO membership on the overall trade gap is consistent with Javorcik
and Narciso (2013), who also found that WTO membership has led to no net difference in the
reported trade gap for 15 recent member countries. Importantly, parameter estimates on tariffs,
27

Data on World Trade Organization membership were obtained from accession dates on the WTO website, at
https://www.wto.org/.

16

auditing and accounting standards, and corruption in the exporting country remain consistent and
significant.
In columns (2) and (3) of Table 5 we examine product tax rates. Higher product taxes in
the exporting country give firms the incentive to understate exports, increasing the reported gap
measured as Vxmm − Vxmx . But higher product taxes in the importing country lead to understated
imports, shrinking the reported trade gap. We calculate net product tax rates as the tax revenues
(minus subsidies) that are related to the sale, production, or use of goods and services in a
country, divided by GDP. This measure provides a proxy of the net tax rates on goods and
services faced by importers and exporters across countries. 28 Data coverage on tax rates,
however, is not as extensive as for the other variables in Table 5, with only 64,429 observations
available. Moreover, most of the lost observations come from less developed countries with less
reliable tax data. Given that we are not only adding tax rates as additional proxies but also
substantially altering our sample, in column (2) we first run the same regression as in column (7)
of Table 3 to understand how changing the sample size affects the results. Then in column (3) we
add net taxes on products for both exporters and importers.
Despite the decrease in observations, the results in column (2) are remarkably similar to
those using the full sample. In column (3) of Table 5 the coefficient on exporter net product taxes
(1.34) is large, of the expected sign, and statistically significant. A 1 percent increase in
exporting country tax rates increases exporters’ underreporting and leads to a 1.34 percent
increase in the reported trade gap.
Finally, in columns (4) through (5) of Table 5 we include proxies for capital controls. In
theory, capital export controls give firms incentives to understate exports, increasing the trade

(

)

gap Vxmm − Vxmx , whereas capital import controls give firms the incentive to understate imports,
decreasing the trade gap. Although we don’t have data on the strength of capital controls, one
potential proxy is inflation rates. Inflation can be correlated with large capital inflows that make
it difficult for countries to control monetary policy without capital control restrictions (Cordero

28

Data on both net taxes on products and GDP are from the WBDI database. We also explored but do not present
here other tax rate proxies found in the WBDI, including measures of value added tax revenues and overall tax
revenues as a percentage of GDP. However, these other measures were always insignificant, did not qualitatively
change the results of any of the other relevant variables in the model, and suffered from more severe missing data
problems.

17

and Montecino 2010; Lartey 2012). And Lemmen and Eijffinger (1996) find a positive
correlation between inflation rates and measures of capital controls.
Again, incomplete inflation data across countries reduce our available sample size to
83,735. 29 To ensure that any changes in coefficient estimates are not the result of the changing
sample, in column (4) of Table 5 we again estimate the base model of column (7) in Table 2 on
the new smaller sample. The effects of tariffs and exporter accounting standards and corruption
remain stable and statistically significant. In column (5) the signs on exporter and importer
inflation rates are of opposing signs, consistent with firms’ having incentives to use trade
misreporting to move capital. These effects are not statistically significant, however.
Importantly, the estimates on tariff rates and exporter accounting standards and corruption
continue to remain consistently significant and robust to changing samples and the inclusion of
alternative proxies.

VI. Different Effects for Rich and Poor Countries
As an additional check on our results, we explore whether tariffs, auditing and accounting
standards, and corruption have different effects on countries of different development levels.
Defining high-income countries using the World Bank’s classification, we interact an indicator
for these countries with our tariff, auditing and accounting, and corruption measures. The
interaction terms tell us how the marginal effects of high-income countries differ from the
marginal effects of lower-income countries, which we define as all countries not classified as
high income. The results of the interactions are presented in Table 6, where column (1) includes
interactions with tariffs, column (2) has interactions with accounting standards, and column (3)
has interactions with corruption. In general, there appears to be no difference in the effects of
auditing and accounting standards for high- and lower-income countries. There are, however,
intriguing differences in tariff evasion and importer corruption effects.
To facilitate discussion of these differences, Table 7 reports the combined marginal
effects of high- and lower-income countries from the regression results in Table 6. For both
country categories, tariffs have a negative and statistically significant effect on the reported trade
gap when a country imports from a non-RTA trading partner, but the effect in high-income
countries is three times larger than the effect in lower-income countries. This difference is both
29

Inflation rate data also come from the WBDI database.

18

statistically and economically significant. However, when trading partners are members of the
same RTA, for lower-income importers the tariff effect is not statistically different from zero, but
for high-income importers it remains significant. The results indicate that tariff evasion is more
prevelant in high-income importing countries both within and outside RTAs. We cannot say why
there is such a discrepancy in the trade gap between high- and lower-income importing countries
with respect to the tariff elasticity. However, given that high-income countries have more
multinational firms 30 and consume a greater proportion of differentiated products with larger
markups, 31 and given that those markups create more opportunity for transfer pricing within
firms, 32 we speculate that multinational firm transfer pricing in high-income importing countries
may play a role in the larger trade elasticity gap. However, testing this is outside the scope of this
paper, given multicountry panel data limitations for multinational enterprises.
The marginal effect of stronger auditing and accounting standards is statistically
significant in both high- and lower-income countries, with the effect in lower-income countries
slightly stronger. The difference between the two, however, is not statistically significant.
Finally, the marginal effects of corruption in the exporting countries is similar and statistically
significant for both high- and lower-income countries. Additionally, corruption has a positive
and significant 33 sign for lower-income importing countries, as would be expected (recall that the
corruption index score is higher for less perceived corruption). Less corruption is likely
correlated with less underrreporting of imports, which would increase the reported trade gap. In
this case, a one standard deviation increase in the corruption index in a low-income importing
country leads to a 3.7 percentage increase in the reported trade gap. 34 Our results suggest that
although improvements in auditing and accounting standards across countries can substantially
reduce the extent of misreported trade, the elimination of corruption can have even larger effects,
particularly for lower-income countries.

VII. Conclusion
This paper finds evidence of intentionally misreported trade by examining the difference
between trade reported by exporters and importers. Our approach differs in several ways from
30

Markusen (2002).
Markusen (2013).
32
Clausing (2003).
33
Significant at the 10 percent level.
34
The standard deviation in the log of the corruption perception index for lower-income countries is 0.31.
31

19

prior studies. First, by using a panel of data on aggregate trade among hundreds of countries over
11 years, rather than detailed industry data for specific pairs of countries or regions, we can test
for general patterns of tariff evasion. In this sense, our results apply to a broad range of countries
at different levels of development and across all sectors of the economy. Second, we can break
down those general results and compare tariff evasion in rich and poor countries as well as
among trade agreement members and nonmembers. And third, we can examine country
characteristics aside from tariffs that cause firms to misreport trade, including taxes, auditing
standards, corruption, and capital controls.
For countries that are not members of regional trade agreements, higher tariffs are
associated with significant underreporting of imports. And for high-income non-RTA members,
the tariff evasion elasticity is three times larger than for low-income non-RTA members. For
country pairs that are members of the same RTA, the tariff evasion effect disappears, although
not completely for high-income importing countries. Tariff evasion is simply not a relevant
motivation for misreporting when average tariff rates are near zero for most countries. The
results indicate that tariff evasion effects are dependent on both the level of development across
countries as well as their participation in RTAs.
In addition, we find robust evidence that underreporting of exports increases when
auditing and accounting standards are lower and exporters’ tax rates are higher. Likewise,
eliminating corruption decreases misreporting for both importers and exporters, particularly in
low-income countries.
These last results confirm that when we look beyond disaggregated tariff rates, policyrelevant country characteristics such as domestic tax rates, the strength of auditing and
accounting standards, and corruption are significant in explaining firms’ motivations for
underreporting of exports. These factors must be taken into account by governments and customs
authorities seeking to protect revenue sources associated with tariff and tax evasion on trade
across international borders.

20

References
Baghdadi, Leila, Immaculada Martinez-Zarzoso, Celestino Suarez-Burguet, and Habib Zitouna.
2013. Are RTA agreements with environmental provisions reducing emissions? Journal
of International Economics 90(2): 378–90.
Bouët, Antoine, and Devesh Roy. 2012. Trade protection and tax evasion: Evidence from Kenya,
Mauritius, and Nigeria. Journal of International Trade & Economic Development: An
International and Comparative Review 21(2): 287–320.
Carr, David L., James R. Markusen, and Keith E. Maskus. 2001. Estimating the knowledgecapital model of the multinational enterprise. American Economic Review 91(3): 995–
1001.
Carrére, Celine. 2006. Revisiting the effects of regional trade agreements on trade flows with
proper specification of the gravity model. European Economic Review 50(2): 223–47.
Clark, Ximena, David Dollar, and Alejandro Micco. 2004. Port efficiency, maritime transport
costs, and bilateral trade. Journal of Development Economics 75(2): 417–50.
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2003. Tax-motivated transfer pricing and US intrafirm trade prices.
Journal of Public Economics 87(9): 2207–23.
Collier, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. 2011. Illusory revenue: Import tariffs in resource-rich
and aid-rich economies. Journal of Development Economics 94: 202–206.
Cordero, José Antonio, and Juan Antonio Montecino. 2010. Capital controls and monetary policy
in developing countries. CEPR working paper.
de Sousa, Jose. 2012. The currency union effect on trade is decreasing over time. Economics
Letters 117(3): 917–20.
Dutt, Pushan, and Daniel Traca. 2010. Corruption and bilateral trade flows: Extortion or evasion.
Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4): 843–60.
Ekholm, Karolina, Rikard Forslid, and James R. Markusen. 2007. Export platform foreign direct
investment. Journal of the European Economic Association 5(4): 776–95.
Epaphra, Manamba. 2015. Tax rates and tax evasion: Evidence from missing imports in
Tanzania. International Journal of Economics and Finance. 7(2): 122–37.
Ferrantino, Michael J., Xuepeng Liu, and Zhi Wang. 2012. Evasion behaviors of exporters and
importers: Evidence from the U.S.–China trade data discrepancy. Journal of
International Economics 86: 141–57.

21

Fisman, Raymond, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2004. Tax rates and tax evasion: Evidence from “missing
imports” in China. Journal of Political Economy 112(2): 471–96.
Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2013. Gravity equations: Workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook.
CEPII working paper 2013-27.
Head, Keith, and John Ries. 2010. Do trade missions increase trade? Canadian Journal of
Economics 43(3): 754–75.
Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, and John Ries. 2010. The erosion of colonial trade linkages after
independence. Journal of International Economics 81(1): 1–14.
Javorcik, Beata S., and Gaia Narciso. 2013. Accession to the World Trade Organization and
tariff evasion. CEPR discussion paper 9592.
Javorcik, Beata S., and Shang-Jin Wei. 2004. Pollution havens and foreign direct investment:
Dirty secret or popular myth? Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy 3(2): Article
8.
Kar, Dev, and Joseph Spanjers. 2014. Illicit financial flows from developing countries: 2003–
2012. Global Financial Integrity report. Available at
http://www.gfintegrity.org/report/2014-global-report-illicit-financial-flows-fromdeveloping-countries-2003-2012/.
Kellenberg. 2012. Trading Wastes. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
64(1): 68-87.
Kim, Sunghyun H., and M. Ayhan Kose. 2014. Welfare implications of trade liberalization and
fiscal reform: A quantitative experiment. Journal of International Economics 92: 198–
209.
Lartey, Emmanuel K.K. 2012. Financial openness, nontradable inflation and optimal monetary
policy. Economics Letters 117: 782–85.
Lemmen, Jan J.G., and Sylvester C.W. Eijffinger. 1996. The fundamental determinants of
financial integration in the European Union. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 123(3): 432–56.
Magee, Chris. 2008. New measures of trade creation and trade diversion. Journal of
International Economics 75: 340–62.
Markusen, James R. 2002. Multinational firms and the theory of international trade. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
———. 2013. Putting per-capita income back into trade theory. Journal of International
Economics 90(2): 255–65.
22

Mishra, Prachi, Arvind Subramanian, and Petia Topalova. 2008. Tariffs, enforcement, and
customs evasion: Evidence from India. Journal of Public Economics 92: 1907–25.
Patnaik, Ila, Abhijit Sen Gupta, and Ajay Shah. 2012. Determinants of trade misinvoicing. Open
Economies Review 23: 891–910.
Prasad, Eswar S., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2008. A pragmatic approach to capital account
liberalization. Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(3): 149–72.
Stoyanov, Andrey. 2012. Tariff evasion and rules of origin violations under the Canada-U.S.
Free Trade Agreement. Canadian Journal of Economics 45(3): 879–902.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey. 2010. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Yeaple, Stephen R. 2003. The role of skill endowments in the structure of U.S. outward foreign
direct investment. Review of Economics and Statistics 85(3): 726–34.

23

Figure 1: Total Global Trade as Reported by Importers and Exporters

Figure 2: Trade Reporting Gap by Country-Pair Year

24

Figure 3: Trade Reporting Gap by Tariff

Figure 4: Trade Reporting Gap by Exporter Characteristics

25

Figure 5: Trade Reporting Gap by Importer Characteristics

26

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

Std.
Variable
Obs
Mean Dev.
Min
Max
Evasion Gap [Ln(Imports)-Ln(Exports)]
86,185 0.31
1.57
-14.5
16.5
Regional Trade Agreement
86,185 0.23
0.42
0
1
Both Countries WTO Members
86,185 0.89
0.31
0
1
Ln[Exporter Auditing and Accounting Standards] 86,185 1.57
0.18
0.95
1.89
Ln[Importer Auditing and Accounting Standards] 86,185 1.57
0.19
0.95
1.89
Ln[Bilateral Port Quality]
86,185 2.80
0.45
0.50
3.82
Share a Common Border
86,185 0.03
0.17
0
1
Ln[Bilateral distance between countries]
86,185 8.56
0.91
4.08
9.89
Common Offical Language
86,185 0.12
0.33
0
1
Ln[Exporter Corruption Perceptions Index]
86,185 1.46
0.47
0.18
2.27
Ln[Importer Corruption Perceptions Index]
86,185 1.50
0.47
0.18
2.27
Importer Tariff Rate (weighted average)
86,185 0.04
0.04
0
0.26
Exporter Net Taxes on Products (% of GDP)
64,429 0.10
0.04
0.002
0.24
Importer Net Taxes on Products (% of GDP)
64,429 0.10
0.03
0.002
0.24
Exporter Inflation Rate, GDP deflator (%)
83,735 0.06
0.08
-0.33
1.04
Importer Inflation Rate, GDP deflator (%)
83,735 0.06
0.07
-0.25
1.04
Note: See Appendix Table A1 for how we get from 346,566 possible annual country pairs to
the 86,185 described above and used in our analysis.

27

Table 2: Baseline Regressions on the Reported Trade Gap
m

x

Dep. var: lnV −lnV
Importer Tariff

Importer Tariff × RTA
Ln[Port Quality]
Ln[Distance]

(1)
-2.81*
(0.15)

(2)
-3.21*
(0.16)

(3)
-3.12*
(0.16)

(4)
-3.14*
(0.16)

-0.186*
(0.015)

-0.271*
(0.036)

-0.190*
(0.015)
0.157*
(0.005)
-0.171*
(0.023)
-0.151*
(0.016)
-0.246*
(0.036)

-0.206*
(0.018)
0.157*
(0.005)
-0.169*
(0.023)
-0.154*
(0.016)
-0.225*
(0.038)
0.070
(0.039)

No
No
1.38*
(0.05)

No
No
0.050
(0.070)

No
No
-0.051
(0.086)

-0.204*
(0.018)
0.149*
(0.007)
-0.170*
(0.023)
-0.154*
(0.016)
-0.217*
(0.038)
0.075
(0.039)
-0.026
(0.015)
No
No
-0.004
(0.092)

Common Border
Common Offical Language
Ln[Exporter Auditing Stds]
Ln[Importer Auditing Stds]
Regional Trade Agreement
Year Dummies
Bilateral Dummies
Constant

(5)
-3.40*
(0.18)
1.71*
(0.30)
-0.205*
(0.018)
0.147*
(0.007)
-0.181*
(0.023)
-0.161*
(0.016)
-0.207*
(0.038)
0.075
(0.039)
-0.084*
(0.019)
No
No
0.020
(0.093)

(6)
-3.35*
(0.18)
1.73*
(0.30)
-0.224*
(0.019)
0.147*
(0.007)
-0.181*
(0.023)
-0.162*
(0.016)
-0.185*
(0.039)
0.102*
(0.041)
-0.085*
(0.019)
Yes
No
-0.005
(0.095)

(7)
-1.22*
(0.35)
1.03*
(0.48)
-0.036
(0.039)

-0.290*
(0.089)
0.086
(0.092)
-0.062
(0.048)
Yes
Yes

Effect of Tariffs among RTA
Members
-1.69*
-1.62*
-0.18
F-stat
44.0
39.3
0.16
Observations
86,185
86,185
86,185
86,185
86,185
86,185
86,185
R-squared
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.57
* p<0.05. Robust standard errors in columns (1) –(6) in parentheses. In column (7), robust standard errors are
clustered on bilateral country pairs.

28

Table 3: The Effects of Corruption on the Reported Trade Gap
m

x

Dep. var: lnV −lnV

Importer Tariff
Importer Tariff × RTA
Ln[Port Quality]
Ln[Distance]
Common Border
Common Offical Language
Ln[Exporter Auditing Stds]

(1)
-2.716*
(0.170)
-0.163*
(0.019)
0.147*
(0.007)
-0.176*
(0.023)
-0.165*
(0.016)

(2)
-2.940*
(0.189)
1.426*
(0.301)
-0.164*
(0.019)
0.145*
(0.007)
-0.185*
(0.023)
-0.171*
(0.016)

(3)
-2.871*
(0.195)
1.453*
(0.301)
-0.181*
(0.020)
0.146*
(0.007)
-0.185*
(0.023)
-0.171*
(0.016)

(4)
-1.166*
(0.351)
1.070*
(0.483)
-0.0334
(0.038)

-0.176*
(0.015)
0.051*
(0.017)
-0.009
(0.015)
No
No
1.382*
(0.053)

-0.172*
(0.015)
0.051*
(0.017)
-0.058*
(0.019)
No
No
0.050
(0.070)

-0.164*
(0.015)
0.061*
(0.018)
-0.059*
(0.019)
Yes
No

-0.286*
(0.071)
0.061
(0.063)
-0.065
(0.048)
Yes
Yes

Ln[Importer Auditing Stds]
Ln[Exporter Corruption]
Ln[Importer Corruption]
Regional Trade Agreement
Year Dummies
Bilateral Dummies
Constant

(5)
-2.846*
(0.195)
1.465*
(0.300)
-0.191*
(0.021)
0.143*
(0.007)
-0.185*
(0.023)
-0.174*
(0.016)
0.283*
(0.058)
-0.167*
(0.056)
-0.248*
(0.022)
0.123*
(0.024)
-0.062*
(0.019)
Yes
No

(6)
-1.174*
(0.351)
1.071*
(0.483)
-0.027
(0.039)

-0.204*
(0.094)
0.061
(0.096)
-0.252*
(0.074)
0.046
(0.065)
-0.063
(0.048)
Yes
Yes

Effect of Tariffs among RTA
-1.514*
-1.418*
-0.096
-1.381*
-0.103
Members
F-stat
33.2
28.1
0.04
26.82
0.05
Observations
86,185
86,185
86,185
86,185
86,185
86,185
R-squared
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.57
0.02
0.57
* p<0.05. Robust standard errors in columns (1)–(3) and (5) in parentheses. In columns (4) and (6),
robust standard errors are clustered on bilateral country pairs.

29

Table 4: Robustness Regressions on Outlier Observations on the Reported Trade Gap

m

x

Dep. var: lnV −lnV

Importer Tariff

Importer Tariff × RTA
Ln[Port Quality]
Ln[Exporter Auditing Stds]
Ln[Importer Auditing Stds]
Ln[Exporter Corruption]
Ln[Importer Corruption]
Regional Trade Agreement
Year Dummies
Bilateral Dummies

Drop observations where absolute value of trade gap
percentage is greater than …
0.99
0.75
0.5
(1)
(2)
(3)
-1.076*
-0.718*
-0.622*
(0.282)
(0.167)
(0.117)
1.041*
0.280
0.188
(0.416)
(0.270)
(0.199)
-0.015
0.006
0.004
(0.031)
(0.018)
(0.013)
-0.263*
-0.122*
-0.100*
(0.075)
(0.045)
(0.031)
0.090
0.056
0.038
(0.075)
(0.044)
(0.031)
-0.100
-0.073*
-0.052*
(0.057)
(0.034)
(0.024)
0.052
0.015
-0.001
(0.053)
(0.032)
(0.023)
-0.077*
-0.057*
-0.033*
(0.035)
(0.022)
(0.016)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Effect of Tariffs among RTA Members
-0.035
-0.438
-0.434*
F-stat
0.01
3.02
5.2
Observations
84,365
73,745
63,862
R-squared
0.56
0.54
0.54
* p<0.05. Robust standard errors in columns (1)–(5) in parentheses. In column (6), robust standard
errors are clustered on bilateral country pairs.

30

Table 5: Robustness Regressions on WTO, Tax Rates, and Capital Controls
m

x

Dep. var: lnV −lnV

Importer Tariff
Importer Tariff × RTA
Importer Tariff × WTO
Ln[Port Quality]
Ln[Exporter Auditing Stds]
Ln[Importer Auditing Stds]
Ln[Exporter Corruption]
Ln[Importer Corruption]
Regional Trade Agreement
WTO Members
Exporter Tax (% GDP)

(1)
-1.446*
(0.711)
1.015*
(0.484)
0.0689
(0.052)
-0.025
(0.039)
-0.207*
(0.094)
0.055
(0.096)
-0.252*
(0.074)
0.048
(0.065)
-0.060
(0.048)
0.069
(0.052)

(2)
-1.100*
(0.400)
1.167*
(0.513)

(3)
-1.102*
(0.405)
1.157*
(0.512)

(4)
-0.973*
(0.355)
0.834
(0.486)

(5)
-0.985*
(0.355)
0.876
(0.486)

-0.032
(0.044)
-0.189
(0.110)
-0.013
(0.113)
-0.208*
(0.086)
0.015
(0.076)
-0.070
(0.053)

-0.035
(0.044)
-0.204
(0.111)
-0.012
(0.114)
-0.213*
(0.086)
0.016
(0.076)
-0.067
(0.053)

-0.056
(0.040)
-0.162
(0.096)
0.112
(0.097)
-0.267*
(0.077)
0.111
(0.066)
-0.039
(0.048)

-0.054
(0.040)
-0.174
(0.096)
0.117
(0.097)
-0.266*
(0.077)
0.111
(0.066)
-0.042
(0.048)

1.34
(0.76)
0.07
(0.74)

Importer Tax (% GDP)
Exporter Inflation

Yes
Yes

-0.20
(0.12)
0.13
(0.09)
Yes
Yes

-0.139

-0.109

Importer Inflation
Year Dummies
Bilateral Dummies

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Effect of Tariffs among RTA
-0.431
0.067
0.055
Members
F-stat
0.30
0.02
0.01
Observations
86,185
64,429
64,429
R-squared
0.57
0.56
0.56
* p<0.05. Robust standard errors clustered on bilateral country pairs.

31

0.09
83,735
0.57

0.06
83,735
0.57

Table 6: High- and Low-income Countries
m

Dep. var: lnV −lnV

x

Importer Tariff
Importer Tariff × RTA
Importer Tariff × High Income Importer
Importer Tariff × High Inc. Importer × RTA
Ln[Port Quality]
Ln[Exporter Auditing Stds]
Ln[Exporter Auditing Stds] × High Income
Ln[Importer Auditing Stds]
Ln[Importer Auditing Stds] × High Income
Ln[Exporter Corruption]

(1)
-1.007*
(0.358)
1.051*
(0.484)
-2.239*
(0.875)
0.332
(1.200)
-0.025
(0.039)
-0.206*
(0.094)

0.075
(0.095)

-0.253*
(0.074)

(2)

(3)

-0.959*
(0.352)
0.929
(0.482)

-0.947*
(0.352)
0.921
(0.481)

-0.025
(0.039)
-0.212*
(0.095)
0.019
(0.022)
0.112
(0.096)
-0.107*
(0.021)
-0.257*
(0.075)

-0.025
(0.039)
-0.206*
(0.094)

0.079
(0.096)

-0.258*
(0.076)
Ln[Exporter Corruption] × High Income
0.015
(0.021)
Ln[Importer Corruption]
0.061
0.096
0.118
(0.066)
(0.066)
(0.067)
Ln[Importer Corruption] × High Income
-0.109*
(0.022)
Regional Trade Agreement
-0.065
-0.053
-0.052
(0.047)
(0.048)
(0.048)
Year Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Bilateral Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
86,185
86,185
86,185
R-squared
0.57
0.57
0.57
* p<0.05. Robust standard errors, clustered on bilateral country pairs, in parentheses.

32

Table 7:
Combined Effects for Low- and High-income Countries
(1)
Lower-Income Countries
Tariffs among non-RTA Members
Tariffs among RTA Members
Exporter Auditing Stds

-1.007*
(0.358)
0.044
[0.010]

Importer Auditing Stds
Exporter Corruption

(2)

-0.212*
(0.095)
0.112
(0.096)

Importer Corruption
High-Income Countries
Tariffs among non-RTA Members a
Tariffs among RTA Members a
Exporter Auditing Stds

-3.02*
[13.53]
-1.86
[2.89]

Importer Auditing Stds
Exporter Corruption

-0.193*
[4.18]
0.005
[0.001]

(3)

-0.258*
(0.076)
0.118
(0.067)

-0.243*
[10.89]
Importer Corruption a
0.009
[0.02]
* p<0.05. For coefficent estimates that come directly from Table 5, standard errors are
reported in parentheses. For coeffient estimates that require linear tests of multiple
coeffiecients from Table 5, F-stats are reported in brackets. The a superscript indicates that
the high-income country estimate is statistically different from the lower-income country
estimate.

33

Appendix Tables
Table A1:
Data dropped for missing observations and variables

Starting (2002–2012)
Drop observations where reported trade values are
missing for importer, exporter, or both
Drop observations with missing audit, tariff, ports, or
corruption data
Drop cases with too few (less than 2) observations to
identify country-pair fixed effects

Total
Observations
(11 years)
346,566

Exporters
178

Importers
178

178

178

165,215

134

127

89,420

126

124

86,185

Table A2:
Survey Questions Determining Proxy Variables from the Global Competitiveness Report
Variable
Port infrastructure quality

Survey Question
Port facilities and inland waterways in your country are (1 =
underdeveloped, 7 = as developed as the world's best)

Strength of auditing and
accounting standards

Financial auditing and reporting standards regarding
company's financial performance in your country are (1 =
extremely weak, 7 = extremely strong—the best in the world)

34

