NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MIGRATION RESPONSES TO CONFLICT:
EVIDENCE FROM THE BORDER OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR
Shari Eli
Laura Salisbury
Allison Shertzer
Working Paper 22591
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22591

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

We thank Ran Abramitzky, Jeremy Atack, Martha Bailey, Hoyt Bleakley, Leah Boustan, Ann Carlos,
William Collins, Paul David, Rowena Gray, Tim Guinnane, Eric Hilt, Naomi Lamoreaux, Frank Lewis,
Josh Lewis, Paul Rhode, Alex Whalley, seminar participants at Guelph, Michigan, Stanford, U.C.
Merced, Vanderbilt, and Yale, as well as participants at meetings of the Canadian Network for Economic
History and the Social Science History Association for helpful comments. We also thank Zvezdomir
Todorov for excellent research assistance The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Shari Eli, Laura Salisbury, and Allison Shertzer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Migration Responses to Conflict: Evidence from the Border of the American Civil War
Shari Eli, Laura Salisbury, and Allison Shertzer
NBER Working Paper No. 22591
September 2016, Revised September 2016
JEL No. J61,N31,R23
ABSTRACT
The American Civil War fractured communities in border states where families who would
eventually support the Union or the Confederacy lived together prior to the conflict. We study the
subsequent migration choices of these Civil War veterans and their families using a unique
longitudinal dataset covering enlistees from the border state of Kentucky. Nearly half of
surviving Kentucky veterans moved to a new county between 1860 and 1880. There was no
differential propensity to migrate according to side, but former Union soldiers were more likely to
leave counties with greater Confederate sympathy for destinations that supported the North.
Confederate veterans were more likely to move to counties that supported the Confederacy, or if
they left the state, for the South or far West. We find no evidence of a positive economic return to
these relocation decisions.
Shari Eli
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
shari.eli@utoronto.ca
Laura Salisbury
Department of Economics
York University
Vari Hall 1092
4700 Keele Street
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3
CANADA
and NBER
lsalisbu@yorku.ca

Allison Shertzer
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
4901 WW Posvar Hall
230 South Bouquet Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
shertzer@pitt.edu

1

Introduction

More than half of the nations around the world have faced armed conflicts or civil wars during the
last fifty years. Recent literature has shown that civil war is linked to low per capita incomes and
slow economic growth.1 While there has been a substantial increase in scholarship on the topic
of civil war in the economic development literature, persistent challenges associated with following
survivors over time make it difficult to measure the long-term economic effects of such conflicts on
participants. Moreover, this literature emphasizes the direct negative impact of civil conflict on
physical infrastructure, health, or human capital accumulation rather than the negative impact on
a community’s social fabric.2 These effects are nevertheless important to study because ideological
divisions between victors and the defeated may lead to a lack of economic integration, even after
hostilities have ceased. The lingering social consequences of civil conflict may be particularly acute
in settings where opposing groups live in close physical proximity to one another.
In this paper, we investigate the economic impact of social frictions generated by civil conflict.
In particular, we study the impact of the American Civil War on individuals from the border area
between the Union and the Confederacy, where families who would ultimately support different
sides lived in the same communities. We focus on soldiers from the border state of Kentucky and
ask how the conflict influenced where survivors chose to live later in life. This context provides
a unique opportunity to investigate the consequences of social divisions between veterans from
opposing sides of a civil conflict because Kentucky contributed a significant number of enlistees to
both the Union and Confederate Armies.3 Moreover, soldiers from both sides of the Civil War can
be identified using Kentucky enlistment records and followed through time using federal censuses.
Economists typically model migration as an investment: individuals migrate in order to maximize their expected lifetime earnings net of mobility costs. In the case of civil conflict, animosity
between former combatants may generate migrations which would not have happened for economic
reasons in the absence of the conflict. In other words, by imposing social costs on participants,
civil conflict may lead to economically inefficient migration behavior. This type of migration is
another potential cost associated with civil war. On the other hand, conditional on a civil conflict
1

See Blattman and Miguel (2010) for a review of recent literature.
Miguel and Roland (2011) measure the effect of exposure to bombing during the Vietnam War on human capital
attainment; Bundervoet et al (2009) look at the effect of exposure to conflict in Burundi on child health; Annan
and Blattman (2010) measure the effects of being conscripted into military service in Uganda on human capital
attainment and income in later life.
3
While there was enlistment on both sides in all border states – Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky and Missouri –
enlistees were most evenly split between the Union and Confederate army in Kentucky.
2

2

having occurred, migration may reduce prolonged exposure to enemy combatants, and may thus
limit ongoing violence. In any case, post-war migration is an important vehicle through which civil
conflict may affect the later-life outcomes of participants.
We construct a novel longitudinal database of Union and Confederate recruits from Kentucky
by matching military records from the state’s regiments to the Federal Census of 1860. We then link
recruits forward to the Federal Census of 1880. This allows us to measure, as well as control for,
selection into each army on the basis of observable socioeconomic status. In addition, we are able to
observe recruits’ county of residence prior to enlistment, which allows us to infer whether recruits
were living in places where Union or Confederate status would have been socially rewarded. Thus,
we can determine whether Union recruits were “pushed” out of counties that were socially aligned
with the Confederacy and “pulled” toward counties that were socially aligned with the Union. The
longitudinal nature of our database allows us to address concerns of differential migration patterns
that were the result of differences in skill as opposed to social rewards or penalties from military
service. For example, if Union recruits were systematically less skilled, and the return to skill
is higher in counties sympathetic to the Confederacy, we should expect Union veterans to leave
Confederate-leaning counties for economic reasons alone.4 Therefore, the ability to observe ex-ante
characteristics of recruits, such as occupational attainment and wealth, is a major advantage of our
research design.
We document a series of facts about how ideology, socioeconomic characteristics, and participation in the Civil War interacted to shape the later life of Kentucky veterans. First, although Confederate enlistees tended to come from wealthier families, there was no difference in the propensity
to migrate by side. However, Union soldiers were more likely to migrate the greater the support
for the Confederacy in their home counties. These veterans settled in counties that were more
pro-Union on average. Confederate soldiers, for their part, were more likely to choose Confederateleaning counties or states in the far West or South if they moved. More than half of Kentucky
enlistees migrated out of their home county between 1860 and 1880, so the degree of resorting was
significant. We find that the drive to migrate was stronger for veterans themselves compared with
their families: relatives who did not fight were both less likely to migrate and less responsive to
the ideology of their home county. If these family members did move, however, they exhibited a
similar preference for like-minded destination counties.
Our findings about the skill selectivity of migrants also point to social rather than purely
4

See Borjas (1987) for a discussion of selective migration and the return to skill.

3

economic motives for migration among veterans. Most studies of internal migration during the
mid-19th century find that migrants were negatively selected on skill, measured by occupational
status (Ferrie 1997; Stewart 2006; Salisbury 2014). While we find some evidence that Union and
Confederate veterans who migrated out of their their pre-Civil War county were negatively selected
on family wealth, we find no evidence of negative selection on occupational attainment. Our
results suggest that the economic drivers of migration among veterans were different from other
contemporaneous episodes of internal migration.5 We also investigate the gains associated with this
ideological resorting, and we find little evidence that moving out of one’s home county led to an
increase in occupational income for either Union or Confederate veterans. While our result is more
consistent with the existing literature on short-distance moves during this period (Salisbury 2014),
these findings suggest that the economic gains from socially-motivated migration after the Civil War
may have been minimal.6 However, there may have been non-pecuniary benefits associated with
moving to an area with more ideologically similar residents such increases in emotional wellbeing
that are difficult to detect using census data.
Our findings relate to the literature in economic history on the post-Civil War outcomes of Union
Army veterans. Costa (1995, 1997) used Union army veterans to study the impact of pension income
on retirement and living arrangements, Eli (2015) studied income effects on the health of Union
Army veterans, and Salisbury (2016) investigated the impact of Union Army widows’ pensions
on remarriage. Bleakley, Cain and Ferrie (2014) study labor market discrimination among Union
army veterans. Costa and Kahn (2008) explicitly measure the impact of the war on veterans by
examining how unit cohesion affects later life outcomes and find that deserters were more likely
to leave their home towns after the war. In more recent work, Costa, Kahn, Roudiez, and Wilson
(2016) find that Union Army veterans co-located with men from their former companies. Given
this literature, an advantage of our paper is that we are able to study the migration behavior of
both Union and Confederate Army veterans. Union and Confederate men both preferred to live in
like-minded communities.
5
Long and Siu (2016) study migration prompted by a natural disaster – the 1930s Dust Bowl – and also find little
evidence that migrants were selected on skill.
6
Most studies of historical migration to or within the United States find evidence of large economic gains; however,
these are rarely expressed in terms of occupational attainment alone. Rather, they embed gains migrants experience
by moving to areas with higher average wages (or land availability in the case of the frontier). For instance, frontier
migration during the mid to late 19th century was associated with significant wealth accumulation (Ferrie 1997;
Stewart 2006). Similarly, pre-WWI Norwegian immigration to the United States (Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson
2012) and pre-WWII black migration from the American South (Collins and Wanamaker 2014) were associated with
wage gains of 55 to 70 log points, respectively. Our findings are not strictly comparable to these studies; however,
they are suggestive that the economic gains from migrating out of Kentucky after the Civil War were not large.

4

2

Historical Background

The Civil War began on April 12, 1861 when Confederate ships attacked the Union Army at Fort
Sumter, South Carolina and ended on April 9, 1865 when Robert E. Lee surrendered at Appomattox
Courthouse in Virginia. Approximately 2.2 million men served on the side of the Union (North)
and 1.1 million men served for the Confederacy (South). Kentucky was one of four “border states,”
or slave-owning states that did not secede from the Union; Missouri, Maryland, and Delaware were
the others. In this section, we provide historical background on Kentucky’s role in the Civil War,
as well as what is known about the post-war experiences of Civil War veterans.
In general, the literature on the economic consequences of the Civil War emphasizes the experience of the southern U.S. Much less is written about the consequences of the war in border regions,
where individual communities contributed troops to both sides. In the border states, the “civil”
nature of the Civil War is most apparent. This paper contributes to the historical literature on the
American Civil War by offering new insight into the experience of border areas.

2.1

Kentucky during the War

During the Civil War, Kentucky – a border and slave state – did not secede from the Union.
As in other border states, pro-Confederate and pro-Union supporters lived alongside each other
(both Union President Abraham Lincoln and Confederate President Jefferson Davis were born in
Kentucky). Tobacco, whiskey, snuff and flour produced in Kentucky were exported to the South and
Europe via the Ohio and Mississippi rivers and to the North by rail. Therefore, Kentucky’s economy
relied on markets in the Union and the Confederacy. In addition, though most Kentuckians owned
no slaves, a share of them were heavily involved in the profitable export of slaves to the Deep South.
In general, antebellum Kentucky was solidly proslavery but decidedly more moderate than
most states in the Deep South. This was common among border states, where all governors elected
during the late 1850s were proslavery Democrats (Phillips 2013, p 5). At the same time, as Astor
(2012, p 9) argues, Kentuckians and other border residents “rarely viewed the national debates
over slavery as irreconcilable,” due to social ties with the Midwest and the frequency with which
free wage labor and hired slave labor interacted in factories and farms.7 This relative moderation is
7
Astor (2012) notes that most Kentucky slaveholders owned fewer saves than their counterparts in the Deep South.
It was common practice to “hire out” slaves to factories, or to hemp or tobacco plantations, during harvest season.
As such, the institution of slavery differed in many respects in the border region compared to the South. Astor (2012)
argues that this encourage the Kentucky electorate to believe that “northern” and “southern” modes of production
could easily exist side by side, leading to a political culture that split the difference between North and South.

5

clear from Kentucky’s behavior in the 1860 presidential election, in which the westward expansion
of slavery was a major campaign issue. While northern states voted overwhelmingly in favor of
Abraham Lincoln’s Republicans, who explicitly favored banning slavery in all U.S. territories, and
southern states voted overwhelmingly in favor of John C. Breckenridge’s Southern Democrats, who
explicitly favored the protection of slavery in the territories, Kentucky voted in favor of John Bell,
a moderate with respect to slavery. Bell headed the Constitutional Union party, which consisted
largely of moderate ex-Whigs who found the Republican party too “radical.” His party’s platform
avoided the question of slavery in the territories altogether. Bell carried 60 of Kentucky’s 110
counties, and Breckenridge placed second, carrying 43 counties (Harrison 1975, p. 4).
While Kentucky considered the possibility of secession, most Kentuckians were “Conservative
Unionists” (Astor 2012; Phillips 2013). It was not the case that all slaveowners wished to secede
while all non-slaveowners wished to remain in the Union: many Kentucky slaveholders felt that
their interests were better served within the Union than outside it. This desire was likely due
to the fact that Kentucky shared its northern border with free states, and Kentucky slaveholders
were concerned about relinquishing the protections they currently enjoyed under the Fugitive Slave
Act. As prominent Kentucky attorney Joseph Holt argued, if Kentucky were to secede, it would
“virtually have Canada brought to her door, denying the state’s slaveholders legal protections to
prevent enslaved people from fleeing northward to freedom” (quoted in Phillips 2013, p 12).
Kentucky initially tried to remain neutral; this proved impossible when the Confederate army
invaded in the fall of 1861 and federal troops subsequently occupied the state. While the majority
of Kentuckians initially favored remaining in the Union, public opinion changed over the course
of the war. Many Conservative Unionists objected to Lincoln’s troop call-up and the behavior of
occupying federal troops in their state; even more objected to the Emancipation Proclamation and
subsequent enlistment of former slaves in the Union Army. At the same time, many Kentuckians
felt alienated by Confederate raids during 1862 and 1863 (Astor 2012; Harrison 1975). While, as
Astor (2012) argues, few Kentuckians formally switched allegiance after early 1862, public opinion
had become decidedly anti-Lincoln by the end of the war. Kentucky was one of the few states not
to vote for Lincoln in the 1864 presidential election. In the end, approximately 100,000 Kentuckians
served for the Union side, while 30-40,000 served on the Confederate side (Phillips 2013; Marshall
2010). Nonetheless, many whites of military age did not enlist – 187,000 by one estimate – which
stands as further evidence of the state’s ambivalence (Phillips 2013).

6

3

Data

Our dataset consists of linked military and census records. In this section, we describe the data
from each source and the procedure by which records were linked.

3.1

Military Records

We begin with a collection of military records from the genealogical website fold3.com (U.S. War
Department, 1890-1912). These data consist of indexes to compiled service records, which include
muster rolls and other documents collected from the War Department and the Treasury Department. These records exist for both Union and Confederate soldiers; however, they are likely more
complete for Union soldiers. The indexes to these record collections contain the recruit’s regiment,
full name, and (in some cases) age at enlistment. We extracted these indexes in their entirety for
the state of Kentucky, with 107,589 entries on the Union side and 50,304 entries on the Confederate
side.
Table 1 contains an illustration of the nature of the data extracted from these indexes. An
obvious complication with using these indexes is that it is not clear when multiple entries refer to
the same person. The first three entries in Table 1 are men from the 3rd Union Cavalry named
John Ewbanks, John Ubanks, and John Ebanks, respectively. The 4th entry is a man from the
55th Union Infantry, who is also named John Ewbanks. These names are all phonetic variants of
one another, and could easily refer to the same person. Soldiers frequently re-enlisted in multiple
units, and if their names were spelled differently on different muster rolls or were duplicated for
some other reason, they could easily appear in this index multiple times.
This poses a challenge for establishing the coverage of these records, or the fraction of all
enlistees who appear in the indexes. In particular, estimating the coverage of these indexes will
depend on assumptions that we make about which records are duplicates. In the top panel of Table
1, we illustrate the least conservative grouping, in which we assume that phonetically identical
names from the same regiment are the same person. In the example in Table 1, this reduces the
number of unique soldiers from 10 to 7. In the entire sample, this reduces the number of unique
soldiers to 78,257 Union and 37,917 Confederate, for a total of 116,174 recruits from Kentucky
(see panel A of Table 2 for relevant statistics).8 Another possibility is to assume that all Union or
Confederate soldiers with phonetically identical names are the same person, as illustrated in panel
8

These groupings are formed by creating NYIIS codes for both first and last names and grouping by these codes.
When only first initials are given, they are grouped with full first names containing the same first initial.

7

B of Table 1; this reduces the number of soldiers in Table 1 to 5, and it reduces the number of
records in the complete sample to 64,309 (44,976 Union and 19,333 Confederate). How do these
sample sizes compare with the likely number of military recruits from Kentucky? An estimated
90,000 to 100,000 Kentuckians enlisted on the Union side, while only 30,000 to 40,000 enlisted
on the Confederate side (Astor 2012; Marshall 2010). Thus, the most conservative estimate of
the number of recruits included in these records implies a coverage rate of around 50%. This is,
however, a conservative lower bound: it is likely that multiple men with similar names did enlist,
implying a much higher coverage rate of up to 100%.9
The military indexes give us very little information other than the name of the recruit and the
side on which he enlisted. Therefore, we need to match these indexes to other records in order to
characterize these enlistees and their outcomes. A challenge is that the only information we can
use to match military indexes to other records is first and last name. Although many enlistment
records contain the recruit’s age at enlistment, this is substantially more common in Union records:
more than 80% of Union records contain the recruit’s age at enlistment, while only about 15%
of Confederate records contain this information. Accordingly, we cannot use age at enlistment
to match records without introducing severe systematic differences in the accuracy of matches by
Union or Confederate status. As we discuss in detail in Appendix A, it is imperative that we avoid
introducing linkage error that is correlated with military side; this will severely impede our ability
to draw inferences about the impact of military side on post-war outcomes.
An additional complication is that we cannot be sure how many individuals are covered by
each unique name entry. Importantly, some names appear on both Union and Confederate rosters.
To construct a list of names to match to census records, we group names by phonetic first and
last name, defined using NYIIS codes (Atack and Bateman 1992), and military side, i.e. Union
or Confederate. We restrict the sample to phonetic name groups that are uniquely identifiable as
Union or Confederate, and we treat each phonetic group as a single individual. We also omit name
groups that only include first initials, as we do not have sufficient information from these initials
to accurately link our observations to other records.10 As an example, see panel C of Table 1, in
9

The 50% figure is especially conservative because NYIIS codes tend to be over-inclusive, defining some names as
“phonetically identical” when they are clearly not. For example, “John” and “James” have the same NYIIS code.
On the other hand, NYIIS codes will usually fail to identify identical names with typing or transcription errors.
10
This restriction reduces the number of Confederate recruits relative to Union recruits, since almost 20% of
Confederate records list only a first initial, while very few Union recruits list only a first initial. This can be seen
in panel A of Table 2. We find that, in our Confederate sample of names, the regiment that the soldier enlisted
in explains about 12% of the variation in whether or not a full first name is reported, and we do not find evidence
that the socioeconomic status of the soldier’s surname is related to the probability of reporting a full first name. We
measure the socioeconomic status of a surname as the mean family wealth and occupational income among families

8

which only two of the five unique phonetic name groups listed would be included in our sample.
As seen in panel A of Table 2, this leaves us with 49,180 unique phonetic name groups to match,
38,318 of which are Union and 10,862 of which are Confederate.
We select this method of constructing our database with specific empirical questions in mind.
We are interested in comparing the ex ante characteristics and post-war outcomes of Union and
Confederate soldiers. To do so, we first identify a sample of Union and Confederate recruits-tobe in 1860. When constructing this sample, our dual goals are the following: (i) maximize the
accuracy of the Union or Confederate status assigned to individuals in our sample; (ii) minimize
differences in the accuracy of Union and Confederate status. Goal (i) reduces attenuation bias in
our estimates; goal (ii) reduces bias of unknown direction (see Appendix A for details). Selecting
a sample of names whose phonetic variants do not appear on both sides will increase the accuracy
of our assignment of Union or Confederate status. Because Confederate records are more likely to
contain only first initials as compared to Union records, omitting records with first initials avoids
introducing systematic differences in the accuracy of Union and Confederate status. While we
believe these methodological choices best enable clean comparisons between Union and Confederate
recruits, they introduce certain issues which are worth mentioning. Specifically, they cause people
with uncommon names to be overrepresented, and they reduce the size of the Confederate sample.11

3.2

Matches to 1860 census

We match our sample of uniquely Union and Confederate names to the Census of 1860 using
records available from ancestry.com via the NBER. Again, our challenge is that the only linkable
information we have in our military data is the soldier’s name. So, to facilitate matching to the
census, we impose certain restrictions on our target sample of census records. First, because our
sample of recruits comes from regiments of white males, we limit our search to white males in the
census. A sample of Union Army veterans indicates that 99% of Union recruits were born between
1817 and 1847 (Fogel 2000). Assuming a similar age range in the Confederate army, and allowing
for some error in the reporting of ages, we further restrict our search of the 1860 census to men
born between 1815 and 1850. Finally, we restrict the geographic area in which we search for these
with this surname in Kentucky in 1850, using the 1850 full count census data from the North Atlantic Population
Project (Ruggles et al 2010). As such, we believe that reporting only a first initial reflects record keeping practices
of individual regiments or companies rather than systematic socioeconomic differences. As with age at enlistment,
the fact that the availability of full first names differs by military side precludes using records with only first initials
in our sample.
11
We do not find economically significant differences between Kentuckians with common and uncommon names.

9

soldiers.
We impose these restrictions on our target sample in order to maximize our linkage rate while
minimizing linkage error. An unrestricted match to the 1860 census based on name alone would
yield many potential matches, most of which would be incorrect. Using information about the
prior probability that recruits have other characteristics can improve the accuracy of our matches.
Take, for example, residential location. Given that our recruits enlisted in Kentucky regiments, it
is overwhelmingly likely that they resided in Kentucky at the time of enlistment, which occurred
between 1861 and 1865. Companies were typically organized locally, and regiments were named
after the state that enlistees were from. So, we believe it is fair to assume that recruits were more
likely to reside in Kentucky in 1860 than elsewhere; as such, matches residing in Kentucky are more
likely to be correct than matches residing elsewhere. We perform two matching procedures: one in
which we match military records to white men ages 10-45 residing in Kentucky (275,999 records in
target sample), and one in which we match our military records to white men ages 10-45 residing in
states surrounding Kentucky (3,610,482 records in target sample).12 We match names by searching
for exact phonetic first name and surname matches between the military records and the target
census sample, then by comparing the similarity of the first and last names using the Jaro-Winkler
algorithm (Ruggles et al 2010). We discard matches with a string similarity score of less than 0.9.13
Panel B of Table 2 contains information on matching rates using both approaches. Not surprisingly, matching to an expanded geographic area increases the fraction of military records matched
to at least one census record, from around 43% to 66%. However, it decreases the fraction of
records that are matched uniquely to the target sample, from around 25% to 18%. Moreover, it
appears that the matches made exclusively to Kentucky are more accurate. Recall that we have
information on age at enlistment for most of the Union recruits in our sample. While we do not
perform matches to the census using this information, we can use it to check the accuracy of our
results. Specifically, for individuals with an age of enlistment recorded on their military record, we
can estimate
Agemil = β0 + β1 Age1860 + u
12

These states are: Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Virginia, Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, North Carolina, and South Carolina.
13
Approximately 75% of phonetic name groups contain a single entry. When a phonetic group contains multiple
(differently spelled) entries, we select one entry to compare with potentially matched records in the 1860 census using
the Jaro-Winkler algorithm. We use the following rule to select this entry: (i) we select the entry with information on
age at enlistment, which will facilitate our test of linkage accuracy (described below); (ii) if there are zero or multiple
entries with data on age at enlistment, we select the most frequently occurring spelling in the phonetic group; (iii) if
multiple spelling occur with equal frequency, we select one at random.

10

If a match is correct, the age in the military record (Agemil ) should be more or less identical to
the age in the census record (Age1860 ). So, a sample of correct matches should yield an estimated
intercept close to zero and a slope close to one. In the bottom panel of Table 3, we estimate this
regression equation under two specifications: (i) using only records that are uniquely matched to
the 1860 census; and (ii) using all matched records, weighting multiple matches by 1/N , where
N is the number of census records that match the military record in question. We estimate these
specifications for three samples: (i) a sample matched to all states surrounding Kentucky; (ii) a
sample matched to Kentucky only; (iii) and a sample matched to Missouri only as a placebo test.
The first four columns of panel C of Table 2 indicate that using unique matches between military
records and the 1860 census introduces less error than using weighted multiple matches. And, these
results indicate that matching to Kentucky is more accurate than matching to Kentucky and all
states bordering Kentucky. Restricting the target sample to Kentucky will cause us to miss (or
mis-match) recruits who migrated to Kentucky after 1860. However, it appears that expanding the
target sample introduces enough false positives that we are better off with the restriction. The last
two columns of the table indicate that matches to Missouri alone are extremely inaccurate, which
gives us further confidence that our matches to Kentucky are of a high quality.14
The 1860 Census allows us to observe each man’s place of residence, the composition of his
family, the occupation and literacy status of each family member, and the value of the family’s
real and personal property. We assign 1950 occupational codes to each individual’s occupation
(Ruggles et al 2010), and we assign a value of occupational income based on the 1900 occupational
wage distribution with an imputed wage for farmers (Preston and Haines 1991; Abramitzky et al
2012; Olivetti and Paserman 2015; Salisbury 2014). Because some recruits are children in 1860, we
assign each individual the socioeconomic indicator (occupational income or wealth) of the head of
the individual’s household.

3.3

Matches to 1880 census

We match our recruits from the 1860 census (12,440 in total) to the 1880 100% census sample
(NAPP). Here, we make use of the demographic information we obtain from the 1860 census in
14

This “check” on the accuracy of our matches is necessarily driven by Union recruits, as they comprise the
overwhelming majority of records with age information. However, we have no reason to believe that Confederate
recruits were less likely to come from Kentucky than Union recruits. When we match to all states surrounding
Kentucky, we end up finding a greater fraction of Confederate matches in Kentucky than Union matches: 30% of our
Confederate matches reside in Kentucky, whereas 26.5% of our Union matches live in Kentucky. So, we are confident
that restricting our target sample to Kentucky improves match accuracy overall.

11

order to locate recruits in 1880. We search the entire 1880 census for records that exactly match our
1860 census records on the following dimensions: birth place, phonetic first and last name codes,
sex, and race. We restrict birth year in the 1880 census to be no more than three years before
or after birth year in the 1860 census. Finally, we discard matches in which the index measuring
the similarity of names across census records (using the Jaro-Winkler algorithm) is less than 0.9.
These procedures approximately follow Ruggles et al (2010). Using this procedure, we are able to
uniquely match 30% of our Union soldiers and 29% of our Confederate soldiers. This match rate
is comparable to other studies that perform automated record linkages (Ferrie 1996; Ruggles et al
2010; Abramitzky et al 2012).15
In addition to linking our sample of recruits to the Census of 1880, we link male relatives of
recruits who are under the age of 45 in 1860. Male relatives are defined as males who are living
in the same household as an individual linked to a military record, but who are not themselves
linked to a military record. This does not necessarily mean that these relatives are civilians; only
that they are more likely to be civilians than those linked to a military record. We link these men
using an identical procedure to that used to link soldiers to 1880. We are able to identify 29,747
male relatives of recruits in the 1860 census, and we link 17% of these to the census of 1880 (the
rate is similar for relatives of Union and Confederate soldiers). This linkage rate is substantially
lower than the linkage rate among soldiers. This can be explained by the fact that soldiers in our
database have uncommon names by construction, so very few records are discarded because they
can be linked to multiple records in the 1880 census.
15
There is a growing body of research into record linkage using machine learning (Feigenbaum 2016; Bailey et al
2016). The primary benefit of this approach is that allows for automated comparisons between alphabetic strings
that more closely resemble comparisons made by the human eye; the “rule” for identifying matching strings can
be more complex. Our rule for identifying matching strings – matching NYIIS codes and a Jaro-Winkler string
similarity score of 0.9 or higher – is substantially less costly but also coarser. This may increase our error rate;
however, because we are applying this linking algorithm to everyone in our sample, it should not introduce linkage
error in a way that is correlated with military side. Thus, our relatively coarse string comparison rule may attenuate
our estimates of the impact of military side on post-war outcomes; however, it should not affect the direction of our
estimates (see Appendix A for proof). As our primary goal is to establish the direction of these effects, we maintain
that our approach is appropriate. We also note that our likely error rate compares favorably with the IPUMS linked
1860-1880 sample (Ruggles et al 2010; this links the 1860 1% sample to the 1880 full count census). We make this
inference by comparing the county out-migration rate in both samples: while using locational information to form
links between censuses is inappropriate, linkage error should increase the measured migration rate, as an incorrectly
linked individual is very unlikely to reside in the same county in both census years. The IPUMS linked sample of
males shows a county out-migration rate of approximately 45% for Kentucky, while our data shows a migration rate
of approximately 50%.

12

4

Empirical Approach

We are interested in understanding how service in the military affected locational choices after the
Civil War. We typically model migration as an investment which maximizes a person’s expected
lifetime earnings. Importantly, we usually think of migration as a welfare maximizing event: if
people migrate in response to regional wage differentials, they are effectively sorting themselves
into regions where labor is relatively productive. Moreover, if people migrate to regions that
complement their individual skill profiles, as much of the existing research on migrant selection
contends, they are sorting into the regions in which they are individually most productive. In
the case of civil conflict, migration may occur for other reasons. In particular, animosity among
combatants may generate migrations which would never have happened for economic reasons in
the absence of the conflict.
Our aim with this paper is to measure the degree to which conflict among recruits from opposing
sides generated a migration response after the Civil War. To fix ideas, suppose a person i’s earnings
in county c (Yic ) depend on both individual ability (Aic ) and “social capital” (Sic ), both of which
are person and location specific. A person will choose to locate in the county that maximizes
Y (Aic , Sic ) net of migration costs; if this is the person’s home county, he will choose not to migrate.
Our hypothesis is that the Civil War affected Sic . In particular, in counties more sympathetic to the
Union, Sic should have fallen for Confederate recruits and risen for Union recruits; in counties more
sympathetic to the Confederacy, Sic should have fallen for Union recruits and risen for Confederate
recruits. This will affect observed migration behavior in two key ways: (1) Recruits who have
experienced a reduction in Sic in their home county should be more likely to migrate; (2) Migrant
recruits should be more likely to select a destination in which Sic has increased for recruits from
their side.
We use two county-level measures to infer relative “social capital” to Union and Confederate
recruits after the war. First, we use the share of recruits we identify in a given county that enlisted
in the Confederate army. Second, we use the county’s share of the presidential vote going to John
C. Breckenridge – the southern Democratic candidate – in the 1860 election. As Breckenridge
carried all southern states in the 1860 presidential election – and explicitly supported the westward
expansion of slavery – counties that favored Breckenridge can be presumed to be more aligned with
the South than the North. As we will show in the next section, this metric is a strong predictor of
military side. Conditional on other characteristics, a 10 percentage point increase in vote share to

13

Breckenridge generates a 6 percentage point increase in the probability of serving in the Confederate
army. This result is significant at the 1 percent level. A county’s Confederate enlistment share
is perhaps the most obvious measure of that county’s sympathy with the Confederacy. However,
because we measure this using our sample of soldiers linked to the 1860 census, it is likely measured
with error. In particular, we cannot be sure that we are sampling Union and Confederate soldiers
from every county at the same rate. Moreover, this measure embeds a certain amount of linkage
error. As an indicator of public opinion, Breckenridge vote share is likely measured with less error.
However, the link between voting behavior and Confederate sympathy may be more attenuated
than the link between Confederate enlistment and Confederate sympathy. As neither measure is
perfect, we present results using both.16
We test whether the propensity to leave a county depends differently on these indicators for
Union and Confederate recruits. We also test whether migrants from Union and Confederate sides
sorted differentially into places more sympathetic to the South, measured as Confederate enlistment
share and Breckenridge vote share in 1860 for intrastate migrants, and region of residence in 1880
for interstate migrants. Lastly, we explore differences in the selection of migrants, as well as the
return to migration, by military side.

4.1

Migration Propensity

To determine whether Union recruits were more likely to leave more “Confederate” counties, we
estimate the following equation using OLS:
Mij,1880 = α + β1 Uij + β2 Sj,1860 + β3 Uij × Sj,1860 + γXi,1860 + δj + uij

(1)

Here, Mij is an indicator equal to one if person i from county j had migrated by 1880; Uij is equal
to 1 if this person served in the Union army; Sj,1860 is a measure of sympathy for the Confederacy
in county j in 1860; Xi,1860 is a matrix of individual characteristics observed in 1860, including age
and birthplace fixed effects; δj is an 1860 county fixed effect. We expect to find β3 > 0.
A complication with this approach is that Union and Confederate recruits are drawn from
systematically different parts of the skill distribution: Confederate recruits are more skilled on
16

The other strong predictor is the fraction of a county’s population that is enslaved: a 10 percentage point increase
in the fraction enslaved generates a 6.5 percentage point increase in the probability of joining the Confederate army.
However, we do not use this as one of our baseline measures of Confederate sympathy because it is very clearly linked
to the direct economic impact of the Civil War, which may differ by military side if Confederate recruits are more
likely to own slaves in slaveholding counties than Union recruits. This paper emphasizes social (rather than direct
economic) determinants of migration.

14

average. Thus, we may find that Union recruits are more likely to leave “Confederate” counties if
these counties are more complementary to skilled individuals (Borjas 1987). In other words, differences in migration propensities may work through differences in individual skill and not differences
in social capital. Because we observe indicators of recruits’ socioeconomic status in 1860 – namely,
occupation (or occupation of the household head in the case of children) and family wealth – we
can include interactions between ex ante socioeconomic status and our indicator of social alignment
with the Confederacy. If β3 is robust to the inclusion of these controls, then selection on skill is
unlikely to explain differential migration behavior by military side.
It is also possible that Union and Confederate recruits are differently selected on unobservable
skill, so controlling for 1860 socioeconomic status is not sufficient to show that differential migration
behavior is driven by social capital and not skill. One way to address this problem is to use recruits’
family members to control for systematic unobserved skill differences by military side. In addition
to our sample of recruits, we link male family members of recruits, who are under the age of 45,
to the Census of 1880. We then estimate the difference in the difference between a soldier’s and a
related civilian’s migration propensity by military side. Specifically, we estimate the following:
Mijk,1880 = α + β1 Vijk + β2 Vijk × U Fjk + β3 Sj,1860 + β4 U Fjk × Sj,1860 + β5 Vijk × Sj,1860 +

(2)

+β6 Vijk × U Fjk × Sj,1860 + γXi,1860 + δj + φk + uijk
Variables are generally defined as above, with i indexing individuals, j indexing county of origin,
and k indexing families. The variable Vijk is equal to one if person i from county j and family k is
a veteran and zero if this person is a civilian family member. The indicator U Fjk is equal to one
if family k from county j is a “union family” and zero otherwise. The parameter φk is a family
fixed effect. For Confederate civilians, the marginal effect of Sj,1860 on the probability of migrating
is β3 ; for Confederate veterans, this marginal effect is β3 + β5 ; for Union civilians, this marginal
effect is β3 + β4 ; and for Union veterans this marginal effect is β3 + β4 + β5 + β6 . The parameter we
are most interested in is β6 : if β6 > 0, this means that Union soldiers respond more to Sj,1860 than
their family members, and by a greater margin than Confederate soldiers relative to their family
members. The family fixed effect ensures that between-family variation in skill is not driving the
result.
We note that, while β6 > 0 is evidence that skill is not the sole driver of differential migration
behavior among Union and Confederate veterans, β6 = 0 is not sufficient to prove that it is.
If soldiers and soldiers’ family members are treated similarly after the war, then civilian family
15

members should be equally encouraged to leave counties hostile to their side. Thus, even if social
forces (and not skill) drive migration, we could observe that β5 = β6 = 0. As such, in addition
to arguing that social forces guide migration decisions, β6 > 0 informs us about the way in which
these social forces work. In particular, these forces are more powerful for combatants than noncombatants. It is also important to note that the military status of recruits’ family members
is measured with a substantial amount of error. We define “civilian” family members as family
members who are not linked to a military record. This does not necessarily mean that these family
members did not fight, only that they are less likely to have fought than those linked to a military
record. This matching error will tend to attenuate these estimates.

4.2

Migration Destination

To determine whether Union recruits were more likely to sort into less “Confederate” counties, we
estimate the following, using a sample of internal migrants within Kentucky:
Sil,1860 = α + βUijl + γXi,1860 + δj + uij

(3)

Here, Sil,1860 is a measure of social alignment with the Confederacy in 1860 in county l, where
person i is residing in 1880; and Uijl is an indicator equal to one if person i who migrated from
county j to county l between 1860 and 1880 served in the Union army. The remaining variables
are defined as above. Here, we expect to find β < 0. We also estimate a multinomial logit model of
residence in each region in 1880 on a sample of migrants. We predict that enlistees on the Union
side should be more likely to move north than enlistees on the Confederate side.17
This analysis is again complicated by systematic differences in skill between Union and Confederate recruits. Because we are able to control for ex ante occupational attainment and family
wealth, we can rule out the hypothesis that differences in locational choices are entirely driven
by observable skill. We can also use non-veteran family members to control for family-specific
unobservable skill. One additional concern is that Union veterans were eligible to acquire land
under the Homestead Act of 1862, while Confederate veterans were excluded until 1867. So, Union
veterans may have disproportionately migrated to areas with better land, since they had the first
opportunity to do so. To argue that the Homestead Act does not explain our regional location
17

Phillips (2013, pp 108-109) notes that the West was a popular destination for ex-Confederates from border states,
citing several well-known and high ranking Confederates from the region who “ chose expatriation – Cuba, Mexico,
Brazil, or Canada – or headed for the Far West rather than face postwar retributive violence or trial for treason in
their home states.”

16

results, we control for 1880 farm value per acre and the rate of farm ownership, which are available
at the county level in 1880. If we still estimate a significant β, then regional locational differences
cannot be explained by regional differences in land quality.

4.3

Differences in Migrant Selection and Returns

In addition to establishing that Civil War veterans migrated due to social pressure, we investigate
who chose (or was able) to migrate due to social pressure. In particular, we estimate the following
regression separately for Union and Confederate veterans:
Mij,1880 = α + β1 Yi,1860 + β2 Yi,1860 × Sj,1860 + γXi,1860 + δj + uij

(4)

Here, Yi denotes a measure of socioeconomic status in 1860 (log occupational earnings or log family
wealth), and other variables are defined as above. In equation (3), the parameter β2 captures the
selectivity of migrants from counties with higher S. In particular, if β2 > 0, then migrants from
counties with larger S are more positively selected than migrants from counties with lower S. If
β2,U nion > β2,Conf ed. , then Union migrants from counties more aligned with the Confederacy are
more positively selected than Confederate migrants from these counties. This may indicate that
S affects the earnings of skilled individuals more than the earnings of unskilled individuals. For
instance, occupations higher in the skill distribution – such as managers and officials – may benefit
more from social capital than occupations that are lower in the skill distribution. This finding is
also consistent with the notion that higher SES individuals are better able to absorb the economic
costs associated with migrating for social reasons.
Finally, we consider how military side affects the return to migration, in terms of occupational
income.18 We are interested in the overall return to migration, the difference in the returns of Union
and Confederate veterans, and heterogeneity in this difference by county of origin. We estimate
the following separately for Union and Confederate veterans:
Yij,1880 = α + β1 Mij,1880 + β2 Mij,1880 × Sj,1860 + γXi,1860 + δj + uij
18

(5)

Here, we use the 1900 occupational wage distribution with an imputed wage for farmers, assigned to 1950
occupational codes (Preston and Haines 1991; Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson 2012; Olivetti and Paserman 2015;
Salisbury 2014). Occupational attainment is the only measure of socioeconomic status available in the 1880 census.
By using a national occupational income measure, we are abstracting away from migration returns experienced by
moving to a place with a higher wage in a given occupation.

17

If β2,U nion > β2,Conf ed. , then Union migrants from Confederate-leaning counties experience a larger
return to migration than Confederate migrants from Confederate-leaning counties.
Our predictions for this final test are ambiguous. If enlistees migrate for purely social reasons,
then it is not clear that they should realize an economic return to migration. Predictions about heterogeneity in the return to migration by military side and county of origin are similarly ambiguous.
On the one hand, if men living in unsympathetic counties are inclined to migrate for social rather
than economic reasons, we may see more migrants with lower potential returns from these counties:
this should tend to make β2,U nion < β2,Conf ed. On the other hand, if migrants from unsympathetic
counties are positively selected on unobservable skill, this will tend to make β2,U nion > β2,Conf ed .

5

Results

We present preliminary results using our sample of soldiers’ names that are matched uniquely to
Kentucky in 1860 (12,440 individuals). We are able to uniquely match 3,693 of these men to the
Census of 1880, in addition to 5,064 male family members (age 45 or younger) of our 12,440 soldiers
in 1860. We use these samples in the results that follow.

5.1

Characteristics of Soldiers in 1860

Panel A of Figure 1 illustrates the fraction of recruits linked to each county that enlisted on the
Confederate side. There are relatively more Union recruits in coal-producing areas of the state,
specifically in the lower portion of the eastern mountains and coalfields, and in the western coalfields.
There are relatively more Confederate enlistees from the northeastern agricultural (“Bluegrass”)
region and around the Mississippi Plateau in the southwest portion of the state, which is also an
agricultural region. There is also a concentration of Confederates in the eastern part of the state
along the border with Virginia. In panels B and C of Figure 1, we plot the share of the vote in
the 1860 presidential election to John C. Breckenridge and the fraction of the population that was
enslaved in 1860, respectively. It is clear from this figure that Confederate enlistment is positively
correlated with both of these characteristics.
In Table 3, we compare average characteristics of Union and Confederate soldiers. The first
column contains mean values of each variable for Union soldiers, the second column contains means
for Confederates, and the third column contains means for all white men in Kentucky between the
ages of 10 and 45. The fourth column contains results from an OLS regression of an indicator for

18

Union status on all characteristics together. As a group, soldiers were younger and less likely to
be married than the general population, which is not surprising. They were also more likely to be
native to Kentucky or native to the United States.
Comparing Union and Confederate soldiers, a number of differences are apparent. On average,
Union soldiers were older, more likely to be married, and less likely to live with a parent. Table 3
also indicates large differences in nativity. Confederate enlistees were much more likely to be born
in Kentucky or in the South generally. Union soldiers were much more likely to be born in the
Northeast, Midwest, or abroad.
Evidence also points to differential selection of Confederate soldiers on socioeconomic characteristics. Confederate soldiers systematically came from counties with more slaves, greater value of
property per family, and more people employed in agriculture. While we do not have data on the
individual wealth of everyone in our sample, we find that Confederate soldiers typically had surnames that were associated with greater value of real estate and more white collar employment in
1850.19 These findings are consistent with men who had greater ties to slavery being more likely to
join the Confederate army. We also find significant differences in voting patterns. Men who joined
the Confederate army tended to live in counties with a greater vote share going to the Democratic
Party in the 1860 presidential election. Conversely, Union soldiers came from counties more likely
to vote for John Bell, an alternative candidate from the Constitutional Union party who did not
explicitly favor the westward expansion of slavery.

5.2

Outcomes for Soldiers in 1880

Table 4 contains additional summary statistics for our sample of soldiers who are matched to the
1880 census. This table includes average outcomes in 1880, as well as average 1860 characteristics
that we have only collected for this sample. These are largely consistent with Table 3 in that they
point to Confederate recruits being of higher socioeconomic status ex ante. The table also indicates
systematic differences in locational outcomes for Union and Confederate soldiers. We discuss these
differences in detail below.
19

Our 1860 full count data does not contain information on wealth or occupation. We enter this information by
hand from census manuscripts for the 3,693 men who we link between 1860 and 1880; however, we do not have this
information for all 12,440 recruits linked to 1860. To infer socioeconomic status for these men, we calculate the mean
value of real estate wealth, as well as the fraction in each occupational class, among male household heads with a
particular surname in Kentucky in 1850, and we link this information with our sample of recruits. We use the 1850
full count data from NAPP (Ruggles et al 2010), which contains information on real estate wealth and occupation.

19

5.2.1

Migration Propensity

From Table 4, we can see that roughly 70 percent of our sample still resided in Kentucky as of
1880; however, approximately 50 percent of our sample had moved between counties by 1880. This
is true of both Union and Confederate veterans. As can be seen in column (1) of Table 5, Union
soldiers were no more or less likely to migrate than Confederate soldiers. However, migrants appear
to be negatively selected from the overall population of Kentucky soldiers in terms of family wealth
in 1860.
In Table 5, we estimate the impact of the home county Confederate enlistment share (panel
A) and Breckenridge vote share (panel B) on the propensity to migrate among Union and Confederate recruits. The key variable is the interaction between Union soldier and our indicator of
alignment with the South: in column (2) of panel A, the coefficient can be interpreted to mean
that the marginal effect of Confederate enlistment share on the probability of migrating is 0.419
(0.145) greater for Union soldiers than Confederate soldiers. Our results are very similar when we
use Breckenridge vote share to instead measure social alignment with the Confederacy. To address
concerns that this differential is driven by county-level differences in the return to skill, we include
log family wealth and the household head’s log occupational income in 1860 and interactions between these variables and Confederate measures in column (3). The inclusion of these variables
has a moderate impact on our results: the coefficient on the interaction between Union soldier and
social alignment with the Confederacy decreases somewhat, and it is not quite significant at the
10 percent level when we use Breckenridge vote share. However, we find little clear evidence that
migrants from counties more sympathetic to the Confederacy are negatively selected on skill, which
is necessary for skill differences among Union and Confederate recruits to drive our results.
In columns (4) and (5), we estimate equation 2, in which we use non-recruit family members
to control for differences in unobservable skill by military side. In column (4), we omit family
fixed effects and include U Fjk as an explicit control. This specification allows us to include all
linked soldiers and family members, not just pairs of soldiers and relatives from the same family.
The necessary assumption here is that the distribution of unobservable skill is the same among
Union veterans and Union family members. Similarly, the distribution of skill must be the same
among Confederate veterans and Confederate family members. In these columns, the variable
“Union soldier” is the interaction U F × V , which appears in equation 2. The key variable is the
interaction between Union soldier and Sj,1860 : in column (5) of panel A, the interpretation is that

20

the difference in the marginal effect of Confederate enlistment share on the probability of migrating
between soldiers and civilian family members is 0.690 (0.199) higher for Union than Confederate
families. This result tells us two things: first, the different response to Confederate enlistment
share by military side cannot be explained entirely by differences in skill; second, soldiers are more
responsive to social pressure to migrate than their relatives. The results in panel B are similar,
albeit less conclusive.
Figure 2 illustrates these results graphically. In panel A, we plot the predicted probability of
migrating (based on results in column (3) of Table 5 for Union and Confederate soldiers with mean
characteristics, in a county with 5 percent Confederate enlistment share and in a county with 65
percent Confederate enlistment share, which is the maximum in our sample). The probability of a
Confederate soldier leaving a county with 5 percent Confederate enlistment share is approximately
10 percentage points higher than the probability of an otherwise identical Union soldier leaving;
however, the probability of a Confederate soldier leaving a county with 65 percent Confederate
enlistment share is almost 15 percentage points lower than the probability of Union soldier leaving.
In panel B, we illustrate the results from column (4). In a county with a 5 percent Confederate
enlistment share, Union soldiers and family members are equally likely to leave, while Confederate
soldiers are almost 10 percentage points more likely than their relatives to leave. Conversely, in
a county with a 65 percent Confederate enlistment share, Union soldiers are around 5 percentage
points more likely than their relatives to migrate, while Confederate soldiers are approximately 5
percentage points less likely to leave than their relatives.
5.2.2

Migration Destination

In Figure 3, we map the locations of Kentucky veterans who left Kentucky in 1880. There appear
to be clear locational differences: Union recruits are more likely to move north, and Confederate
recruits are more likely to move south and west. In panel A of Table 6, we estimate differences in
locational choices of migrants by military side. We estimate a multinomial logit model of region of
residence in 1880 (South, West, or Northeast, relative to the Midwest). Our explanatory variables
include an indicator for having served in the Union army, as well as other 1860 characteristics
including age, birthplace and county of residence fixed effects. We find that Union recruits were
significantly more likely to migrate to the Midwest than either the South or the West. This result
is robust to controlling for ex ante occupational attainment and family wealth (column 2), so
differences in destination region cannot be explained by differences in observable skill. This finding
21

is consistent with recruits moving to areas of the country where the social returns to their military
service are highest.20
A concern is that these results are not driven by regional differences in the social returns to
military service but by the Homestead Act of 1862. Because Confederate veterans were excluded
until 1867, they may have been excluded from acquiring the best available land, if this land was
claimed first. If the best land was in the Midwest, this mechanism could generate our results. To
address this concern, we control for two salient 1880 county characteristics: average farm value
per acre, and the ownership rate in agriculture. If differences in destination region are totally
explained by the fact that Union recruits could access better quality land, then including these
controls should wipe out any systematic regional differences in location by military side. We show
this is not the case, as can be seen in column (3). In column (4), we include non-recruit family
members to address the possibility that Union and Confederate soldiers are differently selected on
unobservable skill. Because we have very few linked soldier-relative pairs who are both migrants,
we do not implement a family fixed effects model similar to equation 2. Rather, we include U Fjk
as a control and omit the family fixed effect. The results are very similar, although the impact of
being a Union soldier on the probability of moving to the South (relative to the Midwest) is not
quite significant.
In panels B and C of Table 6, we estimate differences in destination county characteristics within
Kentucky. We take a sample of men living in Kentucky in 1880 but in a different county from their
county of residence in 1860. We regress the Confederate enlistment share (panel B) or Breckenridge
vote share (panel C) in the person’s 1880 county of residence on a Union indicator, adding the same
controls as in panel A. In columns (1)-(3), we find that Union soldiers who migrate within Kentucky
are significantly less likely to end up in a county more sympathetic to the Confederacy. In column
(4), we add non-combatant relatives, as in panel A. We find that internal Kentucky migrants from
Union families are significantly less likely to end up in Confederate-sympathizing counties than those
from Confederate families; however, there is no differential effect for soldiers relative to civilians.
This result may mean that these results are driven by systematic differences in unobservable skill
by military side; or, it may be that both soldiers and family members are equally attracted to
counties sympathetic with their families’ side. This test does not differentiate between these two
possibilities.
20
As the West was sparsely populated, migration to the West should have been associated with a smaller “penalty”
for serving on the Confederate side. We include the Northeast in the model, but the results are omitted for brevity;
there is no systematic difference in the propensity to move to the Northeast relative to the Midwest by military side.

22

5.3

Differences in Migrant Selection and Returns

In Table 7, we explore differences in the selection of migrants from the Union and Confederate side.
In panel A, we consider differences in the selection of migrants overall. We regress an indicator for
having migrated between 1860 and 1880 on measures of observable skill in 1860 separately for Union
and Confederate recruits, and we test whether or not our coefficients of interest are significantly
different for Union and Confederate recruits. We find little evidence that migrants from the Union
side were systematically differently selected than movers from the Confederate side while migrants
from both sides were negatively selected on family wealth in 1860.
In panels B and C, we estimate equation 4. Here, we consider whether Union recruits from
more “Confederate” counties were differently selected than Confederate recruits from “Confederate”
counties in terms of ex ante observable skill (measured as the household head’s log occupational
income in 1860 and log family wealth in 1860). We find evidence consistent with positive selection:
Union migrants from “Confederate” counties are more positively selected than Confederate migrants
from “Confederate” counties. While this difference is not significant when we measure alignment
with the Confederacy using the Confederate enlistment share, it is significant at the 10 percent
level when we use Breckenridge vote share. Thus, we have some evidence that more skilled recruits
migrated in response to social pressure.21 It may be that skilled workers are more sensitive to
social pressure than unskilled workers. This notion is consistent with social capital being a more
important determinant of skilled worker’s earnings than an unskilled worker’s earnings. A final
potential explanation is that skilled workers were better able to absorb the costs of migrating in
response to social pressure than unskilled workers.
Finally, in Table 8, we explore the return to post-Civil War migration for Union and Confederate
soldiers. In panel A, we report overall differences in migration returns. In particular, we regress
occupational income in 1880 on an indicator for the person having moved counties between 1860 and
1880, an indicator for serving in the Union army, and an interaction between these two variables.
We find that Union soldiers have poorer occupational outcomes than Confederate soldiers, even
conditional on the occupational income and wealth of the soldier’s household head in 1860. This
finding may reflect positive selection into the Confederate army on unobservables or a positive
21

We should also note that Union recruits may have been more positively selected in predominantly Confederate
counties, perhaps because skilled men were more likely to “go against the grain.” We test whether or not Union
recruits were more skilled ex ante (measured by occupational attainment and family wealth) when they came from
counties more aligned with the Confederacy. We do not find any evidence that this is the case. However, they may
have been selected on unobservables.

23

causal effect of service in the Confederate army on occupational attainment. In any case, Union
soldiers were unable to overcome their initial economic disadvantage over the next two decades
despite having emerged victorious in the conflict.
In column 3, we include an indicator for having migrated out of a soldier’s home county in
1860. The coefficient on the main effect of migrating and the interaction between migrating and
Union status are both close to zero and insignificant, indicating no return to migration in terms
of occupational income for soldiers on either side. We note that our measure of occupational
income obscures any gains to migrants who earned higher wages in their destination county despite
remaining in the same occupation. It is thus possible that there was some economic return we are
unable to capture. Nonetheless, since the majority of these migrants were moving within or very
near Kentucky (see Figure 3 and Table 4), we believe wage differentials across destinations were
generally small.22 These findings underscore that the migration of former Kentucky soldiers was
likely driven by social or ideological factors.
In panels B and C, we explore the heterogeneity of migration returns by characteristics of the
county of origin by estimating equation 5. In particular, we are interested in whether soldiers who
moved out of ideologically incompatible home counties realized an economic return to migration.
We find that the return to migration was larger for Union soldiers from more Confederate counties,
but this effect is not significant at traditional levels and is only present for the Breckenridge vote
share measure. This finding could reflect weakly positive selection of such migrants on unobservable
skill rather than a positive return; we cannot distinguish between these mechanisms. Overall we
find no robust or significant evidence that even soldiers who migrated out of counties that were a
poor ideological match realized an economic return on their relocation decision.

6

Conclusion

Our results suggest that social divisions between Union and Confederate supporters following the
Civil War induced a significant share of veterans to relocate for reasons of ideology rather than
economic gain. Belonging to the winning side was not associated with a differential likelihood of
migrating, and we do not find that Union soldiers were more likely to move than former Confederates. Rather, our results paint a picture of soldiers from both sides departing counties where they
22

Abramitsky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2012) and Collins and Wanamaker (2014) find a significant and positive
return to migration using measures that account for both occupation and regional differences in the average wages
associated with that occupation. Due to the short range of most moves in our sample, we do not adjust for occupational
wage differences by geographic region.

24

were surrounded by their former enemies. Union soldiers were more likely to migrate the greater
the support for the Confederacy in their home counties, and they settled in Kentucky counties and
regions of the country that were more pro-Union on average. Confederate soldiers were more likely
to choose Confederate-leaning counties or states in the far West or South if they moved. Although
we are restricted to using occupational income to measure gains associated with these relocation
choices, we estimate that such returns are close to zero for both Union and Confederate veterans.
Even Union soldiers who departed Confederate-leaning counties saw no gains in occupational income by 1880, underscoring that these migration decisions were likely driven by social rather than
economic considerations.
The implications of these findings are twofold. First, more research is needed to understand the
potential individual return to migrating in the aftermath of a civil conflict. Increases in emotional
wellbeing and feelings of personal safety may not be readily detectable using standard economic
measures. Nonetheless, these benefits may greatly improve the quality of life for survivors of civil
conflict. Future scholarship should search for ways to measure these benefits. Second, ideological
resorting may be an important mechanism for maintaining peace after a war. The relative mobility
of the nineteenth century American population could have facillitated the end of hostilies by allowing individuals and families to form new communities instead of trying to repair social devisions in
towns fractured by conflict. Removing barriers to internal migration after a civil war could promote
both individual welfare and reduce opportunities for continuing violence.

References
[1] Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. “Europe’s Tired, Poor, Huddled Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration.” American
Economic Review 102, no. 5 (2012): 1832-1856.
[2] Annan, Jeannie and Christopher Blattman. “The Consequences of Child Soldiering.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 92, no. (2010): 882-898.
[3] Astor, Aaron. Rebels on the Border: Civil War, Emancipation, and the Reconstruction of
Kentucky and Missouri. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana University Press, 2012.
[4] Atack, Jeremay and Fred Bateman. “Matchmaker, Matchmaker, Make Me a Match: A General
Personal Computer-Based Matching Program for Historical Research” Historical Methods. 25,
no. 2 (1992):53-65.
[5] Bailey, Martha and Morgan Henderson. “How Do Alternative Linking Methods Perform? Evidence from the LIFE?M Project.” Working Paper, 2016.

25

[6] Blattman, Christopher, and Edward Miguel. “Civil War.” Journal of Economic Literature 48,
no. 1 (2010): 3- 57.
[7] Bleakley, Hoyt, Louis Cain, and Joseph Ferrie. “Amidst Poverty and Prejudice: Black and
Irish Civil War Veterans,” in Institutions, Innovation, and Industrialization: Essays in Economic History and Development, Avner Greif, Lynne Keisling, John V.C. Nye (eds.), 2014.
(Festschrift volume for Joel Mokyr.)
[8] Borjas, George J. “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants.” American Economic Review
77, no. 4 (1987): 531-553.
[9] Bundervoet, Tom, Philip Verwimp, and Richard Akresh. “Health and Civil War in Rural
Burundi.” Journal of Human Resources 44, no. 2 (2006): 536-563.
[10] Clubb, Jerome M., William H. Flanigan, and Nancy H. Zingale. Electoral Data for Counties
in the United States: Presidential and Congressional Races, 1840-1972. ICPSR08611-v1. Ann
Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 200611-13. http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR08611.v1
[11] Collins, William J. and Marianne H. Wanamaker. “Selection and Economic Gains in the Great
Migration of African Americans: New Evidence from Linked Census Data.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6, no. 1 (2014): 220-252.
[12] Costa, Dora L. “Pensions and Retirement: Evidence from Union Army Veterans.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 110, no. 2 (1995): 297-320.
[13] Costa, Dora L. “Displacing the Family: Union Army Pensions and Elderly Living Arrangements.” Journal of Political Economy 105, no. 6 (1997): 1269-1292.
[14] Costa, Dora L, and Matthew Kahn. Heroes and Cowards: The Social Face of War. Princeton
University Press. 2008.
[15] Costa, Dora L., Matthew Kahn, Christopher Roudiez, and Sven Wilson. “Persistent Social
Networks: Civil War Veterans who Fought Together Co-Locate in Later Life.” NBER Working
Paper no. 22397, 2016.
[16] Eli, Shari J. “Income Effects on Health: Evidence from Union Army Pensions.” Journal of
Economic History 75, no. 2 (2015): 448-478.
[17] Feigenbaum, James J. “Automated Census Record Linking: A Machine Learning Approach.”
Working Paper, 2016.
[18] Ferrie, Joseph P. “A New Sample of Americans Linked from the 1850 Public Use Micro Sample of the Federal Census of Population to the 1860 Federal Census Manuscript Schedules.”
Historical Methods. 29 (1996): 141- 156.
[19] Ferrie, Joseph P. “Migration to the Frontier in mid-Nineteenth Century America: A Reexamination of Turner’s Safety Valve.” Working Paper, 1997.
[20] Fogel, Robert W. Public Use Tape on the Aging of Veterans of the Union Army: Military,
Pension, and Medical Records, 1860-1940, Version M-5. Center for Population Economics,
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, and Department of Economics, Brigham
Young University, 2000.
26

[21] Haines, Michael R., and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002 [Computer file].
ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 2010-05-21. doi:10.3886/ICPSR02896
[22] Harrison, Lowell H. The Civil War in Kentucky. Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky,
1975.
[23] Long, Jason and Henry Siu. “Refugees from Dust and Shrinking Land: Tracking the Dust
Bowl Migrants.” NBER Working Paper no. 22108, 2016.
[24] Marshall, Ann. Creating a Confederate Kentucky: The Lost Cause and Civil War Memory in
a Border State. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010.
[25] Miguel, Edward and Gerard Roland. “The Long-Run Impact of Bombing in Vietnam.” Journal
of Development Economics 96, no. 1 (2011): 1-15.
[26] Olivetti, Claudia and Daniele Paserman. “In the Name of the Son (and the Daughter): Intergenerational Mobility in the United States, 1850-1940.” American Economic Review 105, no.
8 (2015): 1-31.
[27] Phillips, Christopher. The Civil War in the Border South. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2013.
[28] Portraits and Sketches of the Lives of All the Candidates for the Presidency and
Vice-Presidency, for 1860: Comprising Eight Portraits Engraved on Steel, Facts in
the Life of Each, the Four Platforms, the Cincinnati Platform, and the Constitution of the United States. New-York: J. C. Buttre, 1860. From Library of Congress,
http://hdl.loc.gov/loc.gdc/scd0001.00118958603 .
[29] Ruggles, Steven J., Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder,
and Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable
database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2010.
[30] Salisbury, Laura. “Selective Migration, Wages, and Occupational Mobility in Nineteenth Century America.” Explorations in Economic History 53 (2014): 40-63.
[31] Salisbury, Laura. “Women’s Income and Marriage Markets in the United States: Evidence
from Civil War Pensions,” Journal of Economic History Forthcoming (2016).
[32] Stewart, James I. “Migration to the Agricultural Frontier and Economic Mobility, 1860-1880.”
Explorations in Economic History 43, no. 4 (2006): 547-577.
[33] United States War Department (1890-1912). Carded Records Showing Military Service of Soldiers Who Fought in Volunteer Organizations During the American Civil War. Record Group
94, National Archives Building, Washington, DC. Accessed at fold3.com.

27

7

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Military Data: Example
Side

Regiment

Name

Panel A: phonetic name + regiment groups
Union
3rd Cavalry
John Ewbanks
Union
3rd Cavalry
John Ubanks
Union
3rd Cavalry
John Ebanks
Union
55th Infantry
John Ewbanks
Union
1st Cavalry
Jefferson Eubanks
Confederate
Kirkpatrick's Battalion
John J Ewbank
Confederate
Kirkpatrick's Battalion
J J Eubank
Confederate
10th Infantry
Napolean Ewbanks
Confederate
12th Cavalry
Napolean Eubanks
Confederate
19th Infantry
F Eubanks
Panel B: phonetic name + union/confederate groups
Union
3rd Cavalry
John Ewbanks
Union
3rd Cavalry
John Ubanks
Union
3rd Cavalry
John Ebanks
Union
55th Infantry
John Ewbanks
Union
1st Cavalry
Jefferson Eubanks
Confederate
Kirkpatrick's Battalion
John J Ewbank
Confederate
Kirkpatrick's Battalion
J J Eubank
Confederate
10th Infantry
Napolean Ewbanks
Confederate
12th Cavalry
Napolean Eubanks
Confederate
19th Infantry
F Eubanks
Panel C: names included in final sample
Union
3rd Cavalry
John Ewbanks
Union
3rd Cavalry
John Ubanks
Union
3rd Cavalry
John Ebanks
Union
55th Infantry
John Ewbanks
Union
1st Cavalry
Jefferson Eubanks
Confederate
Kirkpatrick's Battalion
John J Ewbank
Confederate
Kirkpatrick's Battalion
J J Eubank
Confederate
10th Infantry
Napolean Ewbanks
Confederate
12th Cavalry
Napolean Eubanks
Confederate
19th Infantry
F Eubanks

Notes. Illustration of possible groupings of military records, under different assumptions about which records constitute a single person. In panel A, we assume that
all records with phonetically matching first and last names from the same regiment
refer to the same individual. In panel B, we assume that all records with phonetically
matching first and last names from the same side (Union of Confederate) refer to
the same person. In panel C, we illustrate the “individuals” who constitute our final
sample of military records, obtained from the genealogical website Fold3.com, which
we link to the census of 1860. These consist of phonetic first and last names that
appear uniquely on the Union or Confederate side, excluding records with first initials
only.

28

29

10,862
22.1%

38,318
77.9%

7,103
9.00
2,008
65.4%
18.5%
29.5%

0.501
10.3
0.185
5,944

0.214
18.0
0.027
302,022

Matched to all states near KY
Unique
Weighted

Panel C. Test of Accuracy of Matched Records

25,461
11.86
6,503
66.4%
17.0%
26.5%

Matched to all states near KY
Union
Confederate
***
**
***
***

4,588
1.81
2,911
42.2%
26.8%
-

0.632
7.0
0.294
9,391

0.474
11.4
0.135
35,393

Matched to KY
Unique
Weighted

16,472
2.12
9,529
43.0%
24.9%
-

Matched to KY
Union
Confederate

100%

49,180

157,893
100%
116,174
64,309
3,707
5.8%

Total

***
-

***
-

0.051
22.3
0.001
4,323

0.048
22.5
0.001
28,299

Matched to MO (placebo)
Unique
Weighted

Notes. Statistics pertaining to military records and links to the census of 1860. Phonetic groups defined using NYIIS codes. Approximately 75% of phonetic
groups contain a single entry. See text for details of matching procedures.

Coefficient on Military Age
Constant
R-squared
Observations

Sample:

# military records matched at least once to census
Mean # matches per military record (of matched)
# unique matches to census
% of military records matched to at least one census
Conventional match rate
% of matches living in Kentukcy

50,304
31.9%
37,917
19,333
3,578
18.5%

107,589
68.1%
78,257
44,976
129
0.3%

Confederate

Panel B. Linkage Rates to Census by Target Sample

Total # Records
% of total
# unique phonetic last name + phonetic first name + regiment groups
# unique phonetic last + phonetic first + union/confederate groups
# groups with only first initials available
% of groups with only first initials available
# unique phonetic last + phonetic first + union/confederate groups, excl
groups with only first initials, identifiable as union/confederate only
% of total

Union

Panel A. Characteristics of Military Data

Summary Statistics and Test of Matching Accuracy

Table 2: Military Data

Table 3: Characteristics of Union and Confederate Soldiers, 1860
Mean Comparison

OLS Regresion
All men 10-45 in
Kentucky, 1860

Union

Confederate

Age

22.398

22.031

**

23.895

Married

0.319

0.270

***

0.370

Household head

0.302

0.251

***

0.371

Lives with parent

0.442

0.481

***

0.385

Born Kentucky

0.749

0.820

***

0.722

Born south (incl. Kentucky)

0.863

0.933

***

0.834

Born northeast

0.018

0.010

***

0.021

Born midwest

0.043

0.023

***

0.038

Immigrant

0.077

0.034

***

0.106

County % agricultural

0.754

0.788

***

0.766

County % urban

0.090

0.081

County % slave

0.148

0.189

County % free black

0.008

0.009

Property per family ($1000)

3.873

4.909

County ag value per acre

18.524

22.072

22.403

County mean farm size

2.371

2.315

2.210

County churches per 100 people

0.193

0.187

0.187

County value per church

2.233

2.234

2.675

Vote share: Bell

0.454

0.419

***

0.451

Vote share: Breckenridge

0.357

0.441

***

0.353

Vote share: Douglas

0.178

0.134

***

0.186

Presidental voter turnout

0.667

0.699

***

0.671

Surname: mean prop., 1850 ($1000)

1.240

1.739

***

1.503

Surname: % white collar, 1850

0.057

0.066

***

0.065

Surname: % farmer, 1850

0.627

0.625

0.623

Surname: % laborer, 1850

0.064

0.061

0.062

0.117
***

0.176
0.009

***

4.576

Constant

Observations
R-squared

Dependent variable = 1 if Union
-0.002**
(0.001)
0.019
(0.015)
0.020
(0.019)
-0.013
(0.011)

0.100***
(0.026)
0.081***
(0.026)
0.153***
(0.021)
0.041
(0.088)
-0.254**
(0.112)
-0.650***
(0.226)
1.229
(1.765)
0.002
(0.012)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.010
(0.019)
0.249*
(0.143)
0.004
(0.008)

-0.597***
(0.101)
-0.189
(0.133)
-0.161
(0.182)
-0.002***
(0.000)
-0.058
(0.053)
-0.002
(0.025)

1.204***
(0.161)
9,529

2,911

275,999

10,346
0.094

Notes. Stars next to mean comparison refer to significance of the coefficient on the 1860 characteristic in a
Note: Stars next to mean comparison refer to significance of the coefficient on the 1860 characteristic in a univariate regression of union
univariate
regression of union status on that characteristic. For county-level characteristics, standard errors are
status on that characteristic. For county-level characteristics, standard errors are clustered at county level. The regression in the final
clustered
at clusters
countystandard
level. errors
The regression
in thecharacteristics
final column
clusters
standard
by county.
column also
by county. Individual
arealso
obtained
from the
1860 full errors
count census;
county Individual
characteristics
are
obtained
from
1860
full election
count returns
census;
county
characteristics
are taken
Haines and
characteristics are
taken
from Haines
andthe
ICPSR
(2010);
data
are taken
from Clubb et al (2006);
1850 from
surname
variables
refer to mean
characteristics
of individuals
with a from
particular
surname
living
in Kentucky
1850, obtained
from therefer
full count
ICPSR
(2010);
election
returns data
are taken
Clubb
et al
(2006);
1850in surname
variables
to mean
1850 census (Ruggles et al 2015).
characteristics of individuals with a particular surname living in Kentucky in 1850, obtained from the full count
1850 census (Ruggles et al 2015).

30

Table 4: Summary Statistics of Linked 1860-1880 Census Data

Union

Mean
Confederate

Sample size
Union
Confederate

Panel A. 1880 Characteristics
Age
Married
Lives in 1860 county
Lives in Kentucky
Lives elsewhere in south
Lives in northeast
Lives in midwest
Lives in west
White collar
Semi-skilled
Farmer
Laborer
No occupation

42.170
0.871
0.467
0.708
0.059
0.021
0.203
0.009
0.080
0.110
0.649
0.135
0.026

41.960
0.853
0.489
0.730
0.089
0.009
0.150
0.020
0.118
0.098
0.662
0.095
0.027

***
**
***
**
***

***

2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848
2,848

845
845
845
845
845
845
845
845
845
845
845
845
845

Panel B. 1860 Characteristics
Family wealth ($1000)
Parent white collar
Parent semil-skilled
Parent farmer
Parent laborer
Parent no occupation
White collar
Semi-skilled
Farmer
Laborer
No occupation

2.109
0.048
0.088
0.688
0.051
0.088
0.044
0.112
0.394
0.242
0.172

6.074
0.085
0.075
0.708
0.039
0.058
0.065
0.088
0.426
0.214
0.159

***
***

*
*

2,716
1,308
1,308
1,308
1,308
1,308
1,540
1,540
1,540
1,540
1,540

798
411
411
411
411
411
434
434
434
434
434

Notes. Characteristics of veterans linked between the census of 1860 and the census of 1880. See text for
details about the linking process.

31

Table 5: Impact of County Characteristics on Migration Propensity
(1)
Dependent variable:

(2)

(3)
(4)
Moved counties, 1860-80

(5)

Panel A. Confederate enlistment share
Union soldier

0.014
(0.025)

Union soldier X Confederate enlistment share, 1860

-0.108**
(0.050)
0.419***
(0.145)

HH head log occ. income, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860
HH Head log occ. income X Confed. enlist. share, 1860
Log family wealth X Confed. enlist. share, 1860

-0.100*
(0.052)
0.315**
(0.143)
0.045
(0.055)
-0.092***
(0.023)
-0.026
(0.185)
0.137**
(0.066)

Soldier
Union family
Soldier X Confed. enlist. share, 1860
Union family X Confed. enlist. share, 1860

-0.182**
(0.077)
0.690***
(0.199)

0.083
(0.051)
-0.018
(0.043)
-0.205
(0.131)
0.133
(0.125)

0.162**
(0.070)

-0.420**
(0.161)
0.290
(0.654)

Soldiers

Soldiers

Soldiers

Soldiers &
relatives

Soldiers &
relatives,
linked pairs

3,693
0.100

3,693
0.103

3,338
0.136

8,643
0.085

3,174
0.053

Sample
Observations
R-squared

-0.098
(0.061)
0.330**
(0.167)

Panel B. Breckenridge vote share
Union soldier

0.014
(0.025)

Union soldier X Breckenridge vote share, 1860

-0.089*
(0.050)
0.247**
(0.121)

HH head log occ. income, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860
HH Head log occ. income X Breckenridge vote share, 1860
Log family wealth X Breckenridge vote share, 1860

-0.095*
(0.053)
0.199
(0.130)
0.099*
(0.053)
-0.056***
(0.018)
-0.171
(0.130)
0.002
(0.046)

Soldier
Union family
Soldier X Breckenridge vote share, 1860
Union family X Breckenridge vote share, 1860

-0.038
(0.081)
0.103
(0.150)

0.093*
(0.054)
0.017
(0.038)
-0.173*
(0.100)
0.017
(0.084)

0.093
(0.078)

-0.155
(0.140)
0.033
(0.425)

Soldiers

Soldiers

Soldiers

Soldiers &
relatives

Soldiers &
relatives,
linked pairs

3,693
0.100

3,693
0.102

3,338
0.135

8,643
0.084

3,174
0.048

Sample
Observations
R-squared

-0.097
(0.060)
0.212*
(0.116)

Notes. “Union soldier” is an indicator for union status in columns 1-3 and an interaction between an
indicator for union family status and veteran status in columns 4-5. Confederate enlistment share is the
fraction of all soldiers linked to a particular county (12,440 soldiers in total) that are Confederate. Log
family wealth is log(1 + W ), where W is the sum of real and personal property. Breckenridge vote share
from Clubb et al (2006). Occupational income is based on the 1900 occupational wage distribution with
an imputed wage for farmers (Preston and Haines 1991; Salisbury 2014; Olivetti and Paserman 2015).
All regressions contain controls for age (fixed effects in columns 1-3, quadratic in columns 4-5), birthplace
fixed effects, 1860 county of residence fixed effects. Column (5) contains family fixed effects and includes
1,372 families with more than one individual linked between 1860 and 1880. Standard errors are clustered
at the 1860 county level.

32

Table 6: Locational Choices of Migrants
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel A. Multinomial Logit, dep. var. 1880 region of residence
(relative to Midwest)
South
Union soldier

-0.286**
(0.137)

-0.342**
(0.147)

-0.284*
(0.157)

-0.318*
(0.163)
0.312**
(0.145)
0.093
(0.106)

-1.123***
(0.371)

-0.984**
(0.415)

-0.988**
(0.443)

-1.131**
(0.468)
0.750*
(0.395)
-0.013
(0.330)

1,951

1,780

1,777

4,906

Soldier
Union family

West
Union soldier
Soldier
Union family

Observations

Panel B. OLS, dep. var. 1860 Confederate enlistment share in 1880
(Kentucky) county
Union soldier

-0.054***
(0.017)

-0.057***
(0.019)

-0.055***
(0.018)

787
0.398

694
0.422

694
0.495

Soldier
Union family
Observations
R-squared

-0.016
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.013)
-0.036***
(0.012)
1,832
0.347

Panel C. OLS, dep. var. 1860 Breckenridge vote share in 1880
(Kentucky) county
Union soldier

-0.050***
(0.017)

-0.053***
(0.019)

-0.058***
(0.019)

-0.013
(0.020)
-0.007
(0.019)
-0.032**
(0.015)

805
0.451

711
0.477

711
0.540

1,792
0.261

Y
N

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
N

N

N

Y

N

Soldier
Union family

Observations
R-squared
Controls:
Age, birthplace & 1860 county
1860 SES
1880 county agricultural land
value & farm ownership rate
Sample:

Migrant soldiers Migrant soldiers Migrant soldiers

Migrant soldiers
& relatives

Notes. “Union soldier” is an indicator for union status in columns 1-3 and an interaction between an
Note. ``Union soldier'' is an indicator for union status in columns 1-3 and an interaction between an
indicator
familystatus
status
veteran
status
in column
Nullabout
results
impact of
indicatorfor
forunion
union family
andand
veteran
status
in column
4. Null 4.
results
the about
impact the
of military
military
on the probability
of to
migrating
to the
Northeast
Midwest)
are omitted
side onside
the probability
of migrating
the Northeast
(relative
to the (relative
Midwest) to
arethe
omitted
from Panel
A
from
brevity.
B andconsists
C, theofsample
consists
left for
their county
for Panel
brevity.AInfor
panels
B andInC,panels
the sample
individuals
who of
leftindividuals
their county who
of origin
anotherfor
county
in Kentucky
1860 and
1880; 1860
standard
1880 county.
of origin
another
county between
in Kentucky
between
anderrors
1880;clustered
standardbyerrors
clustered by 1880
Controls
for 1860 for
SES1860
include
loginclude
family wealth
and household
head's
log occupational
(see
county.
Controls
SES
log family
wealth and
household
head’sincome
log occupational
notes (see
to Table
5 for
for the value
per acre
and
farm ownership
income
notes
todetails).
Table 5Controls
for details).
Controls
for of
theagricultural
value perland
acre
ofthe
agricultural
land and
rate in 1880 are from Haines and ICPSR (2010).
the farm ownership rate in 1880 are from Haines and ICPSR (2010).

33

Table 7: Differential Selection of Union & Confederate Migrants
(1)
Dependent variable
Sample

Union

(2)
Migrated counties
Confederate

p(u=c)

Panel A. Overall
HH head log occ. income, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860

Observations
R-squared

0.014
(0.039)
-0.052***
(0.014)

0.103
(0.086)
-0.048**
(0.019)

2,569
0.143

769
0.305

0.337
0.858

Panel B. Heterogeneity by Confederate enlistment share
HH head log occ. income, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860
HH head log occ. income X Confed. enlist. share, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860 X Confed. enlist. share, 1860

Observations
R-squared

0.015
(0.040)
-0.052***
(0.014)
-0.059
(0.350)
0.196*
(0.116)

0.159
(0.097)
-0.068***
(0.021)
-0.542
(0.427)
0.169
(0.113)

2,569
0.145

769
0.309

0.152
0.478
0.450
0.869

Panel C. Heterogeneity by Breckenridge vote share
HH head log occ. income, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860
HH head log occ. income X Breckenridge vote share, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860 X Breckenridge vote share, 1860

Observations
R-squared

0.010
(0.042)
-0.051***
(0.015)
-0.070
(0.180)
0.051
(0.060)

0.141*
(0.084)
-0.045**
(0.019)
-0.761**
(0.358)
-0.019
(0.084)

2,569
0.143

769
0.311

0.158
0.816
0.100
0.473

Notes. P-values are from a test of equality of coefficients across regressions. Sample consists of soldiers only. See notes to Table
Note. P-values are from a test of equality of coefficients across regressions. Sample consists of soldiers only. See notes to table 5 for variable
5definitions.
for variable
definitions.include
All regressions
include
age, birthplace,
and
county
of origin
fixed
errors are clustered
All regressions
age, birthplace,
and county
of origin fixed
effects.
Standard
errors
are effects.
clusteredStandard
by 1860 county.
by 1860 county.

34

Table 8: Differential Migration Returns for Union & Confederate Soldiers
(1)
Dependent variable:

Union

(2)
Log occupational income, 1880
Panel A. Differences in Return to Migration

-0.059***
(0.012)

-0.041***
(0.012)

0.162***
(0.021)
0.026***
(0.006)

-0.039**
(0.017)
0.003
(0.020)
-0.003
(0.023)
0.162***
(0.021)
0.026***
(0.006)

3,261
0.100

3,261
0.100

Moved counties
Union X moved counties
HH Head log occ. Income, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860

Observations
R-squared

(3)

3,606
0.068

Panel B. Heterogeneity by Confederate Enlistment Share
Union
Confederate
p(u=c)
Moved counties
Moved counties X confed. enlist. share
HH Head log occ. Income, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860

Observations
R-squared

-0.004
(0.014)
-0.048
(0.095)
0.137***
(0.025)
0.031***
(0.009)

0.010
(0.032)
-0.060
(0.149)
0.204***
(0.064)
0.025**
(0.011)

2,509
0.105

752
0.302

0.653
0.948
0.331
0.68

Panel C. Heterogeneity by Breckenridge Vote Share
Union
Confederate
p(u=c)
Moved counties
Moved counties X Breckenridge vote share
HH Head log occ. Income, 1860
Log family wealth, 1860

Observations
R-squared

-0.001
(0.012)
0.073
(0.059)
0.137***
(0.025)
0.031***
(0.009)

0.009
(0.031)
-0.088
(0.122)
0.201***
(0.064)
0.024**
(0.011)

2,509
0.106

752
0.302

0.757
0.207
0.35
0.671

Notes. P-values are from a test of equality of coefficients across regressions. Sample consists of soldiers only. See notes to Table
Note. P-values are from a test of equality of coefficients across regressions. Sample consists of soldiers only. See
5 for variable definitions. All regressions include age, birthplace, and county of origin fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
notes to table 5 for variable definitions. All regressions include age, birthplace, and county of origin fixed effects.
by 1860 county.
Standard errors are clustered by 1860 county.

35

Figure 1: Relevant Kentucky County Characteristics, 1860

(a) Confederate Enlistment Share

(b) Breckenridge Vote Share

(c) Percent Slave

36

.4

Probability of Migrating
.5
.6
.7

.8

Figure 2: Impact of County Confederate Enlistment Share on Migration Propensity: Illustration

5% Confederate Enlistment Share

65% Confederate Enlistment Share

Union

Confederate

.4

Probability of Migrating
.5
.6

.7

®

5% Confederate Enlistment Share
Union relative
Confederate relative

65% Confederate Enlistment Share
Union soldier
Confederate soldier
®

Notes. Top panel illustrates predicted probability of migrating for Union and Confederate recruits with mean characteristics, in counties with 5 and 65% Confederate
enlistment share. Based on results from Table 5, panel A, column (3). Bottom panel
illustrates predicted probability of migrating for Union and Confederate recruits and
relatives with mean characteristics, in counties with 5 and 65% Confederate enlistment share. Based on results from Table 5, panel A, column (4).

37

Figure 3: Distribution of Interstate Migrants from Union and Confederate Armies, 1880

Notes. Illustrates county of 1880 residence of all interstate migrants from sample of
Kentucky recruits.

38

A

Note on Bias Introduced by Matching Error

Here, we justify certain features of our approach to matching Union and Confederate military
records to the Census, which may reduce our sample size but are designed to make the rate of
matching error similar for Union and Confederate veterans (specifically, discarding Confederate
records with only first initials, and failing to use age at enlistment to generate matches). We show
that, if the entire population could be classified as “Union” or “Confederate,” the optimal strategy
is to minimize matching error, even if this generates differential matching error by military side.
However, because the population can actually be classified as “Union,” “Confederate,” or “neither,”
the optimal strategy is to equalize matching error among Union and Confederate recruits, even if
this results in a higher error rate overall. The proof follows.

Population divisible into two categories
Suppose the population belongs to one of two group: A or B. Information on group membership
comes from database 1, which we match to database 2. Database 2 contains information on some
outcome variable y.
The causal effect of group membership on y is:
β = E(y|A) − E(y|B)

(6)

Matches are done with error. Suppose we observe variables a and b, which are equal to one if a
person observed in database 2 is matched to a person in database 1 from group A or B, respectively.
Matching is done with error, so φA|a ≡ P r(A = 1|a = 1) < 1 and φB|b ≡ P r(B = 1|b = 1) < 1.
If we assume matches are correct, we will estimate:
P
β̂ =
=

a ya

P

b yb
Nb
P
a,A ya,A +
a,B ya,B

N
P a

−

Na,A + Na,B

P
−

b,B

yb,B +

P

b,A yb,A

Nb,B + Nb,A

Here, the subscript (i, J) refers to an observation whose true group is J but is assigned a group
i, where i ∈ {a, b} and J ∈ {A, B}.

39

Rearranging and taking expectations, it can be shown that
E(β̂) = E(y|A)(φA|a − φA|b ) − E(y|B)(φB|b − φB|a ) = (φA|a + φB|b − 1)(E(y|A) − E(y|B))
This follows because there are only two possible groups, so φB|a = 1 − φA|a and φA|b = 1 − φB|b .
Then, bias will be:
E(β̂) − β = (φA|a + φB|b − 1)(E(y|A) − E(y|B)) − (E(y|A) − E(y|B))
= (φA|a + φB|b − 2)(E(y|A) − E(y|B))
= (φA|a + φB|b − 2)β
If the probability that matches assigned to groups a and b are accurate is 1, then the estimator
will be unbiased. If not, the estimate will be attenuated. Notice that the coefficient on β is always
negative, so the estimator will be downward biased if β > 0 and upward biased if β < 0. As long
as the probability of a match being accurate is more than 50%, this will not cause the sign of the
estimated coefficient to be incorrect.
As such, if everyone in database 2 can be classified as either group A or group B, then the
optimal approach is to maximize φA|a and φB|b individually – attenuation bias will always be
reduced by raising φA|a , regardless of the value of φB|b , and vice versa.

Population divisible into three categories
Now, suppose there is a third category, C, which exists in the population; however, no individuals
from group C appear in database 1. Matches between databases 1 and 2 are still done with error,
so a person who is assigned group a or b could in fact be from group A, B, or C.
By a similar calculation to the one done above, we can write the expected value of our estimator
for β as:
E(β̂) = E(y|A)(φA|a − φA|b ) − E(y|B)(φB|b − φB|a ) + E(y|C)(φA|b + φB|b − φA|a − φB|a )
And, bias of this estimator is:






E(β̂) − β = E(y|A) φA|a − φA|b − 1 − E(y|B) φB|b − φB|a − 1 + E(y|C) φA|b + φB|b − φA|a − φB|a

40

The direction of this bias is unclear. In particular, it will depend on E(y|C), and the relative
probability of assigning a person from group C to groups a and b. Consider, for example, the case
in which matches to group a are perfectly accurate. So, φA|a = 1, which means that φB|a = 0.
Then, the bias will be:




E(β̂) − β = φA|b E(y|C) − E(y|A) − (1 − φB|b ) E(y|C) − E(y|B)
The direction of bias in this case will depend on how the E(y|C) relates to E(y|A) and E(y|B),
which is not something we know.
Now, consider another example in which the probability of error is perfectly symmetric across
groups. Specifically, 0 < φA|a = φB|b < 1 and 0 < φB|a = φA|b < 1. In this case,



E(β̂) − β = φA|a − φB|a − 1 E(y|A) − E(y|B)


= φA|a − φB|a − 1 β
This is just attenuation bias, and should not cause the sign of β̂ to be incorrect as long as
matches are more likely to be correct than incorrect.
If we are interested in correctly identifying the sign of β, the objective should not be to minimize
match error individually for both groups, but to minimize match error conditional on match error
remaining symmetric across groups. This provides us with a clear idea of what the bias in our
estimator is.

41

Appendix Tables and Figures

42

Table A1: Impact of Military Side on Migration Propensity and Destination
Different Measures of Occupational Attainment

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. OLS, dependent variable = moved counties, 1860-80
Union soldier
Union soldier X Confederate enlistment share, 1860

-0.088*
(0.052)
0.291**
(0.142)

-0.104**
(0.049)
0.333**
(0.141)

Union soldier X Breckenridge vote share, 1860

Observations

3312

3,514

-0.097*
(0.052)

-0.083
(0.051)

0.214*
(0.123)

0.171
(0.121)

3,312

3,514

Panel B. Multinomial Logit, 1880 region of residence (relative to Midwest):
South

West

Union soldier

-0.337**
(0.148)

-0.333**
(0.143)

-0.975**
(0.422)

-1.116***
(0.416)

Observations

1,762

1,885

1,762

1,885

Panel C. OLS, Characteristic of 1880 (Kentucky) county:
Confederate enlistment share
Breckenridge vote share
Union soldier

-0.060***
(0.019)

-0.053***
(0.018)

-0.057***
(0.019)

-0.043**
(0.018)

Observations

689

727

706

745

1950
occupational
income

Occupational
class indicators

1950
occupational
income

Occupational
class indicators

Occupational attainment measure

43

