                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY IN A COLLATERALIZED ECONOMY

                                         Gary Gorton
                                          Ping He

                                      Working Paper 22599
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22599


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




Thanks to Javier Bianchi, Hal Cole, Zhiguo He, Sebastian Infante, Todd Keister, Rich Kihlstrom,
participants at the Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the Post-Crisis Period
Conference of the Federal Reserve Board and to seminar participants at Tsinghua University,
University of Pennsylvania, Bank for International Settlements and Ohio State University. Gorton
and He have nothing to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Gary Gorton and Ping He. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Monetary Policy in a Collateralized Economy
Gary Gorton and Ping He
NBER Working Paper No. 22599
September 2016
JEL No. E02,E42,E44,E5,E52

                                         ABSTRACT

In the last forty or so years the U.S. financial system has morphed from a mostly insured retail
deposit-based system into a system with significant amounts of wholesale short-term debt that
relies on collateral, and in particular Treasuries, which have a convenience yield. In the new
economy the quality of collateral matters: when Treasuries are scarce, the private sector produces
(imperfect) substitutes, mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities (MBS). When the ratio of
MBS to Treasuries is high, a financial crisis is more likely. The central bank’s open market
operations affect the quality of collateral because the bank exchanges cash for Treasuries (one
kind of money for another). We analyze optimal central bank policy in this context as a dynamic
game between the central bank and private agents. In equilibrium, the central bank sometimes
optimally triggers recessions to reduce systemic fragility.


Gary Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

Ping He
Department of Finance, Tsinghua SEM
Weilun 308
Beijing 100084, China
heping@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
1. Introduction

The Financial Crisis of 2007-2008 was not the result of an unfortunate convergence of a
number of bad factors, but was the result of a long-term, permanent, transformation of the
U.S. financial system into one involving significant amounts of wholesale funding, which is
vulnerable to runs. This vulnerability has not been solved. In this paper argue that this
transformation has important implications for monetary policy.

In the last forty years the U.S. banking system transformed from a system that mostly produced
retail (insured) demand deposits to a system that produces significant amounts of short-term
debt for the wholesale market. The new system produces short-term debt to a large extent
with backing collateral made from the very loans that the traditional banking system
originated, a process called “securitization.” In the past, since demand deposits are insured,
bank regulators/examiners monitored the on-balance sheet loan collateral backing the
deposits and monetary policy could be conducted without reference to these backing loan
portfolios. The new system, however, is different because the short-term debt is not insured,
and so the quality of the backing assets –the collateral–matters for financial fragility. The
backing assets are asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities and U.S. Treasuries. In the
new system monetary policy cannot be separated from macroprudential policy because open
market operations affect the quality of collateral in the economy. In this paper we show how
collateral quality and monetary policy are intertwined and examine optimal monetary policy
in this context.

The transformation of the financial system is dramatic. Figure 1, reproduced from Gorton,
Lewellen and Metrick (2012), displays the transformation of the U.S. banking system over the
period 1952Q1 through 2009Q1. The figure shows the components of privately-produced safe
debt as a percentage of the total amount of privately produced safe debt.1 The darkest part
of the figure, at the bottom, is demand deposits. As a percentage of the total, demand deposits
have fallen from about 80% to 31%. Moving upwards, the next component is money-like debt
(e.g., repo, commercial paper, money market funds). This component rose from 11% to 21%.
Upwards next are private-label AAA asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities. This
category rose from zero to 18%. The “shadow banking system” is the sum of the ABS/MBS and
money-like debt components, which grew from 11% to 38%, larger than demand deposits.
This transformation seems to have accelerated in the late 1980s, but in any case it is apparent
that the change is not a temporary change.



1
Privately-produced debt cannot be “safe” in the same sense that Treasuries are safe. Nevertheless
we will refer to the privately-produced substitutes as safe debt (which is the norm in the literature).
                                                    1
Gorton and Muir (2015) describe this change in the composition of money as corresponding
to a transition from a system of immobile collateral – bank loans staying on bank balance
sheets until maturity – to a system of mobile collateral, which is created by securitizing bank
loans, that is producing bonds from the loans. Asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities
(ABS/MBS) are the mobile collateral; they can be used as collateral for repo or for derivative
positions, etc. The issue we address here arises in a world where collateral is mobile and, in
particular, privately-produced collateral consists of mortgage-backed securities.

When Treasuries are scarce, the private sector produces substitutes to use as collateral and as
a store of value, asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities (ABS/MBS) prior to the recent
crisis (see Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012, 2015)). When the ratio of privately
produced “safe debt” ABS/MBS to Treasuries is high, i.e., there is a shortage of government-
produced safe debt, a financial crisis is more likely because the privately-produced safe debt,
used to back short-term bank debt (repo and asset-backed commercial paper), is not riskless
in every state of the world. We study a setting where the central bank cares about the quality
of collateral in the economy. Macroprudential policy aims to keep the MBS-to-Treasury ratio
low to reduce financial fragility. This introduces a conflict between maximizing output and
minimizing financial fragility.

We take the transformation of the financial system as permanent and fundamental. In addition,
we state the following stylized facts:

    1. There is a convenience yield associated with U.S. Treasury debt. See, e.g., Duffee
        (1996), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012, 2015), Nagel (2014), Gorton and
        Muir (2015),Carlson, Duygan-Bump, Natalucci, Nelson, Ochoa, Stein, and Van den Heuvel
        (2014), and Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2015).

    2. When Treasury debt is scarce, the convenience yield rises and the private sector
       produces substitutes, mortgage-backed securities in the recent crisis. See
       Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2015), Gorton, Lewellen and Metrick (2012), Xie
       (2012), and Sunderam (2012).

    3. Credit booms—high growth in private debt—typically precede financial crises. See,
       e.g., Schularick and Taylor (2012), Jorda, Schularick and Taylor (2011), Laevan and
       Valencia (2012), Desmirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (1998) and Gorton and Ordoñez
       (2015).2

    4. When the ratio of Treasury debt to GDP is low, a financial crisis is more likely.
       Alternatively, when the ratio of MBS-to-Treasuries is high, crisis is more likely. This is
       implied by points (2) and (3).




2
The literature on credit booms and crises is large and we have only cited a few of the many papers.
                                                 2
In this mobile collateral world there is a fundamental friction: cash cannot be securitized and
Treasuries cannot be used to satisfy cash-in-advance constraints.3 In other words, cash and
Treasuries are not perfect substitutes because non-banks cannot hold reserves at the central
bank and there is (currently) no way to directly intermediate to create a marketable bond
backed by reserves at the Fed, a bond that anyone could hold, trade, or pledge as collateral. If
anyone could open an account at the central bank, hold interest-bearing reserves directly, and
issue a tradable and pledgeable bond against those reserves, then reserves and T-bills would
become very close substitutes. But, this is not currently institutionally feasible.4 On the other
hand, Treasuries are only issued in large denominations and cannot be a hand-to-hand
currency. This means that cash and Treasuries are fundamentally different. This difference and
a cash-in-advance constraint are the frictions in the model.

Since large agents are the end-users for Treasuries and ABS/MBS, to back short-term debt or
to store value, they are one clientele demanding one kind of money, Treasuries and ABS/MBS.
Households are largely the source of the demand for traditional money, M0. These clienteles
are distinct because of the fundamental friction, which means that Treasuries and ABS/MBS
are not substitutes for cash or demand deposits. Taking account of both types of money has
important implications for monetary policy since there are now two clienteles demanding two
different types of “money.” Since each clientele has a demand for its type of money, optimal
monetary policy has a difficult trade-off in terms of welfare. On the one hand, each clientele
needs a form of “money”, but on the other hand, inflation is a function of cash and financial
fragility is a function of the quality of collateral.

In this paper, we introduce a macroprudential policy for the central bank to pursue to manage
financial fragility in the context described above. We show that this policy interferes with what
would otherwise be the optimal monetary policy (in an economy which never has crises), but
that this interference is optimal to reduce financial fragility. The model is a dynamic game
between the central bank and private agents. The equilibrium concept we use considerably
simplifies the analysis of this type of game. In equilibrium, the economy will experience
deflation during recessions, and a boom-bust pattern is the equilibrium outcome under the
optimal policy.

Here “macroprudential policy” is taken to mean optimal management of the quality of the
collateral in the economy, the ratio of ABS/MBS to Treasuries. (We simply refer to MBS
hereafter.) Financial fragility—the likelihood of a crisis-- is increasing in this ratio, and this
reduces welfare. More generally, the ratio would be credit to the private sector divided by

3
    ABS/MBS can be transformed into cash via the discount window, but this faces the problem of stigma
and, in any case, is not permanent.
4
    Garratt, Martin, McAndrews and Nosal (2015) discuss segregated balance accounts at the Fed, but not
securitization of the deposits in such accounts.
                                                    3
Treasuries. MBS and Treasuries are used to back repo, and for money market funds and
mortgage-backed commercial paper, i.e. short-term debt which is the root of crises. Here,
rather than regulate the quantity of short-term debt directly, the central bank regulates
indirectly, via collateral quality. This is very natural since open market operations already trade
cash for Treasuries, and vice versa.5 So, whether or not the central bank recognizes this, it is
in fact affecting the quality of collateral in the economy. Here, the central bank explicitly
recognizes this. In the mobile collateral world macroprudential policy cannot be separated
from monetary policy.

We model the money demands of the two clienteles in the following way. We employ a cash-
in-advance model, in which households demand cash to pay for cash-goods consumption.
Firms demand Treasuries and MBS, implicitly to use as collateral to borrow. Financial
intermediaries will briefly appear in the model, but the use of Treasuries and MBS to back repo,
for example, is in the background. The demand for this second kind of money is modelled by
specifying production to be a function of real Treasury securities and MBS, recognizing that
privately-created MBS cannot supply as much “liquidity” as Treasuries. Entering Treasuries and
MBS into the production function is a reduced form for the combined financial and non-
financial sectors. As we will explain, securitization plays a role in the model. The creation of
MBS is endogenous in the model and occurs via securitization of mortgages.

The dynamics in this economy are quite different from the standard model (without
macroprudential policy). Here, the central bank trades one form of money for another to
balance between the safe public collateral, Treasuries, and the fragile private collateral, MBS,
as well as worrying about inflation. As discussed above, if the central bank does not inject
enough Treasuries into the economy, the private sector generates more MBS. A change in
Treasuries is negatively correlated with the production of MBS. At the same time, the central
bank’s money supply affects the price level, which affects the real value of the collateral
(Treasuries plus MBS). A high initial money supply drives up the price level today, which
decreases the real value of the collateral for production; to balance that, the central bank
needs to conduct an expansionary monetary policy which drives up the amount of MBS and,
consequently, more collateral in nominal term. However, if the ratio of MBS to Treasuries is
too high, this cannot be optimal due to the prohibitively high risk of financial fragility.
Therefore, with a high initial money supply, it may be optimal for the central bank to reduce
the amount of cash in nominal terms by selling Treasuries through open market operations,
which reduces the amount of MBS, the money supply and the price level. In this way, the real
value of liquidity and output may drop, but not as much as the welfare loss of financial fragility
avoided.

The “macroprudential policy” we discuss here is different from what is usually meant by this
term. Usually it refers to the supervision and regulation of “banks,” including capital and
liquidity requirements, stress tests, as well as examinations, stress tests, and required

5
There are, of course, other ways to deal with the vulnerability of short-term wholesale debt. But,
these have not been adopted, so we focus on the current environment.
                                                  4
reporting. The authorities engaged in these activities include parts of the government that are
separate from the central bank. Usually it is argued that monetary policy and macroprudential
policy are distinct, as a practical matter, but moreover monetary policy should be kept separate.
Svensson (2015), for example, argues that monetary policy cannot achieve financial stability
in any case, but the concept of a “financial crisis” is not specified. Bernanke (2015) argues that
as a practical matter the two policies should be separate because with respect to financial
stability monetary policy “is a blunt tool.” Also see Williams (2015) and the references therein.

The debate about the role of financial stability in setting monetary policy has generally focused
on whether the central bank should address asset price bubbles.6 In our setting an asset price
bubble may be viewed as a high level of housing prices, which occurs precisely because there
is an insufficient amount of Treasuries, causing the endogenous creation of MBS. But, in our
model there is no “bubble”, though a high level of MBS appears as one. In our setting if the
growth of MBS makes MBS large relative Treasuries then the central bank must act to decrease
this ratio. The transformation of the financial system means that open market operations have
an effect now that was not present before.7 Consequently, in this paper we take the view, as
does Stein (2014), that the risks of a financial crisis cannot be completely mitigated with
conventional non-monetary tools.

The model we analyze is an infinitely-repeated game between one large player—the central
bank---and many small players, agents in the private economy. It is a Ramsey problem in which
the central bank cannot commit to its optimal policy. Such settings have been the subject of a
large amount of research because of the results of Kydland and Prescott (1977), showing that
dynamic programming cannot be used as a solution method because of the dynamic
inconsistency. A recursive characterization of Perfect Public Equilibrium (PPE), which was first
defined in Fudenberg, Levine, and Maskin (1994), for a dynamic game was proposed by Abreu,
Pearce, and Stacchetti (1986) (APS). APS sheds light on this issue. In any PPE, the strategy of
the large player is dynamically consistent although there is no commitment. Moreover, APS,
in a game with a finite number of players, show that past histories can be summarized by




6
    There is a very large literature on this topic, see the IMF Staff Report (2015) and Conlon (2015) for
references.
7
    Adrian and Shin (2008, 2009) identify other channels that are important. They argue that monetary
policy and financial stability polies “are closely linked” because short-term interest rates influence the
size and leverage of financial intermediaries. Also see Gorio and Zhu (2008). Stein (2012) identifies still
another channel in which banks create too much short-term debt, an issue that monetary policy could
address.
                                                     5
promised future utilities, continuation values, and the values of agents can be described
recursively. This approach has been widely used in macroeconomics.8

Our solution method is most closely related to Phelan and Stacchetti (2001) (PS), an extension
of APS for a strategic game between a large player and a continuum of small players, where
there is a public state variable.9 PS do not augment payoffs using continuation values directly
as APS do, but rather write the continuation values as a product of the choice variables and
marginal values of these variables. By augmenting the payoffs in this way, agents are enticed
to stay on the equilibrium path, without a need to characterize the payoffs for agents off the
equilibrium path. This captures the key feature of small players, that is, as a price-taker, an
individual small player’s action does not affect the other small players’ payoffs.

We closely follow PS with one important difference. The difference concerns the equilibrium
concept. PS use Perfect Public Equilibrium and determine the set of equilibria by determining
the appropriate correspondences. Because functions cannot be used, it is very difficult to
analytically solve the game or to compute the equilibrium numerically.10 Computation of the
equilibrium is also an issue in closely-related models, such as Chang (1998) and Chari and
Kehoe (1990). We strengthen the equilibrium concept, following Gorton, He and Huang (2014),
so that we can work with functions. This may be of independent interest.

Papers closest to ours include Stein (2012) who analyzes a world of unregulated private money
production, which has an externality in that too much is produced, increasing fragility because
of fire sales. Stein (2012) argues that this externality can be addressed by a central bank that
uses reserve requirements to implement a cap-and-trade system for the private money. In our
setting the central bank uses open market operations to address financial fragility, so there is
an effect on inflation as well.

Other papers consider monetary policy in the context of a shortage of safe assets due to a
crisis. As in our model, Caballero and Farhi (2014), and Andolfatto and Williamson (2015)
analyze environments in which cash and government bonds are not substitutes and this is the
essential friction. Caballero and Farhi (2014) study the implications of a safe debt shortage
following a crisis onset. One of their main points is that the shortage of safe debt constrains
the effectiveness of monetary policy when the economy is up against the zero lower bound.
The usual mechanisms for equilibration and policy effectiveness weaken or do not work at all,
a situation they describe as a “safety trap.” Andolfatto and Williams (2015) specify a general
equilibrium model in which there are demands for both cash and government bonds to be
used in transactions. But cash and government bonds are not substitutes. There are two goods.

8
 See Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004), chapter 22, for a summary. An alternative, closely related, approach
introduces Lagrange multipliers as co-sate variables. See Kydland and Prescott (1980) and Marcet and
Marimon (2011).
9
 Atkeson (1991) showed that APS can be used when there is a publicly observed state variable.
10
     On the computation issues see Judd, Yeltekin and Conklin (2003) and Sleet and Yeltekin (2002).
                                                    6
One (good 1) requires cash for purchases and the other (good 2) requires some cash and some
bonds. If the two constraints do not bind, households will be indifferent about producing and
selling each of the two goods. “Scarce safe debt” means that the cash-and-bonds-in-advance
constraint binds. In this world, a lower nominal interest rate (higher bond price) reduces
consumption in the market for good 2 and increases consumption in the market for good 1.
Essentially, an increase in the bond price is an increase in the relative price of consumption of
good 2, from the household's point of view. But, reducing the demand for good 2 reduces
aggregate output and welfare. In this context they analyze a number of monetary policies.
None of these papers, however, consider pro-active monetary policies for avoiding financial
crises.

Benigno and Nisticò (2016) also look at a setting where there is a shortage of safe assets.
They study a model with multiple assets with different liquidity properties, modelled
essentially as exogenous haircuts. Households only find out the haircut at the time they try to
use the asset to purchase goods. They are interested in what happens when an exogenous
“liquidity shock” worsens the quality of some of the assets for use in exchange. The shocked
assets—bonds, say—suffer a fall in price and a rise in their yield because there is a shortage of
safe debt now. The shortage of safe debt means that the demand for consumption goes down.
If there are no nominal rigidities so the price level falls and if there are nominal rigidities, there
would be a recession. How should the central bank respond?          Again, an important role of the
central bank is to supply safe assets.

In Section 2 we start the analysis by specifying and solving a two period model. We then
assume specific functional forms and examine monetary policy. Section 3 presents and solves
the infinite horizon model and also presents results with specific functional forms. The
conclusion is Section 4.

2. The Two-Period Model

We begin with a two-period model in order to convey the basic setting and intuition. In the
two-period model there is no commitment problem for the central bank, as will be seen. We
first explain the model and then briefly discuss the assumptions.

2.1 Model Setup

There are two types of goods available each period, perishable cash goods, which are subject
to a cash-in-advance constraint (CIAC), and credit goods, which are housing services, at prices
p and q, respectively. There is a continuum (of measure 1) of infinitely–lived identical agents.
They consume cash goods and housing services, and they also own the proceeds from
production and home rental. Agents are arranged on a circle. Each agent is renting a house
from the agent on the left and renting out a house he owns to an agent on the right. Each

                                                  7
agent will purchase housing services and receive payments from the rental of housing services.
Think of goods as being of different colors. Agents prefer the color of the goods produced by
the agents to their left. For markets to be competitive there must be a double continuum. But,
because agents are otherwise identical we will speak of a representative agent. The central
bank conducts monetary policy through trading in open market operations, adjusting the
quantity of cash (M) and Treasuries (TB) in the economy.

The supply of houses, H, is constant, and each period one unit of house generates one unit of
housing services. Units of houses can be rented out at price, q per unit. Define Q to be the
market value of one unit of a house. In the background, the agent will obtain a variable rate
mortgage to buy h units of house; the agent makes rQ in mortgage payments for each unit of
house he buys, with a total mortgage payment of rQh each period. In equilibrium, renting one
unit of housing services at price q is equivalent to buying one unit of house with a mortgage
payment rQ, that is q = rQ (i.e., the house price is the annuity value of the mortgage payments).

Mortgage-backed-securities (MBS) are generated from housing sales, and in equilibrium the
amount of MBS is proportional to the total amount of credit generated to finance housing
sales, that is, MBS = QH in equilibrium.

Each agent owns a firm which produces cash goods using real Treasuries and real MBS as
inputs. (This is discussed below.) The liquidity of MBS is not as good as Treasuries, since MBS
are privately-produced; with respect to liquidity services MBS are only worth δMBS, where δ<
1. The value of δ can be thought of as a haircut. It is a measure of market liquidity; the higher
the value of δ, the better the market liquidity of MBS (and the more that can be borrowed).
We assume that the production function takes the following form, y = f((TB + MBS)/p, ε). We
interpret (TB + MBS)/p as the amount of liquidity (in real terms) provided through using
Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities as collateral. Therefore, we define L≡(TB + MBS)/p.
Implicitly, the firm is borrowing to buy capital.

We now describe how the MBS are created (via securitization) and used in four steps (we only
show the net changes to the balance sheets). For clarity we omit cash balances and Treasury
holdings.

Step 1: An agent/firm borrows Qh from a bank to buy h units of a house. At the same time the
agent/firm receives QH from the agent buying his house. He deposits this in the bank. In
equilibrium, market clearing will require that h = H.

             Bank                    Special Purpose Vehicle                 Agent/Firm

     Asset          Liability         Asset          Liability         Asset           Liability

      Qh               QH               0                0              QH                Qh




                                               8
Step 2: The bank securitizes the loan Qh through a special purpose vehicle, and the agent/firm
uses its deposits to buy the MBS issued by the special purpose vehicle.


                Bank                        Special Purpose Vehicle                        Agent/Firm

      Asset             Liability            Asset               Liability           Asset            Liability

         0                  0                  Qh                 MBS                MBS                 Qh


Step 3: The agent/firm uses MBS as collateral to borrow MBS from the bank for production.

                Bank                        Special Purpose Vehicle                        Agent/Firm

      Asset             Liability            Asset               Liability           Asset            Liability

      MBS                MBS                 Qh                 MBS            MBS+MBS            Qh+MBS


Step 4: The agent/firm produces and pays off all its debt (including the mortgage payment and
the principal of debt); the special purpose vehicle passes the debt payment Qh to the
agent/firm, who is the MBS holder, and the MBS are cleared; the bank receives MBS loan
repayments and pays off its own debt.

                Bank                        Special Purpose Vehicle                        Agent/Firm

      Asset             Liability            Asset               Liability           Asset            Liability

         0                  0                   0                   0                  0                  0


The time line is as follows:



                       Date 1                                                     Date 2
 1. The agent starts with m1 and w1 = m1 + tb1(1 +          1. The agent starts with m2 and tb2, with w2= m2 +
 r0), and needs to pay a lump sum tax TB1r0                 tb2(1 + r1), and needs to pay a lump sum tax TB2r1
 2. Output y1 is realized; the central bank conducts        2. Output y2 is realized, and the agent receives
 open market operations, determines the aggregate           income p2y2
 supply of M2 and TB2, price p1, q1 and r1 are formed       3. The agent consumes c2, and chooses final wealth
 3. The agent receives income p1y1 + qH, and                w3
 consumesc1 and h, and ends up holding m2 and               4. The agent pays a lump sum tax TB2, and final
Remarks:
 tb2assavings                                               consumption occurs

                                                            5.




                                                        9
Note:

(i) The representative agent has wealth wt at the beginning of period t, and pays a lump sum
    tax TBtrt–1. Define net worth as nwt ≡ mt + tbt(1 + rt–1) – TBtrt–1.

(ii) At the aggregate level, we assume that the sum of cash and Treasuries, net of the tax
     payment, is a constant, and we define NW ≡ M1 +TB1 = M2 +TB2.

(iii) At the end of date 1, each unit of house has a resale value of Q’ = q/r1 Therefore, we have
      the value of the house at the beginning of date 1, Q = (q + Q’)/(1 + r1) = q/r1. This
      assumption makes the model consistent with the infinite horizon model.

(iv) Open market operations occur at date 1 and affect output at date 2. The quantity of
     Treasuries is taxed away and is irrelevant for the final consumption, by assumption.

(v) Final consumption is the real value of final wealth minus the tax payment, normalized by
    the date 2 cash goods price. The composition of final wealth does not affect utility, by
    assumption. Specifying the final consumption in this way closes the model.

At date 1, given the cash goods price p1, the housing services price q, and the interest rate r1,
the representative agent is choosing cash goods consumption, c1, housing services
consumption, h, a cash amount, m2, and Treasuries, tb2, subject to the budget constraint and
the cash-in-advance constraint.

                  max c1 ,h1 ,m2 ,tb2 u(c1 , h)   U(m2 ,tb2 )  (MBS / TB2 ) (1)
                  s.t. p1c1  qh  m2  tb2  p1y1  qH  nw1
                            p1c1  m1 .

In the above optimization problem, U(m2, tb2) is the utility generated from date 2 consumption,
as a function of the individual state variables, m2 and tb2.The representative agent also suffers
a welfare loss due to a possible financial crisis, namely ψ(MBS/TB), which—as discussed in the
Introduction (and further below) —is a function of the ratio of MBS/Treasuries at date 1, and
which is also a function of the aggregate state variable, M2. We refer to the likelihood of a
financial crisis as “financial fragility” henceforth. The individual agent cannot internalize the
cost of financial fragility as it is a function of the aggregate state variable only, and he behaves
as if the cost does not exist.

At t = 2, the representative agent starts with wealth w2 = m2 + tb2(1 + r1), pays a lump sum tax
TB2r1, and receives income from cash goods output y2 and housing services supplied, h. With
MBS = QH(in equilibrium), we have y2 = f((TB2 + MBS)/p1,ε). The agent also pays a lump sum
tax TB2 from his final wealth w3. Given the cash goods price, p2, the representative agent is
choosing cash goods consumption, c2, and final wealth, w3, subject to the budget constraint
and the cash-in-advance constraint.




                                                10
                           U(m2 , tb2 )  E max c2 ,w3 [v(c2 )   v(c3 )]
                           s.t.       p2c2  w3  p2 y2  nw2
                                      p2c2  m2
                                      c3  nw3 / p2   w3  TB2  / p2          (2)
                                      nw2  m2  tb2 (1  r1 ) - TB2r
                                      y2  f ((TB2   MBS) / p1 ,  ).

Note that since housing consumption at date 2 plays no role (there is simply a residual value
to the house, Q’), we have omitted it from (2).

We now turn to the central bank’s objective function. Subject to a boundary condition on
expected deflation (discussed below), the central bank is choosing M2 to maximize social
welfare, which is the representative agent’s utility function consisting of two parts: (i) The
expected utility of the representative agent from consumption; (ii) The welfare loss due to
financial fragility. Unlike the representative agent, the central bank can internalize the cost of
financial fragility by choosing the money supply (and hence the amount of Treasuries in the
economy).

The optimization problem of the central bank is:

                    MaxM2 u(c1 , h1 )   U(M2 ,TB2 )  (MBS / TB2 )
                                                                                       (3)
                    s.t.          E[p2 / p1 ]   .

The central bank’s objective function is concerned with the effects of money (monetary policy),
but it is also concerned about managing financial fragility (the likelihood of a financial crisis).
The constraint on deflation means that the central bank does not want to have a deflation in
the economy, which increases the real value of debt, and which may aggravate recessions and
lead to a deflationary spiral. We discuss this constraint further below.

For a given amount of Treasuries, production of MBS constitutes a credit boom and has an
externality that private agents do not take into account; it raises the likelihood of a crisis. The
welfare loss, ψ, is a function of the ratio of MBS to TB2. When relatively more mortgage-backed
securities are used as collateral for production (a credit boom), the probability of financial
fragility increases, and we use the reduced form function ψ to capture the expected welfare
loss from the likelihood of financial fragility (ψ’>0and ψ’’>0). In equilibrium there will never
be an explicit financial crisis (though the strategy space admits this), but the objective function
of the central bank specifies that welfare changes are smoothly changing with the ψfunction.
In other words, it is painful for the central bank to have a higher likelihood of crisis, since it
does not know exactly what ratio of MBS to Treasuries will result in a crisis.

The central bank’s choice of the aggregate variable, M2, affects social welfare through several
channels: (i) Supply channel: M2 affects the level of p1 (if the cash-in-advance constraint is not
binding at date 1), TB2 and MBS (through q), and consequently affects output at date 2
(because TB2, MBS and p1 affect real liquidity); (ii) Demand channel (price effect): M2 affects
                                                       11
the price level p1 (if the cash-in-advance constraint is not binding at date 1), q and p2 (if the
cash-in-advance constraint is binding at date 2), as well as the interest rate level r1, and
therefore affects the consumption and saving behavior of the agent; (iii) Demand channel
(wealth effect): output is also one source of income for an agent; (iv) Externality: the ratio of
MBS/Treasuries at date 1 determines the welfare loss due to its effect on financial fragility.

The representative agent, being small, does not take the possibility of financial fragility into
account. Only the central bank can internalize the welfare loss due to the likelihood of financial
fragility by choosing the aggregate level of the money supply. The representative agent cannot
affect the aggregate money supply, and he behaves as if the welfare loss due to financial
fragility does not exist, though he suffers if there is a higher likelihood of a financial crisis. In
other words, the household worries when the economy becomes more fragile, because the
household can observe the ratio MBS/TB. Here, “worries” reduce utility.

We will focus on symmetric equilibrium in which all agents start with the same endowment
and behave the same way. In general, there can be many equilibria for a strategic game
between the central bank and the continuum of small agents. We focus on the sequential
equilibrium in which after observing every value of M2, all agents will behave competitively
and rationally. We define the sequential equilibrium below.

Definition 1 (Sequential Equilibrium): A sequential equilibrium satisfies the following two
conditions:

    (i) Given the central bank’s choice of M2, and the realization of cash goods output at
    date 2, {p1, q, r1, p2} and {c1, h, m2, tb2, c2, w3} are the competitive equilibrium of this
    economy, that is: Given {p1, q, r1, p2}, {c1, h, m2, tb2, c2, w3} solves (1) and (2), and {p1, q, r1,
    p2} are such that markets are cleared, with c1 = y1, h = H, m2 = M2, tb2 = TB2 = NW – M2, c2
    = y2, and w3 = M2 + TB2.

    (ii) The central bank’s choice of M2 maximizes social welfare.

2.2 Discussion of the Model

Housing plays a central role in the model because the amount of privately-produced collateral,
mortgage-backed securities, is endogenously determined. This is consistent with the importance
of housing for the macroeconomy, see, e.g., Jorda, Schularick and Taylor (2014, 2015), Mian and
Sufi (2014), Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2016), and Leamer (2007), and it is consistent with housing
often being at the center of financial crises.

A key ingredient of the model is the demand for Treasuries and MBS. Putting Treasuries and
MBS in the production function is a reduced form for the use of Treasuries and MBS as




                                                  12
collateral in the economy. It is simpler than using a “collateral in advance” constraint. 11
Privately-produced collateral, MBS, is not as liquid as Treasuries, hence the δ<1 parameter.

As discussed in the Introduction, financial crises tend to occur when there is insufficient
government debt in the economy, resulting in the private sector creating a substitute, but
inferior form of collateral, MBS—a credit boom. The credit boom is an externality because it
creates financial fragility. Private agents cannot affect the quantities of Treasuries and MBS in
the economy. This becomes the job of the central bank, as represented here by the ψ function.

Note the timing of the open market operations. Agents enter the first period with m1and tb1,
but before transacting in the first period, the central bank conducts open market operations.
This affects first period agent decisions via prices. Agents then enter period 2 with m2 and tb2.
So, in the two-period model, there is no commitment problem, as there will be in the infinite
horizon model. Still, in the two-period model, the central bank acts strategically, as a large
player.

Note that the MBS implicitly pay interest. In the background, every agent is borrowing money to
buy a house, paying a variable interest rate, while depositing all the money from selling his own
house and receiving a variable interest rate via the MBS. So interest payments on the mortgages
and the MBS cancel out.

We assume a constant housing supply for simplicity, but note that the price of houses can
change. Also, housing services are proportional to the housing stock (with proportionality one)
for simplicity. Note that in order to pay off his mortgage, an agent sells the house. But, the
new housing price may be such that he defaults on his mortgage. For simplicity this is costless.

2.3. Equilibrium Characterization

2.3.1 Individual Agent Optimization in a Competitive Equilibrium

To simplify the analysis below (for the two period model), we assume there is no uncertainty
in production, that is, y2 = f((TB2 + δMBS)/p1),and we also assume:

                                    u(c1 , h1 )  ln c1  ln h1
                                    v(c2 )  ln c2 , v(c3 )  ln c3 .




11There
         is an older literature on money in the production function. The issue first arose in monetary
growth models, e.g., Levhari and Patinkin (1968) and the debate evolved from that point. Examples
include Friedman (1969), Fischer (1974), and Saving (1972). Examples of the empirical literature include
Sinai and Stokes (1972) and You (1981). Nguyen (1986) reviews a lot of the literature. Benchimol (2010)
is a recent example.
                                                  13
We will start by solving the model backwards starting from t =2. In the second period there
are no central bank actions.

Proposition 1 (Equilibrium Prices): In a sequential equilibrium, at date 1, if the central bank
chooses M2 such that M2<M1β, then the cash-in-advance constraint is not binding for the
representative agent, and we have:

                                       M2        M           1
                                p1         , q  2 ,1  r1  .
                                        y1      H          

If the central bank chooses M2 such that M2>M1β, then the cash-in-advance constraint is
binding for the representative agent, and we have:

                                        M1      M           1
                                 p1       , q  2 ,1  r1  .
                                        y1      H          a

At date 2 the cash-in-advance constraint (CIAC) is always binding for the representative agent,
and we have:

                                           p2  M2 / y2 .

Proof: See Appendix.■

We solve the equilibrium prices using backward induction. Notice that, the money supply
chosen by the central bank, M2, at date 1, is the key for equilibrium prices, i.e., the central
bank is NOT a price taker.

In the proof of Proposition 1, one of the key steps was to characterize U(m2, tb2) defined in (2)
and use the derivatives with respect to m2 and tb2 to calculate the marginal value of money
and the marginal value of Treasuries for the representative agent. U(m2, tb2) should be
interpreted as the expected utility of an agent with m2 and tb2 while everyone else is holding
M2 and TB2, and this is the key feature of a small agent. Notice that, Um (m2  M2 ,tb2  TB2 )
and Utb (m2  M2 ,tb2  TB2 ) are in general not the same as UM (m2  M2 ,tb2  TB2 ) and
UTB (m2  M2 ,tb2  TB2 ) . Intuitively, an individual agent is a price-taker, and he can only
change his own choices of m2 and tb2 without affecting the aggregate level of M2 and TB2,
while the central bank can change the aggregate economic variables. In the infinite horizon
model, in general, the functional form U(m2, tb2) usually cannot be derived analytically,
however, we can show that the value of its derivatives with respect to m2 and tb2 at m2 = M2
and tb2 = TB2 are sufficient to solve for the symmetric equilibrium in which all agents hold the
same amounts of m2 and tb2. So, instead of knowing the functional form of U(m2, tb2), we only
need to know two values, which reduces the complexity of the problem substantially as will
be seen.




                                                14
2.3.2 Optimal Monetary Policy

The central bank trades through open market operations to maximize social welfare defined
in (3):

                       V  u(y1 , H)   U(M2 ,TB2 )  (MBS / TB2 )
                        ln(y1 )  ln(H)   (1   )ln( f (L))  (MBS / TB2 )，

subject to the deflation bound constraint with MBS  QH  qH / r1 =M2 /  (1   ) and
L  TB2   MBS  / p1 .

In the above optimization problem, the money supply affects social welfare through the real
value of collateral and the cost of financial fragility. The decision problem of the central bank
depends on whether the cash-in-advance constraint is binding or not at date 1. From
Proposition 1, we know that, when the central bank chooses a low money supply, M2, the
value of money is high at date 2 (because the price level is low), agents are hoarding cash and
the price level at date 1 is low, and the cash-in-advance constraint is not binding. In this case
we will say that the economy is in recession (the CIAC is not binding). When the central bank
chooses a high money supply, M2, the value of money is low at date 2, agents spend all their
cash on hand and the price level is high at date 1, and the cash-in-advance constraint is binding.
In this case we say that the economy is booming (the CIAC is binding).

Assuming the production function has the simple linear form with f(L) = AL, we have the
following:

Lemma 1 (Money Supply and Output): With δ/(1–)>β, the amounts of real collateral and
output at date 2 are decreasing with M2 during recession (CIAC not binding) and increasing
with M2 when the economy is booming (CIAC binding).

Proof: See Appendix.■

The above lemma shows the key link between the money supply and output; it works through
the real value of collateral. And, this depends on whether the cash-in-advance constraint is
binding or not. Under the parametric restriction in the proposition, our use of the terms
recession and boom is consistent with output movements.

From Proposition 1, we can see that inflation between date 1 and date 2, π, is increasing with
the money supply chosen by the central bank, M2. For future use, we define Mπ as the money
supply such that π(Mπ) ≡π, and we have:

                                                A NW
                                 M                                .
                                          A ( / (1   )   )

Notice that, both the inflation rate π and Mπ are independent of date 1 output, y1, and the
initial money supply, M1 (this is driven by the model assumptions). Recall that NW=TB2+M2 is
constant.
                                                 15
The welfare loss from financial fragility, ψ, is increasing with the ratio of MBS to Treasuries,
and, suppose it takes the following form for tractability, with γ> 0 being some constant:

                                M2         
                                              lnNW  ln(NW  M2 ).
                        (1   )(NW  M2 ) 

Recall that TB2=NW-M2. Let:

                                    (1   )( / (1   )   )  
                 M                                                              NW.
                           (1   )( / (1   )   )   ( / (1   )   )

Assume M  M . We can show that Mψ is the optimal money supply that maximizes the
social welfare in (3) if the cash-in-advance constraint is binding at date 1. Notice that Mψ is
also a constant independent of date 1 output, y1, and initial money supply, M1. It is easy to see
that Mψ decreases as the risk of financial fragility, as measured by γ, rises. Intuitively, if an
expansionary monetary policy (Mψ) is optimal, with a higher marginal cost of financial fragility,
the central bank wants to lower the money supply (sell Treasuries) and this increases the real
value of collateral and increases the marginal utility from cash-goods consumption.

With the results in Proposition1 and Lemmas 1, we can fully characterize the optimal money
supply, which is stated in the following Proposition.

Proposition 2 (Optimal Monetary Policy): There exists a cutoff value of the initial money
supply M1*∈(Mπ/β, Mψ/β), above which the economy is in recession, and a contractionary
monetary policy (Mπ) is optimal, and below which the economy is booming, and an
expansionary monetary policy (Mψ) is optimal.

Proof: See Appendix. ■

When the economy is in recession, output is decreasing with the money supply, and the
welfare loss from financial fragility is increasing with the money supply. Therefore, the optimal
money supply is at the lower bound. When the economy is booming, output is increasing with
the money supply, but the welfare loss from financial fragility is also increasing with the money
supply. Therefore, the optimal money supply balances the gain from the output increase with
the welfare loss due to financial fragility.

The above proposition tells us that when the initial money supply is high, it is more likely that
the economy is going into a recession with deflation and low welfare loss due to financial
fragility. This boom-bust pattern is the equilibrium outcome under the optimal monetary
policy.

We plot the three cases of the optimal monetary policy in the figures below. In the figures the
x-axis is M2 and the y-axis is social welfare. Figure (A) is for the case where M  M  M1  ;
Figure (B) is for the case M  M1   M ; and Figure (C) is for the case M1   M  M . In


                                                  16
the figures the upper curve is the utility from output, and the bottom curve is the disutility
from financial fragility. The dashed lines are the marginal utilities.


                                        (A)




                      β(1+α)ln(y2)                    Social
                                                      Welfare        ψ




                                                                              M2
                         M1β    Mπ              M2*=Mψ




                                        (B)

                                                                         NW
                                                                         W
                                                           Social
                                                                     ψ
                               β(1+α)ln(y2)                Welfare




                                                                              M2
                               Mπ        M1β         M2*=Mψ              NW
                                                                         W
                                        (C)


                       β(1+α)ln(y2)
                                                                     ψ



                                      Social
                                      Welfare

                                                                              M2
                               M2*=Mπ                 Mψ       M1β       NW
                                                                         W


                                                17
From case (C), we can see that imposing a lower bound on inflation/deflation prevents the
corner solution (M2=0), and this is the only reason for the constraint.

2.4 Summary

The two-period model shows optimal monetary policy in an economy where collateral is
central and the central bank seeks to mitigate the likelihood of a financial crisis. Monetary
policy works through the real value of collateral. The two-period model, however, is simplified
because the cash-in-advance constraint is always binding in the second period and there is no
commitment issue for the central bank. In the second period there is no further action by the
central bank and there are no expectations about the future path of monetary policy.

3. Infinite Horizon Model

We now turn to the infinite horizon model, which admits dynamics. In this setting, there is a
commitment problem; agents do not know the future path of monetary policy. Also, the cash-
advance-constraint in the future may or may not be binding.

3.1. Model Set-Up

The model is a straightforward extension of the two-period model to an infinite horizon
problem.

The time line for period t is as follows:

1. At the beginning of period t the agent starts with mt and tbt(1+rt–1), but needs to pay a
    lump sum tax of TBtrt–1;

2. Output yt is realized, and then the central bank conducts open market operations, which
    determines the aggregate supplies of Mt+1 and TBt+1; prices pt, qt and rt are formed;

3. The agent receives income ptyt + qtH and chooses the consumption of cash goods, ct, and
    housing services, ht, subject to the budget constraint and the cash-in-advance constraint,
    generating utility u(ct, ht,), while holding mt+1 and tbt+1 as savings.

Remarks: As before, the lump sum tax is used for interest payments on outstanding Treasuries.
We assume the central bank/government will tax the exact amount to cover the interest
payments. After paying the lump sum tax, the representative agent carries a net wealth of nwt
≡ mt + tbt(1+rt–1) – TBtrt–1 into the beginning of period t, and he also receives income ptyt + qtH.
On-the-equilibrium path nwt = Mt + TBt = NW, which is a constant as we assume the only
monetary policy allowed in the model is the open market operations, which involve a one-for-
one exchange of cash and Treasuries.




                                                 18
The representative agent’s lifetime utility from consumption net of the welfare loss from
financial fragility can be written as E t1  t u(ct , ht )  (MBSt / TBt 1 ) , where u(.) is the
utility function and  (.) is a convex function increasing in MBSt / TBt 1 , and β∈(0, 1) is the
discount factor. We assume that u(.) is increasing and concave in both c and h, that is, uc> 0,
ucc≤ 0, uh> 0, and uhh≤ 0. The term  (MBSt / TBt 1 ) affects the welfare of each agent in
equilibrium, but it does not affect their optimization problems as it is a function of aggregate
variables only. The central bank is maximizing social welfare, which is the representative
agent’s lifetime utility from consumption net of the cost of financial fragility.

In period t, after output yt is realized, the central bank chooses the amount of Treasuries to
trade, ΔTBt+1, which leads to TBt+1 = TBt + ΔTBt+1 and Mt+1 = Mt – ΔTBt+1, and the representative
agent chooses consumption of cash goods, ct, consumption of housing services, ht, cash
holdings mt+1, and Treasury bill holdings, tbt+1, as functions of the prices in the economy, pt, qt
and rt. The equilibrium prices pt, qt and rt are such that all markets clear, that is, ct = yt, ht = H,
mt+1 = Mt+1, and tbt+1 = TBt+1.

Similar to the two-period case, we will study sequential equilibria with public strategies in
which the strategies of both the central bank and the representative agent depend only on
public information. This type of equilibrium is called Perfect Public Equilibrium (PPE) (see
Fudenberg, Levine, and Maskin (1994)). The public history at time t is denoted as ηt:

                         {M1 ,TB1 , y1 , r0 } for t  1
                         
                  t                                                                  t 1
                         {M1 ,TB1 , y1 , r0 }  {M 1 ,TB 1 , y 1 , p , q , r } 1 for t  1.
                         

The representative agent’s strategy can be written as:


           a  {ct ( t , pt , qt , rt ), ht ( t , pt , qt , rt ), mt ( t , pt ,qt , rt ),tbt ( t , pt ,qt , rt )}t1 .

The central bank’s strategy can be written as:


                                                     b  {TBt ( t )}t1 .

We can see that the only state variable of the economy is the money supply in the economy,
and we denote the economy that started with M1 as Φ(M1). A strategy profile for the economy
Φ(M1) is denoted as σ = (σa, σb). We will use the Strong Markov Perfect Public Equilibrium
concept to define our equilibrium, as in Gorton, He and Huang (2014), which is defined below.
We will first construct an auxiliary competitive equilibrium by assuming that the central bank
adopts an exogenous strategy σb. This auxiliary equilibrium will be useful subsequently
because along the equilibrium path private agents behave as if the central bank has an
                                                                19
exogenous strategy. So, subsequently determined equilibria must be in the set of equilibria for
this auxiliary problem.

3.2. An Auxiliary Competitive Equilibrium

Given the central bank’s exogenous strategy σb, the representative agent is solving the
following optimization problem:


                     max E[t1  t  u(ct , ht )  (MBSt / TBt 1 ) ]
                               pt ct  qt ht  mt 1  tbt 1  pt yt  qt H  wt  TBt rt 1 (4)
                      s.t.
                               pt ct  mt


Given the realization of cash goods output, the competitive equilibrium of this economy
(conditional on the central bank’s strategy), denoted as Φ(M1|σb), is a sequence of cash goods

prices, housing services prices and interest rates, {pt , qt , rt }t1 and a sequence of cash goods

consumption, housing consumption, cash holding and Treasuries holding {ct , ht , mt 1 ,tbt 1 }t1 ,

such that:


        1. Given {pt , qt , rt }t1 , {ct , ht , mt 1 ,tbt 1 }t1 maximizes E t 1  u(ct , ht )  (MBSt / TBt 1 )
                                                                                          t



             subject to the budget constraints and cash-in-advance constraints.

        2. Markets are cleared, that is, ct = yt, ht = H, mt+1 = Mt+1, and tbt+1 = TBt+1, for any t.

In equilibrium, the representative agent consumes today and saves in the form of cash and
Treasuries. To construct the auxiliary equilibrium, we need to define the marginal value of
additional cash holding, X, and the marginal value of additional Treasuries holding, Z. Under
the usual regularity conditions, the budget constraint is binding, but not necessarily the cash-
in-advance constraint. We will define X and Z separately in the case when the cash-in-advance
constraint is binding and in the case when it is not binding.

Lemma 2 (Marginal Values of Cash and Treasuries): When cash-in-advance constraint is
binding (B), the marginal value of cash holding and Treasury holdings at time t+1 are:

                                       XtB1  uc (yt 1 , H) / pt 1
                                       ZtB1  uh (yt 1 , H)(1  rt ) / qt 1，

When cash-in-advance constraint is binding (NB), the marginal value of cash holding and
Treasury holdings at time t+1 are:

                                                            20
                                         1  uc (yt 1 , H) / pt 1
                                      XtNB
                                         1  uc (yt 1 , H)(1  rt ) / pt 1
                                      ZtNB
                                             uh (yt 1 , H)(1  rt ) / qt 1 .

Proof: See Appendix. ■

Combining the two cases in Lemma 2, we have:

                         Xt 1  EB [ XtB1 ]Prt +1 (B)  ENB [ XtNB
                                                                   1 ]Prt 1 (NB)

                         Zt 1  EB [ ZtB1 ]Prt 1 (B)  ENB [ ZtNB
                                                                   1 ]Prt 1 (NB)


The variables Xt+1 and Zt+1 represent the representative agent’s marginal expected lifetime
utility for an additional amount of cash and Treasuries, respectively, that he holds at the
beginning of period t+1. These two variables summarize all the information the representative
agent needs to make the consumption and saving decision at time t. In our two-period model,
Xt+1 and Zt+1 correspond to the derivatives of U(m2, tb2) with respect to m2 and tb2, respectively,
at m2 = M2 and tb2 = TB2, which is the only information we need from date 2 when we
characterize the date 1 problem for our two-period model in Section 2.2.2 (see the Lagrange
conditions).

Suppose we have solved the auxiliary competitive equilibrium for the economy Φ(M1|σb). We
can then calculate the values of Xt+1 and Zt+1 for every period. Let us construct a one-period
economy where the representative agent owns initial cash holdings and Treasuries of mt and
tbt, and Xt+1 and Zt+1 are taken as exogenously given. Since the central bank’s trading strategy
is now exogenously given, the representative agent in this one-period economy chooses cash
goods consumption, ct, housing services consumption, ht, cash holdings, mt+1, and Treasuries,
tbt+1, with an augmented utility function over consumption in cash goods and housing and
end-of-period cash holding and Treasuries holding, subject to the budget constraint and cash-
in-advance constraint:

                  max u(ct , ht )   Xt 1mt 1   Zt 1tbt 1 
                           pt ct  qt ht  mt 1  tbt 1  pt yt  qt H  wt  TBt rt 1 (5)
                  s.t.
                           pt ct  mt .

The competitive equilibrium of this static one-period economy consists of prices {pt, qt, rt} and
consumptions plus savings {ct, ht, mt, tbt} such that the following two conditions are satisfied:


    1. Given {pt, qt, rt}, {ct, ht, mt+1, tbt+1} maximizes u(ct , ht )   Xt 1mt 1   Zt 1tbt 1 ;


                                                        21
    2. {pt, qt, rt} are such that ct = yt, ht = H, mt+1 = Mt+1, and tbt+1 = TBt+1.

Let CE(mt, tbt, Xt+1, Zt+1) denote the set of competitive equilibrium allocations (ct, ht, mt+1, tbt+1)
of this static one-period economy. We can show that the auxiliary competitive equilibrium of
this economy is equivalent to a corresponding one-period economy constructed below with a
transversality condition. As shown in Phelan and Stacchetti (2001), the transversality condition
holds if we impose boundary conditions on the representative agent’s marginal utility, for
which we assume that, the money supply is bounded from below away from zero, that is 0

<M<M<NW, output is bounded from above and below away from zero, that is 0  y  y  y   ,

and u(c,h) is concave with 0  uc  uc (c , h)  uc   and 0  uh  uh (c , h)  uh   .


With the above equivalence result, we can represent the infinite-horizon dynamic problem in
recursive form, as shown below.

3.3. Strong Markov Perfect Public Equilibria

We now proceed to characterize the dynamic equilibrium with the central bank’s decisions
endogenized. For a given strategy profile σ = (σa, σb), the representative agent has the following
expected lifetime utility:


                                V[ ]  E t 1  t u(ct , ht )  (MBSt / TBt 1 ) .
                                            

                                                                                     

Definition 2 (Perfect Public Equilibrium) A strategy profile σ = (σa, σb) is a Perfect Public
Equilibrium (PPE) for the economy Φ(M1) if for any τ ≥ 1, and history ητ, the following
conditions are satisfied:

     1. Given the representative agent’s strategy σa, the central bank has no incentive to
          deviate, that is, V[(σaτ, σbτ)] >V[(σaτ, σ’bτ)] for any σ’bτ≠σbτ, where (σaτ, σbτ) is the
          truncated equilibrium strategy profile σ = (σa, σb) starting from τ ≥ 1;


     2. {ct , ht , mt 1 ,tbt 1 }t resulting from the representative agent’s strategy σaτ is an

          auxiliary competitive equilibrium outcome of the economy Φ(Mτ|σbτ).

The definition of PPE imposes two conditions. The first condition requires sequential
optimality, that is, the central bank’s continuation strategies must be best responses to the
representative continuation strategies after any history ητ. The second condition states the
optimality of the representative agent’s strategy in an auxiliary competitive equilibrium we
analyzed in Section 3.1.

                                                          22
From the definition of PPE, we know that the continuation payoffs of a PPE after any history
have to correspond to PPE profiles, so the lifetime expected payoffs can be factored into
current payoffs and continuation PPE payoffs. As in Phelan and Stacchetti (2001), the recursive
formalization involves not only the payoffs to the central bank and the representative agent,
but also the marginal values of cash and Treasuries for the representative agent, which are the
key features for the auxiliary competitive equilibrium. For any strategy profile σ = (σa, σb), we
define the marginal value of cash and Treasuries at the beginning of the game as

                                 X[ ]  E[uc (c1 , h1 ) / p1 ]
                                                                           .
                                 Z[ ]  E[uh (c1 , h1 )(1  r0 ) / q1 ]

Following Phelan and Stacchetti (2001), we can show the recursive factorization of the defined
PPE in terms of V[σ], X[σ] and Z[σ], which can be replaced with simplified state-dependent
value correspondences due to the existence of multiple PPEs. In our model, the state variable
is the distribution of money holdings across agents, however, when all dispersed agents hold
the same amount of money, the state variable degenerates to a single variable—the aggregate
money supply in the economy, M. We define

       (V (M), X (M), Z(M))  {(V[ ], X[ ], Z[ ])| is a PPE for the economy (M)} .

The recursive formalization of the PPE only delivers value correspondences that depend on M,
but the strategies of the central bank and the representative agent still depend on the history.
For tractability, we restrict attention to strategies where the central bank’s and the
representative agent’s strategies only depend on the state variable, M. These strategies are
known as Markovian strategies. A Markov Perfect Public Equilibrium (MPPE) is a Perfect Public
Equilibrium in which the central bank and the representative agent play time-invariant
Markovian strategies. As in Gorton, He and Huang (2014), we impose a further restriction on
the off-equilibrium-path strategies, and require off-equilibrium strategies to be the same as
on-equilibrium strategies when the state variables are the same. Markovian strategies
satisfying this consistency conditions are named as Strong Markov Perfect Public Equilibrium
(SMPPE), which is formally defined below.

Definition 3 (Strong Markov Perfect Public Equilibrium) A Strong Markov Perfect Public
Equilibrium (SMPPE) is a Markov Perfect Public Equilibrium (MPPE) that yields the same MPPE
in every truncated continuation game regardless of on- or off-the-equilibrium path beliefs.

By imposing this restriction on off-equilibrium threats, we can study functions instead of
correspondences. We can write an SMPPE as a set of functions, {V(M, y), X(M, y), Z(M, y), M’(M,
y), p(M, M’, y), q(M, M’, y), r(M, M’, y), c(M, M’, y), h(M, M’, y), m’(M, M, y), tb’(M, M’, y)} that

                                                   23
are derived from solving the optimization problems of the representative agent and the central
bank.


         max c ,h ,m ',tb' u(c , h)  (MBS / TB ')   E y ' [ X (M ', y ')]m '  E y ' [ Z (M ', y ')]tb '
                  pc  qh  m ' tb '  py  qH  nw
                  pc  m
                                                                                                                  (6)
         s.t.     nw  m  tb(1  r0 )  TBr0
                          TB '  MBS 
                  y'  f             , '  ,
                                p         

                          max M ' u(y , H)  (MBS / TB ')   E y ' V (M ', y ')
                                               TB '  MBS 
                             s.t.      y'  f             , '  ,
                                                     p                                     (7)

where nw is equal to the initial wealth, w, net of the lump sum tax payment for the
representative agent, MBS is equal to QH with Q = q/r, and r0 is the interest rate from last
period

Remarks: here we use {V(M, y), X(M, y), Z(M, y)}, values after y is realized, instead of the
expected values, {V(M), X(M), Z(M)}. It is more convenient to state the results in terms of the
realized values.

Substituting in the market clearing conditions, we have the following conditions that need to
be satisfied:

1. V(M, y) is the value function of the central bank:

                      V (M , y)  u(y , H)  (MBS / TB ')   E y ' V (M ', y ')
                                            TB '  MBS                                       (C1)
                      s.t.          y'  f             , ' .
                                                  p         

2. X(M, y) is the marginal value of cash (m) for the representative agent:


                             uc (y , H) / p if uc (y , H) / p  uh (y , H) / q
                             
                 X (M , y)                                                                           (C2)
                             uc (y , H)cw  uh (y , H)hw if py  M.
                                          NB             NB
                             

3. Z(M, y) is the marginal value of Treasuries (tb) for the representative agent:




                                                            24
                       u (y , H)(1  r0 ) / q if uc (y , H) / p  uh (y , H) / q
           Z (M , y)   h                                                                        (C3)
                       uc (y , H)(1  r0 ) / p  uh (y , H)(1  r0 ) / q if py  M.

4. Optimal cash holding, m′, for the representative agent:

                             uh (y , H) / q   E y ' [ X (M ', y ')]
                                               TB '  MBS             (C4)
                              s.t.     y'  f             , ' .
                                                     p         

5. Optimal Treasuries holding, tb′, for the representative agent:

                              uh (y , H) / q   E y ' [ Z (M ', y ')]
                                               TB '  MBS             (C5)
                              s.t.     y'  f             , ' .
                                                     p         

6. Optimal consumption of cash goods:


                    M / y  (NW  TB) / y if uc (y , H) / p  uh (y , H) / q
                  p                                                               (C6)
                    quc (y , H) / uh (y , H) if py  M ,

where NW is a constant that is equal to the sum of aggregate cash, M, and aggregate Treasuries,
TB.

7. Optimal open market operations by the central bank:

           M '(M , y)  argmax M ' u(y , H)  (MBS / TB ')   E y ' V (M ', y ')
                            TB '  MBS                                                  (C7)
           s.t.     y'  f             , ' .
                                  p         

Remarks:

(i) With the binding budget constraint, we only have three first order conditions (C4-C6), and
the optimal housing consumption is implied from the binding budget constraint. If the cash-
in-advance constraint is also binding, then the first order condition in (C6) reduces to the
binding cash-in-advance constraint.

(ii) The continuation values (or marginal values), V(M’, y’), X(M’, y’) and Z(M’, y’), in the above
conditions reflect the consistency of the continuation game no matter whether it is on- or of-
the-equilibrium path, and this is the key feature of SMPPE.


                                                       25
Proposition 3 (Existence of SMPPE) If f(L,ε) is continuous and u(c,h) is continuous and have
continuous differentials, then there exists a Strong Markov Perfect Public Equilibrium.

Proof: See Appendix. ■

3.4. An Example with Policy Analysis


We assume u(c,h) = ln(c) + ln(h), and the production,y’ = f(L,ε), has common support Y=[y , y] .

We also assume that the cost of financial fragility ψ(ρ) satisfies ψ’(ρ) > 0(ρ≡MBS/TB) and the
Inada conditions, that is, limρ→0ψ’(ρ) = 0 and limρ→∞ψ’(ρ) = ∞.

Next, we are going to characterize some features of an SMPPE.

Proposition 4 (The Taylor Rule with Housing Rental Prices): Let gq be the expected
appreciation in home rental prices. The interest rate is approximately equal to the expected
home rental price appreciation rate plus one minus the time discounting rate i.e.,

r  gq  (1   ) .


Proof: See Appendix.■

ThisTaylor rule is derived from (C5) above with the assumed functional form, i.e., the FOC for
optimal Treasury holdings. To get an additional unit of Treasury bonds today, the agent needs to
give up some housing services (credit goods) consumption today, while his gain is the principal plus
interest rate tomorrow, which can be transformed into housing services consumption tomorrow.
So, the trade-off is between waiting to consume housing services tomorrow and paying the house
(rental) price appreciation versus the interest received. Note that this does not apply to cash goods
consumption, which is constrained by the amount of cash.

In our cash-in-advance economy, housing, i.e., the credit good, expenditure is closely linked to
the money supply chosen by the central bank while the cash good spending is sometimes
disconnected. The price level of the cash good is constrained by the initial money supply, and
is linked to the money supply chosen by the central bank as well as the housing rental price,
but only during a recession (i.e., when the CIAC is not binding). When the economy is booming
(the CIAC is binding), the money supply chosen by the central bank does not have an impact
on the price level today while it does affect the interest rate and the housing rental price. The
housing price is highly correlated with the money supply, and our theory provides an
explanation for that and suggests that the optimal monetary policy should pay close attention
to asset markets, in particular, the housing market.


                                                 26
Proposition 5 (Optimal Expansionary Policy): In any period, there exists some output levelwith
non-zero measure, whichafter being observed by the central bank,causes the central bankto
optimally choose a money supply such that the economy booms (i.e., CIAC is binding)
regardless of the initial money supply.

Proof: See Appendix. ■

The above proposition says that, regardless of the initial money supply, the central bank will
optimally conduct expansionary monetary policy, creating a boom, but only for certain output
levels. Intuitively, ex-ante money and Treasuries have the same expected value for the
representative agent in equilibrium (otherwise only one of them will be held by the agent in
equilibrium). However, we know that if the economy is in recession (CIAC is not binding),
Treasuries are more valuable as they pay interest, and on the other hand, if the economy is
booming (CIAC is binding), cash is more valuable as there is a shortage of cash. If the economy
is almost surely in recession, Treasuries will always be more valuable unless the interest rate
is zero, but zero interest rate cannot be optimal as there will be a very large amount of MBS in
the economy and cost of financial fragility is prohibitively high.

However, when the initial money supply is very high, the chance of getting into recession
becomes substantial, as we describe in the following proposition.

Proposition 6 (Boom-Bust): Assume that output is smoothly distributed for any amount of
collateral, and in particular, we assume yE[1/y’] ≤π (i.e., the variation in output is large enough).
When the initial money supply is high enough, then there exists some low output level with
non-zero measure, which after being observed by the central bank, causes the central bank to
optimally choose a money supply that triggers a recession (i.e., CIAC is not binding).

Proof: See Appendix. ■

Intuitively, with a large initial money supply, M, when the output is low, the central bank has
to choose a relatively low level of money supply M’ to drive down the price this period with
CIAC not binding. Otherwise, the price level this period would be too high, and the central
bank has to choose a very high M’ to keep the economy away from deflation, but this cannot
be optimal as the risk of financial fragility is too high. Proposition 6 is similar to Stein (2014):
“ . . . Monetary policy should be less accommodative—by which I mean that it should be willing
to tolerate a larger forecast shortfall of the path of the unemployment rate from its full-
employment level . . . “ (p. 2).

From Proposition 6, we can see that imposing a lower bound on inflation/deflation is a key
assumption for boom-bust pattern. Intuitively, when the output is very low this period causing

                                                27
the price level to surge up, the central bank has to choose an expansionary monetary policy
to avoid deflation, but this will increase the probability of financial crisis. Therefore, a recession
will be triggered when an expansionary monetary policy cannot be sustained when the initial
money supply is already very high (and there is a negative shock on output).

3.5. Discussion of the Value of Central Bank Intervention

While doing nothing (allowing a crisis to occur) is always in its strategy space, central bank
intervention can improve social welfare, which is measured by the representative agent’s
lifetime utility from consumption net of the cost of financial fragility. In the two-period model,
the optimal money supply M2 is either Mπ or Mψ, which are independent of output given the
assumptions in Section 2. But, as long as M1 is not at either Mπ or Mψ then there is an M2 which
can improve welfare, which is the utility from consumption net of the cost of financial fragility.

For the infinite horizon case, the channels through which central bank intervention improves
social welfare are more complicated. Intuitively, a low output this period would drive up the
price level this period (if the CIAC is binding) and drive down the real value of collateral and
next period’s output. The central bank can conduct an expansionary monetary policy to
increase the nominal amount of collateral, keeping the economy booming. However, if the
initial money supply is already very high, an expansionary monetary policy after a low output
realization might not be optimal as the cost of financial fragility is too high, and the optimal
monetary policy could be contractionary, which drives down the price level (if the CIAC is not
binding) and the economy goes into recession. In a recession, the nominal amount of the
collateral goes down, but the real value of the collateral does not go down as much because
the price level also goes down.

Similarly, a high output realization this period would drive down the price level this period (if
the CIAC is binding) and drive up the real value of collateral and next period’s output. The
central bank can conduct a contractionary monetary policy to reduce the nominal amount of
collateral to balance the marginal gain from the output increase with the marginal cost of
financial fragility, while keeping the economy booming. However, if the initial money supply is
very low, a contractionary monetary policy after a high output might not be optimal as the
cost of financial fragility is low, and the optimal monetary policy could be expansionary, which
drives up the price level and the economy could get into booming.

To illustrate some of the intuition above, we can check the welfare improvement of a one-shot
deviation from no-intervention. To simplify the illustration, besides the assumptions in Section
3.4., we further assume the realization of output can be only one of two values, yG or yB, and
that the real value of the collateral affects the probability distribution of output, i.e., prob(yG)

                                                 28
= f(L), with f(L) increasing with the real value of the collateral, L. The representative agent’s
value functions can be expressed as:

               VG  u(yG , H)  (G )    f (LG )VG  (1  f (LG ))VB 
                                                                               .
                VB  u(yB , H)  (B )    f (LB )VG  (1  f (LB ))VB 

Now consider a one-shot marginal money supply shock to the economy, in which M’ = M ±
ΔM, and we have the following:

Proposition 7: With δ/(1-β) greater than 1, an increase in the money supply M’ will increase
both ρ and L, and we have three cases for the optimal choice of money supply:

(i) M is very high; the optimal monetary policy is contractionary for both output levels, i.e.,
M’(G) = M’(B) = M – ΔM.

(ii) M is at an intermediate level; the optimal monetary policy is contractionary for the high
output level, i.e., M’(G) = M – ΔM, and expansionary for the low output level, i.e., M’(B) = M +
ΔM.

(iii) M is very low; the optimal monetary policy is expansionary for both output levels, i.e.,
M’(G) = M’(B) = M – ΔM.

Proof: See Appendix. ■

From the above example, we can see that case (ii) is very similar to the conventional
countercyclical type monetary policy, but it is due to a completely different non-interest rate
channel. Cases (i) and (iii) are slightly different types of central bank intervention. If the
economy experienced a long-lasting monetary expansion, a contractionary monetary policy is
almost surely optimal. If the economy experienced a long lasting monetary contraction, an
expansionary monetary policy is almost surely optimal.

In our dynamic game with frequent central bank intervention, the mechanism is more
complicated as the central bank intervention might drive the economy into recession, which
could be optimal.

4. Conclusion

Monetary policy and macroprudential policy are linked because of the transformation of the
financial system, which occurred over the last thirty or so years, dramatically increasing the role
of collateral. Bank loans, which were previously passively held on bank balance sheets as
immobile collateral became mobile via securitization. In the credit boom preceding the crisis,

                                                   29
it was mortgage-backed securities that grew enormously. A large portion of Treasuries are held
abroad, so in the United States, the ratio of MBS to Treasuries rose dramatically, ending in a
financial crisis. Privately-produced collateral is not riskless, so when the ratio of MBS to
Treasuries increases, financial fragility increases.

Cash and Treasuries are not substitutes because cash cannot be securitized and Treasuries cannot
be used to satisfy cash-in-advance constraints. Open market operations exchange cash for
Treasuries affecting the quality of collateral in the economy. If insured demand deposits are the
dominate form of privately-produced safe debt, then the quality of collateral, bank loans, can be
monitored by bank examiners and the central bank can focus on inflation targeting.

One possible solution to the issue of the quality of private collateral is for the government to
oversee, monitor, its production (see Gorton and Metrick (2010)). But, this is not likely to eliminate
the problem that privately-produced collateral is not riskless. So, in a world where privately-
produced collateral, MBS, is important, the central bank needs to respond to a decline in
collateral quality to reduce financial fragility. The central bank undertakes this
macroprudential role by incorporating the costs of financial fragility into its policy. In the
setting here, it is the real value of collateral which is central to monetary policy. But, trading
one kind of money for another complicates monetary policy.

As a practical matter how should the central bank behave? Financial crises are not predictable, but
they are related to the quality of collateral in the economy. This suggests that measures of the
scarcity of Treasuries would be an indicator of fragility. There are signs of a scarcity of good
collateral. One is an increase the convenience yield such as the GC repo minus Treasury rate spread.
Stein (2014) focuses on bond risk premia, which when very low may also be signaling an excess
demand for collateral. This does not exclude other possible indicators such as financial firm
leverage, but that requires knowing where the “banks” are. The financial crisis illustrated that this
is not always easy.




                                                 30
                                        Appendix: Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1: We solve for equilibrium prices using backward induction. At date 2,
with the multipliers λ1 ≥ 0 and λ2 ≥ 0, the Lagrange conditions for (2) are:

                                   vc (c2 )  1 p2  2 p2  0
                                    vc (nw3 / p2 ) / p2  1  0
                                   p2c2  w3  p2 y2  nw2
                                   p2c2  m2 .

It is easy to show that the budget constraint is binding, which implies λ1> 0. Eliminating λ1 from
the Lagrangean and substituting in the market clearing conditions, c2 = y2, c3 = nw3 /p2 = (w3 –
TB2 )/p2 = M2/p2, we have:

                                vc (y2 )   vc (M2 / p2 )  2 p2  0
                                p2 y2  M2 .

If the cash-in-advance condition is not binding, that is, p2<M2/y2, then λ2 = 0, or,
vc (y2 )=vc (M2 / p2 ) . With the assumptions on the utility function, we have

                           vc (y2 )  1 / y2   vc (M2 / p2 )   p2 / M2
                            p2  M2 /  y2  M2 / y2

which constitutes a contradiction. Therefore, we must have the cash-in-advance constraint
binding at date 2 with λ2> 0, and we have p2  M2 / y2 .

For the date 1 price, we need to characterize the functional form of U(m2 ,tb2 ) for an agent
with holdings m2 and tb2, whether on-the-equilibrium path or off-the-equilibrium path at date
2. Using p2  M2 / y2 , when the cash-in-advance constraint is binding, we have:

                                c2  m2 / p2  m2 y2 / M2
                                                                     .
                                nw3  M2  tb2  TB2  (1  r1 )

If the following condition holds, then the cash-in-advance constraint is binding:

                      m2  nw3 /  with nw3  M2  (tb2  TB2 )(1  r1 ).

In which case:

                       U(m2 ,tb2 )  ln(c2 )   ln(nw3 / p2 )
                         ln(m2 f / M2 )   ln(nw3 f / M2 )
                         (1   )ln( f )  ln(m2 / M2 )   ln(nw3 / M2 ).


                                                 31
We can also characterize the form of U(m2, tb2) when the cash-in-advance constraint is not
binding, and we have λ2 = 0 and

                         c2  nw3 /  p2  nw3y2 /  M2
                                   
                         nw3           M2  m2  (tb2  TB2 )(1  r1 )
                                 1

Using the condition in the lemma, we have:

                        U(m2 ,tb2 )  ln(c2 )   ln(nw3 / p2 )
                         ln(nw3 f /  M2 )   ln(nw3 f / M2 )
                         (1   )ln( f )  (1   )ln(nw3 / M2 )  ln( ).

At date 1, with the multipliers μ1 ≥ 0 andμ2 ≥ 0, the Lagrange conditions for (1) are:

                           uc (c1 , h)  1 p1  2 p1  0
                           uh (c1 , h)  1q  0
                            Um  1  0
                            Utb  1  0
                           p1c1  qh  m2  tb2  p1y1  qH  nw1
                           p1c1  m1 .

Substituting in the market clearing conditions m2 = M2 and tb2 = TB2 into U(m2, tb2), we have:

                          Um (m2  M2 ,tb2  TB2 )  1 / M2
                          Utb (m2  M2 ,tb2  TB2 )   (1  r1 ) / M2 .

For the Lagrange conditions, substitute in the market clearing conditions, c1 = y1, h = H, and
we have:

                            1   / M2 ,1  r1  1 /  , q  M2 /  H
                            1 / y1  1 p1  2 p1  0
                            p1y1  M1 .

When the cash-in-advance constraint is binding, we have:

                            p1  M1 / y1
                            1 / y1  1 p1  2 p1  0  M2  M1  .

When the cash-in-advance constraint is not binding, we have:




                                                   32
                                  2  0
                                  p1  1 / y1 1  M2 /  y1       ■
                                  p1y1  M2 /   M1  M2  M1  .

Proof of Lemma 1: The output can be written as:

                           A[  NW  ( / (1   )   )M2 ]y1
                                                                if M2  M1 
                                          M2
                     y2  
                           A[  NW  ( / (1   )   )M2 ]y1 if M  M  .
                          
                                          M1                       2    1



The result is immediate. ■

Proof of Proposition 2: The optimal monetary policy solves the following optimization
problem:

     max M2 V (M2 )   (1   )ln( f (L))  (MBS / TB2 )  C
                       [  NW  ( / (1   )   )M2 ]y1            M2         
        (1   )ln f                                                             C if M2  M1 
                                      M2                      (1   )(NW  M2 ) 
     
        (1   )ln f  [  NW  ( / (1   )   )M2 ]y1          M2         
                                                                                    C if M2  M1  .
                                     M1                      (1   )(NW  M2 ) 

With the assumption that M  M , we know that the lower bound on the money supply is
Mπ. When M  M  M1  , the optimal money supply is Mψ as Mψ yields the highest
welfare for any M2  M1  . When M  M1   M , we know that in the region with
M2  M1  , the optimal money supply is Mπ, as both the output and the risk of financial
fragility increase as M2 decreases, while in the region M2  M1  , the optimal money supply
is Mψ, by Proposition 2, therefore the optimal money supply is Mπ or Mψ, whichever gives the
highest value of social welfare. When M1   M  M , we know in the region M2  M1  ,
social welfare is decreasing with M2, while in the region M2  M1  , social welfare is
decreasing with M2; therefore, the lower bound on money supply, Mπ, yields the highest
welfare, and is the optimal money supply. We can see that the proposition statement is true
when M  M  M1  or M1   M  M , so we only need to show the case with
M  M1   M . We first prove that when M1 satisfies M  M1   M , we have
V(Mπ|M1)/V(Mψ|M1) increasing with M1. To see that, we have:

                                              A  NW  ( / (1   )   )M  y1               NW
V (M |M1 )  ln y1  lnH   (1   )ln                                                 ln           ,
                                                                 M                             NW  M



                                                        33
                                        A   NW  ( / (1   )   )M  y1
V (M |M1 )  ln y1  lnH   (1   )ln 
                                                                                         NW
                                                                                  ln         .
                                                        M1                            NW  M

The result is immediate as V(Mπ|M1) is independent of M1 while V(Mψ|M1) is decreasing with
M1. We can check that, when M1  M /  , we have V(Mπ|M1) <V(Mψ|M1); when
M1  M /  , we have V(Mπ|M1) >V(Mψ|M1). Therefore, there exists some M1*∈(Mπ/β,
Mψ/β) such that V(Mπ|M1*) = V(Mψ|M1*). ■

Proof of Lemma 2: Cash-in-advance constraint is binding (B): If on-the-equilibrium path, the
cash-in-advance constraint is binding, the additional cash holding today will increase cash
goods consumption tomorrow, while the additional Treasuries holding today will increase
housing consumption tomorrow, given everything else the same. We can write a one-period
optimization problem as follows

              max ct 1 ,ht 1 u(ct 1 , ht 1 )
                         pt 1ct 1  qt 1ht 1  mt 2  tbt 2  pt 1yt 1  qt 1H  wt 1  TBt 1rt
              s.t.      wt 1  mt 1  tbt 1 (1  rt )
                         pt 1ct 1  mt 1

The binding cash-in-advance constraint and budget constraint give:

                 ctB1  mt 1 / pt 1
                 htB1   pt 1yt 1  qt 1H  wt 1  TBt 1rt  pt 1ct 1  mt 2  tbt 2  / qt 1
                   pt 1yt 1  qt 1H  tbt 1 (1  rt )  TBt 1rt  mt 2  tbt 2  / qt 1

Define the marginal value of cash holdings at time t+1 as follows


                                                   XtB1  uc (yt 1 , H) / pt 1 ,


which is just the first order condition of expected t+1 utility with respect to mt+1 at

ctB1 (wt 1 )  yt 1 and htB1 (wt 1 )  H .


Similarly, define the expected marginal value of Treasury holdings at time t+1 as follows:


                                             ZtB1  uh (yt 1 , H)(1  rt ) / qt 1 ,


which is just the first order condition of expected t+1 utility with respect to tbt+1 at

ctB1 (wt 1 )  yt 1 and htB1 (wt 1 )  H .

                                                                34
For the cash-in-advance constraint to be binding, we need:

                                           u c ( y t 1 , H ) / pt 1  u h ( y t 1 , H ) / qt 1
                                            X tB1  Z tB1 /(1  rt )

Cash-in-advance constraint is not binding (NB): If on-the-equilibrium path, the cash-in-

advance constraint is not binding, that is pt 1 yt 1  mt , then to calculate the additional utility

from extra cash holdings and Treasury holdings, we write a one-period optimization problem
as follows:

              max ct 1 ,ht 1 u(ct 1 , ht 1 )
                         pt 1ct 1  qt 1ht 1  mt 2  tbt 2  pt 1yt 1  qt 1H  wt 1  TBt 1rt
              s.t.
                         wt 1  mt 1  tbt 1 (1  rt )

in which ct+1 and ht+1 are the only choice variables, and mt+2 and tbt+2 can be deemed to be fixed.

Denote the solution to the above problem as ctNB                 NB
                                              1 ( wt 1 ) and ht 1 ( wt 1 ) , which are functions of


the initial wealth, wt+1.

Now we can define the marginal value of cash holdings at time t+1 as follows


                                                            1 wt 1
                                                        dctNB                        NB dht 1 wt 1
                                                                                           NB

                            1  uc (ct 1 , ht 1 )
                         XtNB                                          uh (ctNB
                                      NB      NB
                                                                                 , h
                                                                               1 t 1 )
                                                        dwt 1 mt 1                    dwt 1 mt 1 ,
                                  uc (yt 1 , H)cwNB,t 1  uh (yt 1 , H)hwNB,t 1

which is again the first order condition of expected t+1 utility with respect to mt at

  1 ( wt 1 )  y t 1 and ht 1 ( wt 1 )  H .
ctNB                          NB




Similarly, we can define the expected marginal value of Treasury holdings at time t+1 as follows

                                                            1 wt 1
                                                        dctNB                        NB dht 1 wt 1
                                                                                            NB
                             1  uc (ct 1 , ht 1 )
                          ZtNB                                          uh (ctNB
                                       NB      NB
                                                                                  , h
                                                                                1 t 1 )
                                                        dwt 1 tbt 1                    dwt 1 tbt 1
                                  uc (yt 1 , H)cwNB,t 1 (1  rt )  uh (yt 1 , H)hwNB,t 1 (1  rt )
                                  XtNB
                                      1 (1  rt )


which is again the first order condition of expected t+1 utility with respect to tbt+1 at

  1 ( wt 1 )  y t 1 and ht 1 ( wt 1 )  H .
ctNB                          NB




                                                                    35
Furthermore, given the binding budget constraint, it is easy to check that

                                   uc (yt 1 , H) / pt 1  uh (yt 1 , H) / qt 1
                                    pt 1cwNB,t 1  qt 1hwNB,t 1  1

which implies


        uc (yt 1 , H)cwNB,t 1  uh (yt 1 , H)hwNB,t 1  uc (yt 1 , H) / pt 1  uh (yt 1 , H) / qt 1 .


Therefore, we can further simplify the expressions of XtNB       NB
                                                         1 and Zt 1 as follows:




                        1  uc (yt 1 , H) / pt 1
                     XtNB
                        1  uc (yt 1 , H)(1  rt ) / pt 1  uh (yt 1 , H)(1  rt ) / qt 1 . ■
                     ZtNB

Proof of Proposition 3: Given the pricing functions p(M, M’, y) and q(M, M’, y), for any value
function, U(M, y), the central bank chooses next period’s money supply, M′, to maximize the
representative agent’s utility.


Let CU be the set of continuous functions from [0, NW ]  [y , y ] to R, and let ρ be the sup-

norm defined on CU, that is ρ(V1,V2) = sup{V1(M, y) – V2(M, y)}. Given continuous p(M, M’, y),
q(M, M’, y) and V(M, y), define a mapping TU: CU→CU as follows:

              T1 (V )(M , y)  max M ' u(y , H)  (MBS / TB ')   E y ' V (TB ', y ')
                                TB '  MBS      
              s.t.      y'  f              , ' 
                                      p          

We can show that T1(V) is a contraction mapping. According to Berge’s Maximum Theorem,
we know that there exists a fixed point, V, which is continuous and satisfies T1(V) = V. Moreover,
the corresponding solution M’(M, y) is compact-valued upper hemi-continuous
correspondences (M’(M, y) is not empty-valued as the objective function is continuous and
the choice sets are compact by the Extreme Value Theorem. We know that a compact-valued
upper hemi-continuous correspondence contains a continuous function,12 and we can pick



12
 To see this, we know that a compact-valued upper hemi-continuous correspondence (Ω: X→Y) has
the following property: for every sequence {xn}→x and every sequence {yn} such that yn∈Ω(xn) for all n,
there exists a convergent subsequence of {yn} whose limit point y is in Ω(x). See, for example, Stokey et
al. (1989).
                                                          36
such a continuous function from M’(M, y), defined as M’(M, y). Therefore, we have a map from
continuous pricing functions (p(M, M’, y), q(M, M’, y)) to M’(M, y), which is also continuous.

Given continuous M’(M, y), with M’’ = M’(M’, y’), define:


       Tq (p)  uh (y , H) / q(TB,TB ', y)   E[uc (y ', H) / p(TB ',TB '', y ')]
       Tp (p)  uc (y , H) / p(TB,TB ', y)
              uc (y / H)y / (NW  TB) if uc (y / H)y / (NW  TB)  uh (y , H) / q(TB,TB ', y)
             
              Tq (p)  uh (y , H) / q(TB,TB ', y) otherwise

                                           ~ ) using the first order condition with respect to
Basically, Tp maps p to 𝑝̃ through Tq (and q

m′ for the representative agent’s optimization problem.

Let Cp be the set of continuous function from [0, NW ] [y , y ] to R, and let ρ be the sup-norm

defined on Cp. We can show that Tp(.) is a contraction mapping, and there exists a continuous
function p(M, M’, y) such that, uc(y, H)/ p(M, M’, y) = Tp(p). Thus, we establish a mapping from
M’(M, y) to p(M, M’, y), from which we can derive q(M, M’, y) from Tq.


With C being the set of continuous pricing functions from [0, NW ]2  [y , y ] to R2, so far we have

established a mapping from (p(M, M’, y), q(M, M’, y))  C to (p(M, M’, y), q(M, M’, y))  C, which
we call T. We can show that C is a non-empty weakly compact convex subset of a Banach space
(because the set of continuous functions defined on a compact set with the sup-norm is
compact, convex, and complete), and T is a continuous mapping as it is the product of two
continuous mappings. By the Brouwer-Schauder-Tychonoff Fixed Point Theorem, we know

there exists a fixed point {p(M, M’, y), q(M, M’, y)}  C( [0, NW ]2  [y , y ] ) such that (p, q)  T(p,

q).13■


Proof of Proposition 4: (C3) and (C5) imply: 1 / qH   E  Z (M ', y ')   E[(1  r ) / q ' H] , which

can be written as:


                    1
                            E q / q '  1  E[(q ' q) / q ']  1  E[(q ' q) / q]  1  gq .
                 (1  r )



13
     See, for example, Aliprantis and Border (1999).
                                                        37
Taking logs we have r  gq  (1   ) .■


Proof of Proposition 5: Suppose that for almost all realizations of output y’, the economy is in
recession next period, i.e. the cash-in-advance constraint is not binding Then we have:

                         1 / qH   E  X (M ', y ')   E 1 / q ' H 
                         1 / qH   E  Z (M ', y ')   E (1  r ) / q ' H  ,

which implies r = 0. However, r = 0 implies MBS = infinity, which yields an infinitely high cost
of financial fragility and cannot be an equilibrium outcome. This is never optimal, so the
central bank adopts an expansionary monetary policy. ■

Proof of Proposition 6: Given that the initial money supply M large enough (close to NW),
assume for any output y, the optimal monetary policy is such that the economy is booming
(CIAC is binding) this period. For the lower bound of output level, y, the price level this period
will be p = M/y. We know that the price level for next period must satisfy p’≤M’/y’ by CIAC,
and this implies M’>M as we know E[p’]/p≥π but yE[1/y’] ≤π. When M approaches the upper
limit, NW, we must have M’ approaching NW, which implies ρ = MBS/TB’ is approaching
infinity and the cost of financial fragility goes to infinity. Therefore, the money supply M’ such
that M’>M and the economy is always booming cannot be the optimal monetary policy for the
central bank when the output is low. ■

Proof of Proposition 7:We can show that the CIAC is binding in equilibrium for both output
levels without central bank intervention. Consider a one-shot marginal money supply shock to
the economy, in which M’=M±ΔM; we only need consider the marginal benefit of the central
bank operation with CIAC always binding (i.e., the economy is always booming). We have the
following results:


                pG yG  pB yB  M , qG H  qBH  M '/ 
                 (1  r )  1, X G  X B  1 / M
                ZG  (1  r ) / qG H  ZB  (1  r ) / qBH  1 / M '
                G  MBSG / TB '  B  MBSB / TB '  M '/ (1   )(NW  M ')
                                               NW  M '  M '/ (1   )
                LG  (TB '  MBSG ) / pG 
                                                         M / yG
                                                NW  M '  M '/ (1   )
                 LB  (TB '  MBSB ) / pG 
                                                          M / yB




                                                   38
When M is very high, both ρ and L are very high, with convexity of ψ() and concavity of f(), we
know that ψρρM’(G) = ψρρM’(B) > fLLM’(B)(VG–VB) > fLLM’(G)(VG–VB), and so the optimal monetary
policy is contractionary for both output levels, i.e., M’(G) = M’(B) = M – ΔM.

When M is at an intermediate level, we have fLLM’(B)(VG–VB) > ψρρM’(G) = ψρρM’(B) > fLLM’(G)(VG–
VB), and the optimal monetary policy is contractionary for the high output level, i.e., M’(G) =
M – ΔM, and expansionary for the low output level, i.e., M’(B) = M + ΔM.

When M is very low, we have fLLM’(B)(VG–VB) > fLLM’(G)(VG–VB) > ψρρM’(G) = ψρρM’(B), and the
optimal monetary policy is expansionary for both output levels, i.e., M’(G) = M’(B) = M – ΔM.
■




                                              39
                                           References

Abreu, Dilip (1988), “On the Theory of Infinitely Repeated Games with Discounting,”
        Econometrica 56, 383-396.

Abreu, Dilip, David Pearce, and Ennio Stacchetti (1986), “Optimal Cartel Equilibria with
        Imperfect Monitoring,” Journal of Economic Theory, 39 (1), 251-269.

Abreu, Dilip, David Pearce, and Ennio Stacchetti (1990), “Toward a Theory of Discounted
        Repeated Games with Imperfect Monitoring,” Econometrica, 58 (5), 1041-1063.

Aliprantis, Charalambos and Kim Border (1999), Infinite Dimensional Analysis, Springer.

Andolfatto, David and Stephen Williamson (2015), “Scarcity of Safe Assets, Inflation, and the Policy
        Trap,” Journal of Monetary Economics 73, 70-92.

Atkeson, Andrew (1991), “International Lending with Moral Hazard and Risk of Repudiation,”
        Econometrica, 59 (4), 1069-1089.

Benchimol, Jonathan (2010), “Money in the Production Function: A New Keynesian DSGE
        Perspective,” Southern Economic Journal, forthcoming.

Benigno, Pierpaolo and Salvatore Nisticò (2016), “Safe Assets, Liquidity and Monetary Policy,”
        American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Bernanke, Ben (2015), “Should Monetary Policy Take into Account Risks to Financial Stability?,”
        speech in London, May 20, 2014; see
        http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/ben-bernanke/posts/2015/04/07-monetary-policy-
        risks-to-financial-stability

Caballero, Ricardo, and Emmanuel Farhi (2014), “The Safety Trap,” NBER Working Paper No. 20652.

Chang, Roberto (1998), “Credible Monetary Policy in an Infinite Horizon Model: Recursive
        Approaches,” Journal of Economic Theory 81, 431-461.

Chari, V. V. and Patrick J. Kehoe (1990), “Sustainable Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 98
        (4), 783-802.

Cronshaw, Mark (1997), “Algorithms for Finding Repeated Game Equilibria,” Computational
     Economics 10, 139-168.

Duffee, Gregory (1996), “Idiosyncratic Variations of Treasuries,” Journal of Finance 51, 527-
     551.
                                                40
Fischer, Stanley (1974), “Money and the Production Function,” Economic Inquiry 12, 517-
    533.

Friedman, Milton (1969), The Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays (Aldine
    Publishing: Chicago).

Fudenberg, Drew, David Levine, and Eric Maskin (1994), “The Folk Theorem with Imperfect
       Public Information,” Econometrica, 62 (5), 997-1039.

Garrat, Rodney, Antoine Martin, James McAndrews and Ed Nosal (2015), “Segregated Balance
       Accounts,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No, 730.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2010), “Regulating the Shadow Banking System,”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 261-312.

Gorton, Gary and Tyler Muir (2015), “Mobile Collateral versus Immobile Collateral,” Yale,
       working paper.

Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordoñez (2015), “Good Booms, Bad Booms,” Yale and Penn
       working paper.

Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordoñez (2014), “Collateral Crises,” American Economic Review
       104 (February 2014), 343-378.

Gorton, Gary, Ping He, and Lixin Huang (2013), “Agency-Based Asset Pricing,” Journal of
    Economic Theory 149, 311-349..

Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen, and Andrew Metrick (2012), “The Safe Asset Share,” American
    Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 102:101–106.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2015), “Betting the House,” Journal of
       International Economics 96, S2–S18.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor (2011), “Financial Crises, Credit Booms and
    External Balances: 140 Years of Lessons,” IMF Review 59, 340-378.

Judd, Kenneth, Sevin Yeltekin and James Curry (2003), “Computing Supergame Equilibria,”
    Econometrica 71, 1239-1254.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), “The Aggregate Demand for
    Treasury Debt.” Journal of Political Economy 120, 233-267.



                                             41
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2015), “Short Term Debt and Financial
    Crises: What We Can Learn from U.S. Treasury Supply?,” Journal of Financial Economics,
    forthcoming.

Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott (1980), “Dynamic Optimal Taxation, Rational Expectations,
    and Optimal Control,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 2, 79-91.

Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency
    of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy 85, 473-491.

Leamer, Edward (2007), “Housing Is the Business Cycle,” paper presented at the Federal Reserve
        Bank of Kansas City 31st Economic Policy Symposium, “Housing, Housing Finance and
        Monetary Policy,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 31– September 1.

Levhari, David and Don Patinkin (1968), “The Role of Money in a Simple Growth Model,”
    American Economic Review 58, 713-753.

Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas Sargent (2004), Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, Second Edition
    (MIT Press).

Marcet, Albert and Ramon Marimon (2011), “Recursive Contracts,” Barcelona GSE Working
    paper no. 552.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2014), House of Debt (University of Chicago Press).

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner (2016), “Household Debt and Business Cycles Worldwide,”
        University of Chicago and Princeton, working paper.

Nagel, Stefan (2014), “The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets,” University of Michigan,
    working paper.

Nguyen, Hong (1966), “Money in the Aggregate Production Function: Reexamination and
    Further Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 18, 141-151.

Phelan, Christopher and Ennio Stacchetti (2001), “Sequential Equilibria in a Ramsey Tax Model,”
    Econometrica 69 (6), 1491-1518.

Saving, Thomas (1972), “Transactions Costs and the Firm’s Demand for Money,” Journal of
    Money, Credit and Banking 4, 245-259.

Schularick, Moritz and Alan Taylor (2012), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
    Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008,” American Economic Review 102, 1029-
    1061.
                                              42
Sidrauski, Miguel (1967), “Rational Choices and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy,”
    American Economic Review 57, 534-544.

Sinai, Allen and Houston Stokes (1972), “Real Money Balances: An Omitted Variable from the
    Production Function?,” Review of Economics and Statistics 54, 290-296.

Sleet, Christopher and Sevin Yeltekin (2002), “On the Computation of Value Correspondences,”
    Northwestern, working paper.

Stein, Jeremy (2012), “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 127, 57-95.

Stokey, Nancy (1991), “Credible Public Policy,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 15,
    627-655.

Stokey, Nancy L., Robert E. Lucas Jr., with Edward C. Prescott (1989), Recursive Methods in
        Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press.

Sunderam, Adi (2012), “Money Creation and the Shadow Banking System,”Review of Financial
    Studies, forthcoming.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2015), “Monetary Policy and Macroprudential Policy: Different and Separate,”
    draft; http://larseosvensson.se/
Williams, John C. (2015), “Macroprudential Policy in a Microprudential World,” speech in
        Singapore, May 28; http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-
        speeches/williams-speeches/2015/may/macroprudential-policy-microprudential-world/

You, Jong (1981), “Money, Technology, and the Production Function: An Empirical Study,”
    Canadian Journal of Economics 14, 515-524.




                                               43
         Figure 1: Components of Privately-Produced Safe
           Debt as a Fraction of Total Privately-Produced
                          Safe Debt (U.S.)
 100%
  80%
  60%
  40%
  20%
    0%




               Deposits                         Money-like debt
               MBS/ABS Debt                     Corporate Bonds and Loans
               Other Liabilities

Source: Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick (2012), based on Flow of Funds data.




                                           44
