                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INFORMAL LABOR AND THE EFFICIENCY COST OF SOCIAL PROGRAMS:
    EVIDENCE FROM THE BRAZILIAN UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE PROGRAM

                                      François Gerard
                                      Gustavo Gonzaga

                                     Working Paper 22608
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22608


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2016, Revised May 2018

We would like to thank Veronica Alaimo, Miguel Almunia, Alan Auerbach, Juliano Assunção,
Richard Blundell, Mark Borgschulte, David Card, Raj Chetty, Julie Cullen, Claudio Ferraz, Fred
Finan, Rema Hanna, Jonas Hjort, Hedvig Horvath, Henrik Kleven, Patrick Kline, Camille
Landais, Attila Lindner, Ioana Marinescu, Jamie McCasland, Pascal Michaillat, Edward Miguel,
Torsten Persson, Roland Rathelot, Emmanuel Saez, Johannes Schmieder, Rodrigo Soares,
Johannes Spinnewijn, Eric Verhoogen, Till von Wachter, Owen Zidar, and seminar participants at
the Annual Congress of the IIPF, the Annual Meetings of the SOLE, the Brazilian Econometric
Society, the Bank of Mexico, Brown, Chicago, the CEPR Annual Public Economics Symposium,
CIDE, COLMEX, Columbia, Duke, EESP–FGV, the IADB, the IIES, Insper, McGill, the NBER
Public Economics Program Meeting, PUC-Rio, Toulouse, UC Berkeley, UC Los Angeles, UC
San Diego, UCL, Maryland, Uppsala, Urbana–Champaign, Wharton, Wisconsin–Madison, and
the World Bank for useful comments and suggestions. We also thank the Ministério do Trabalho
e Emprego for providing access to the data and CNPq (Gustavo Gonzaga), Wallonie–Bruxelles
International, and the Center for Equitable Growth (François Gerard) for financial support. All
errors are our own. Corresponding author: François Gerard (email: fgerard@columbia.edu). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by François Gerard and Gustavo Gonzaga. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Informal Labor and the Efficiency Cost of Social Programs:
Evidence from the Brazilian Unemployment Insurance Program
François Gerard and Gustavo Gonzaga
NBER Working Paper No. 22608
September 2016, Revised May 2018
JEL No. H0,J46,J65

                                           ABSTRACT

It is widely believed that the presence of a large informal sector increases the efficiency cost of
social programs – transfer and social insurance programs – in developing countries. We evaluate
such claims for policies that have been heavily studied in countries with low informality –
increases in unemployment insurance (UI) benefits. We introduce informal work opportunities
into a canonical model of optimal UI that specifies the typical tradeoff between workers’ need for
insurance and the efficiency cost from distorting their incentives to return to a formal job. We
then combine the model with evidence drawn from comprehensive administrative data to quantify
the efficiency cost of increases in potential UI duration in Brazil. We find evidence of behavioral
responses to UI incentives, including informality responses. However, because reemployment
rates in the formal sector are low to begin with, most beneficiaries would draw the UI benefits
absent behavioral responses, and only a fraction of the cost of (longer) UI benefits is due to
perverse incentive effects. As a result, the efficiency cost is relatively low, and in fact lower than
comparable estimates for the US. We reinforce this finding by showing that the efficiency cost is
also lower in labor markets with higher informality within Brazil. This is because formal
reemployment rates are even lower in those labor markets, absent behavioral responses. In sum,
the results go against the conventional wisdom, and indicate that efficiency concerns may even
become more relevant as an economy formalizes.


François Gerard
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 IAB
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fgerard@columbia.edu

Gustavo Gonzaga
Department of Economics
Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro
(PUC-Rio)
gonzaga@econ.puc-rio.br
    The informal sector – the part of an economy that escapes government monitoring – accounts
for a larger share of employment in middle-income and developing countries. In a context of
high informality, the conventional wisdom is that social programs – transfer and social insurance
programs – impose high efficiency costs, particularly when they require beneficiaries to not be
formally employed (Levy, 2008). The concern is that the ready availability of informal job oppor-
tunities exacerbates the usual disincentives to work in the formal sector created by such programs.1
    Despite this widespread view, the evidence behind it remains limited. First, partly due to data
constraints, few papers credibly estimate the impact of social programs on employment choices in
developing countries.2 Existing surveys often poorly measure eligibility and have sample sizes too
small to exploit most sources of exogenous variation in program benefits. Administrative datasets
are only slowly becoming available. Second, those studies finding that social programs induce
some beneficiaries to not work in the formal sector typically lack a theoretical framework to inter-
pret this evidence in terms of the relevant efficiency-equity or efficiency-insurance tradeoff. This
is important because evidence of incentive effects in a context of high informality does not imply
that the associated efficiency cost is relatively high, or higher than in a context of low informality.3
    This paper addresses both limitations for the case of increases in Unemployment Insurance
(UI) benefits. We first adapt a canonical framework in the UI literature to identify the measure of
efficiency for the usual moral hazard problem – that increases in UI benefits distort incentives to
return to a formal job – in a high-informality context. We then obtain new evidence on the size of
the relevant effects using administrative data on Brazilian UI beneficiaries, survey data, and quasi-
experimental variation in UI benefits. This allows us to provide an estimate of efficiency costs that
can be compared to estimates from countries with low informality. We also directly estimate how
the efficiency cost varies across Brazilian labor markets with different degrees of informality. As
a result, we show that the efficiency cost of a typical social program is not necessarily high(er) in
a context of high(er) informality. Finally, as our findings suggest shifting the policy debate from
efficiency concerns to workers’ actual need for insurance, we end by shedding some light on the
insurance value of increases in UI benefits, the other side of the usual efficiency-insurance tradeoff.
    UI is an ideal program to study these issues. It requires the beneficiaries – displaced formal
   1 We define informal workers as those who escape government monitoring, which include informal employees and
most self-employed workers in middle-income and developing countries. Informal workers are not eligible for UI;
UI beneficiaries can work informally and still draw UI benefits. The set of (in)formal jobs – those held by (in)formal
workers – constitute the (in)formal sector. We use “formal workers” and “formal employees” interchangeably.
   2 The list has been growing in recent years (e.g., Azuara and Marinescu, 2013; Banerjee et al., forthcoming; Bergolo

and Cruces, 2014, 2016; Bosch and Campos-Vasquez, 2014; Camacho, Conover and Hoyos, 2014; Garganta and
Gasparini, 2015; Gasparini, Haimovich and Olivieri, 2009; Imbert and Papp, 2015).
   3 The above-cited papers investigate the impact of different social programs on employment outcomes, but none of

them attempts to use a theoretical framework to interpret their findings in terms of the efficiency cost of the policy.
Bergolo and Cruces (2016) is a recent exception, but it is unclear whether they successfully do so. Bergolo and Cruces
(2014) estimates behavioral and mechanical effects of a policy, but do not study its efficiency cost.


                                                          1
employees – to not be formally reemployed. It has been adopted or considered in a number of
middle-income and developing countries.4 Moreover, international development agencies have
emphatically pointed to the heightened moral hazard problem it supposedly creates in the presence
of a large informal sector.5 Finally, in contrast to other programs prevalent in middle-income and
developing countries (e.g., Conditional Cash Transfers), comparable UI programs exist and have
been studied in developed countries, which allows us to benchmark our results against estimates
from contexts of low informality.6 Brazil also constitutes a uniquely well-suited empirical setting
because it offers wide variation in the relative shares of formal and informal workers across labor
markets. This allows us to investigate how the efficiency cost varies with the degree of informality.
    We begin by introducing informal job opportunities into the Baily-Chetty framework (Baily,
1978; Chetty, 2006, 2008). It is a partial-equilibrium framework that has been extensively used
to evaluate the tradeoff with increases in UI benefits, between the need for insurance and the effi-
ciency cost from the usual moral hazard problem, in developed countries. Our extension highlights
the sufficient statistics that capture this tradeoff in our context. As often in economics, the effi-
ciency cost is captured by the ratio of a behavioral effect to a mechanical effect (“leakage” ratio).
The former measures the cost of the policy due to behavioral responses. Beneficiaries may delay
formal reemployment by staying non-employed or working informally, thus drawing more UI ben-
efits and contributing less to the UI system. The latter measures the cost that arises because some
beneficiaries would draw the increased benefits absent behavioral responses. Welfare effects are
positive if the ratio does not exceed the marginal value of insurance, the difference in the marginal
utility of $1 for mechanical beneficiaries – those targeted by the policy – and formal employees.
    There are two main lessons from the theory. First, the behavioral effect only depends on the
impact of behavioral responses on the paid UI duration and the time spent formally employed sub-
sequently. One does not need to separate non-employment from informality responses (Feldstein,
1999). Yet, our measure of efficiency costs is an upper bound if some private costs of informality
responses are not social costs (Chetty, 2009). Second, the efficiency cost is not necessarily high in
a context of high informality. Ceteris paribus, the behavioral effect will be larger if workers have
an extra margin of behavioral responses, i.e., working informally. However, the ceteris paribus
condition may not hold. For instance, the two main views on the prevalence of informality suggest
    4 Some form of UI exists in Algeria, Argentina, Barbados, Brazil, Chile, China, Ecuador, Egypt, Iran, Mexico,

Turkey, Uruguay, Venezuela and Vietnam. The Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand have been considering its intro-
duction (Vodopivec, 2013; Velásquez, 2010).
    5 “Because checking benefit eligibility imposes large informational and institutional demands, particularly under

abundant and diverse employment opportunities in the unobservable informal sector, the resulting weak monitoring
would make the incentive problem of the standard UI system much worse” (Robalino and Vodopivec, 2009). See also
Acevedo, Patricio and Pagés (2006), and Vodopivec (2013). These policy papers cite evidence of moral hazard from
Slovenia (van Ours and Vodopivec, 2006), a country with relatively low levels of informality.
    6 For instance, the CCT program studied in Bergolo and Cruces (2016), and the elasticity they estimate, does not

directly compare with existing programs and estimates from developed countries.


                                                         2
that displaced formal workers may return slower to a formal job in that context irrespective of UI.
It may be harder for them to find a formal job (“exclusion” view) or they may choose to work
informally for reasons unrelated to UI (“exit” view).7 The mechanical effect will be larger in that
case. The potential distortion or “maximum behavioral effect” will also be smaller: there is less
room to delay formal reemployment when workers are already returning slower to a formal job. As
a result, the actual behavioral effect may not be larger, and the efficiency cost may even be smaller.
    In light of the theory, we turn to the empirical analysis, which forms the core of the paper. We
mainly rely on administrative data covering the universe of formal employment and UI spells over
several years in Brazil. These data allow us to measure all the sufficient statistics capturing the
efficiency cost. This would not be possible with survey data. Yet, we use survey data to explore the
role of informal work opportunities in explaining our results and to discuss the value of insurance.
    In a first step, we combine administrative and survey data to document key empirical patterns
that motivate our analysis and drive our subsequent results. First, the average paid UI duration
is high compared to the potential UI duration because most UI takers exhaust their benefits, e.g.,
more than 80% of those eligible for five months of UI do so. This figure is only about 35% in
the US where UI takers are typically eligible for 24 weeks of UI. The difference comes from the
fact that the share of workers who finds a new formal job each month is very low when they are
eligible for UI in Brazil. This share is also lower than the share who finds any new job, so some UI
beneficiaries likely work informally. Second, the share who finds a new formal job increases and
peaks just after UI benefit exhaustion, which suggests clear behavioral responses to UI incentives.
The pattern does not appear to be driven by workers leaving non-employment, however. The share
who finds any new job does not increase around benefit exhaustion, and in fact the share who
finds a new formal job starts exceeding it exactly after most UI takers exhaust their UI benefits.
This highlights the importance of informality responses. Third, despite the existence of behavioral
responses, the efficiency cost of increases in UI benefits may not be relatively high. This is because
displaced formal employees return slowly to a formal job even when they are no longer or not
eligible for UI. Consequently, the mechanical effect of increases in UI benefits would be large and
the maximum behavioral effect would be limited. Moreover, the average paid UI duration may
thus be high, and displaced workers may choose to work informally, for reasons mostly unrelated
to UI incentives. Finally, and importantly, we show that the differences between Brazil and typical
developed countries hold when we compare labor markets with different degrees of informality
within Brazil. The average paid UI duration is higher in labor markets with higher informality,
and displaced formal workers return slower to a formal job even when they are no longer or not
eligible for UI. As a result, the mechanical effect of increases in UI benefits is larger, the maximum
   7 In the “exit” view, workers are voluntarily informal because they do not value the benefits of formality above its
costs; in the “exclusion” view, workers are informal because formal jobs are more difficult to find (Perry et al., 2007).



                                                           3
behavioral effect is smaller, and the efficiency cost may not be higher in those labor markets.
     In a second step, we estimate the impacts and efficiency cost of an increase in one dimension of
UI benefits, the potential UI duration. We do so by combining the administrative data with quasi-
experimental variation from a tenure-based discontinuity. We estimate that a one-month increase in
potential UI duration leads to a large increase in average paid UI duration (.86 month), but mostly
because of a large mechanical effect. We show that the increase in formal reemployment rates after
benefit exhaustion documented in the first step is driven by behavioral responses. Nevertheless,
behavioral responses only account for 14.6% of the increase in paid UI duration. They also delay
formal reemployment by .39 month and reduce the time spent formally employed subsequently by
.24 month on average.8 All together, our results imply an upper bound for the efficiency cost of $.2
per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries. In comparison, results in Katz and Meyer (1990) and
Landais (2015) imply an efficiency cost more than five times higher for the US, where the potential
UI duration is comparable but informal work opportunities are much less prevalent.
     In a third step, we replicate the second step in each of the 27 Brazilian states, separately, and
we find that the efficiency cost is lower in states with higher informality. As documented in the
first step, the mechanical effect is larger. Moreover, the impacts of behavioral responses on the
paid UI duration, the duration out of formal employment, and the time spent formally employed
are all smaller (in absolute values). We show that this smaller behavioral effect is due to the smaller
maximum behavioral effect: workers who would have returned relatively rapidly to a formal job in
absence of the increase in UI benefits appear equally responsive to the new incentives over our wide
range of informality rates. Furthermore, our results hold if we only exploit variation in informality
rates across states over time and if we control for a rich set of worker characteristics. In sum, our
findings indicate that efficiency concerns may become more relevant as an economy formalizes.
     In a last step, we turn to the marginal value of insurance given that our findings suggest shifting
the policy debate to workers actual need for insurance. In that respect, an efficiency cost of $.2 per
$1 implies that the welfare effect of an increase in potential UI duration would be positive if the
average marginal utility of $1 were at least 20% larger for mechanical beneficiaries than for formal
employees. Yet, the “exit” and “exclusion” views on informality, which are both consistent with a
relatively low efficiency cost, have in fact polar implications for the marginal value of insurance.
The marginal value of insurance may be low (resp. high) if it is relatively easy (resp. hard) to find
informal jobs and those are close substitutes for formal jobs (resp. poor means of self-insurance).
There is no publicly available data to evaluate the marginal value of insurance directly in our
context, for instance through a “consumption approach” (Gruber, 1997a).9 Nevertheless, we use
    8 The literature often assumes these two effects to be symmetric. This is not the case in Brazil because, upon formal

reemployment, workers only spend a share of their career formally employed. We find no impact on formal wages.
    9 The approach in Chetty (2008) does not apply, at least in our context, because it requires estimated changes in

rates of formal reemployment following changes in incentives or liquidity to correspond to partial derivatives of search


                                                           4
survey data to explore the extent to which informal work opportunities allow workers to mitigate
disposable income drops following layoff. This is an imperfect but important first step in order
to evaluate their need for insurance. We find that 30% of displaced formal workers eligible for
five months of UI remain without any job six months after layoff, which is comparable to US
figures (Chetty, 2008). Average earnings levels are also much lower than before layoff for those
reemployed informally. As a result, displaced formal workers would experience large drops in
disposable income without UI. However, the existing benefit level appears sufficient to eliminate
almost any drop in disposable income while drawing UI benefits. These findings imply that welfare
effects are likely very small for increases in the benefit level, without the need to estimate the
associated efficiency costs. In contrast, the marginal value of insurance, and thus welfare effects,
may be sizable for increases in the potential UI duration, particularly if other means of consumption
smoothing are more costly in developing countries (Chetty and Looney, 2006).
    This paper contributes to the literature on optimal social insurance, which focuses on the
context of richer countries (Chetty and Finkelstein, 2013). Schmieder, von Wachter and Bender
(2012a), for instance, studies how the efficiency cost of increases in potential UI duration varies
over the business cycle in Germany. Consistent with our findings, they find a lower efficiency cost
in recessions when workers return slower to a formal job. Our paper differs in a key way: infor-
mality is low in Germany, but it is high in developing countries, irrespective of business cycles.
    This paper also contributes to a growing literature at the intersection of public and develop-
ment economics, which has so far focused on tax policies.10 A theoretical literature argues that
efficiency considerations may force governments to resort to alternative policies where enforce-
ment is weak and informality is high. Yet, there is often little evidence on the efficiency cost of
typical policies in the first place (Gordon and Li, 2009). We find that the efficiency cost of a typical
social insurance policy is not necessarily higher in such a context and may even decrease with labor
market informality. For instance, UI Savings Accounts are sometimes presented as an alternative
to UI in developing countries because of the heightened efficiency concerns.11 We show that, once
brought to the test of the data, those concerns may not be founded, at least for modest potential UI
durations. Moreover, because Brazil contains regions with such widely divergent levels of labor
market informality, we are optimistic about the external validity of our study for other countries.
    Finally, this paper contributes to a growing literature on the impact of social policies in labor
markets with high informality. First, it complements a literature that simulates the impact of poli-
efforts. This is unlikely to be the case in practice as changes in incentives or liquidity would modify several choice
variables determining observed rates of formal reemployment (e.g., search efforts for formal and informal jobs).
   10 See, for instance, Bachas and Soto (2016), Best et al. (2015), Carillo, Pomeranz and Singhal (2017), Gadenne

(2014), Jensen (2016) or Naritomi (2015).
   11 For instance, the program implemented in Jordan with the support of the World Bank in recent years is a forced

savings scheme to which workers contribute when formally employed. “UI benefits” drawn by a worker in excess of
what she contributed over her lifetime must be paid back at retirement (http://www.social–protection.org).


                                                          5
cies in specific equilibrium-search models (e.g., Meghir, Narita and Robin, 2015). A feature of our
approach is that the set of sufficient statistics that capture our tradeoff of interest is not specific to
a particular model, but remains the same under a range of modelling assumptions (Chetty, 2006).
This tradeoff is also not addressed in this literature, in which papers often assume away both the
moral hazard problem and the insurance value by modelling UI as a lump-sum transfer upon layoff
and workers as risk neutral. Furthermore, the many empirical moments that we document, such as
the correlation between formal reemployment rates and informality rates, could help identifying
new models in this literature in the future. Second, this paper also complements another strand
in the literature that uses quasi-experiments. Existing studies do not typically link their results to
public economics theoretical frameworks, complicating interpretation.12 Last but not least, this
paper is the first to estimate how the impacts of a given policy vary with labor market informality.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 1 lays out our conceptual framework. Section
2 presents our empirical setting and our data. Section 3 documents key empirical patterns that
motivate our analysis and drive subsequent results. Section 4 estimates the average impacts and
efficiency cost of an increase in potential UI duration and section 5 how these vary across labor
markets with different degrees of informality. Section 6 sheds some first light on the marginal
value of insurance and discusses welfare effects. Section 7 concludes.


1       Conceptual framework
We begin by providing some background on labor markets with high informality. We then intro-
duce informal job opportunities into the canonical Baily-Chetty framework (Baily, 1978; Chetty,
2006, 2008). This extension allows us to highlight the sufficient statistics that capture the usual
efficiency-insurance tradeoff with increases in UI benefits in our context. These statistics are suf-
ficient to evaluate this tradeoff under a range of modelling assumptions (Chetty, 2006). We thus
focus on the intuition for our results, and leave the presentation of a specific model for the Web
Appendix. For completeness, we consider both the cases of increases in the UI benefit level and of
increases in the potential UI duration in this theoretical section. However, the policy variation that
we exploit in our empirical analysis comes from an increase in the potential UI duration.
    12 In
        addition to previously cited papers, we are aware of three relevant UI papers developed in parallel to our work.
González-Rozada, Ronconi and Ruffo (2011) and Amarante, Arim and Dean (2013) estimate the impact of UI on
some labor market outcomes in Latin American countries but without studying its efficiency cost. Gonzalez-Rozada
and Ruffo (2016) study the impact of UI in Argentina and its efficiency cost using an optimal UI framework. However,
they do not compare the correct measure of efficiency cost in their context and in richer countries, or across labor
markets, and thus do not evaluate the main question in this paper, which is whether the efficiency cost is actually larger
in contexts of higher informality. We provide more information in the Web Appendix. We also discuss limitations of
earlier working papers on UI in Brazil in the Web Appendix (Cunningham, 2000; Margolis, 2008; Hijzen, 2011).




                                                            6
1.1    Background
Labor markets in many middle-income and developing countries, including all Latin American
countries, feature both formal employees and a large share of informal workers. Formal employ-
ees typically work in jobs with regulated working conditions, pay payroll and sometimes income
taxes, and are entitled to a series of benefits (e.g., pensions). Informal workers, who pay no in-
come or payroll taxes and are not eligible for these benefits, encompass unregistered employees
in non-complying firms and most self-employed workers. A same firm may hire both formal and
informal employees (e.g., Ulyssea, 2017).13 Importantly for our purpose, informal workers cannot
be covered by UI and the government cannot easily identify UI beneficiaries working informally.
    There are two main views on the prevalence of informal workers in developing countries (Perry
et al., 2007). In the “exit” view, workers are voluntarily informal because they do not value the
benefits of formal employment above its costs. In the “exclusion” view, workers are informal
because formal jobs are more difficult to find. Longitudinal survey data show that workers transit
between formal and informal jobs in Latin American countries (e.g., Bosch and Maloney, 2010).
This contradicts early versions of the exclusion view, which considered formal and informal sectors
as segmented (e.g., Fields, 1975). However, it is fully consistent with formal jobs being more
difficult to find (e.g., Meghir, Narita and Robin, 2015). Surveys also show that earnings levels are
on average higher in the formal sector, although there is a lot of heterogeneity, and some workers
may well be better off in the informal sector (for Brazil, see Botelho and Ponczek, 2011). Today,
these two views are generally recognized as complementary.


1.2    Setup
Chetty (2008) considers a representative worker who lives for T periods, is laid-off at time zero,
and is eligible for a UI benefit level b for a potential UI duration of P periods (period 1 is between
time 0 and 1). When non-employed, she can search for a new job. She earns a net wage wF − τ per
period when reemployed, where τ is a tax financing the UI system. When all jobs are assumed to
be formal, the moral hazard problem is that increases in UI benefits reduce job-search incentives.
    We must make three changes to adapt this framework to our context. First, the worker must be
laid off from a formal job. This is a condition for UI eligibility. Second, her job-search choices
differ, as illustrated in Figure 1a. She can search not only for a new formal job, but also for an
informal job, and she can keep searching for a formal job when working informally. Relatedly,
upon finding a job that would otherwise be formal, she can ask her employer to “hide” her on
an informal payroll. She only loses eligibility for UI when formally reemployed, so the moral
  13 The 2002 World Bank’s Investment Climate Survey in Brazilian manufacturing asked firms about the share of

unregistered workers that a similar firm would likely employ. The median answer was 30% among small firms.


                                                      7
         hazard problem with increases in UI benefits now includes her increased incentives to remain non-
         employed and to work informally. In both cases, she might be willing to trade off utility gains
         from remaining eligible for UI against utility losses from informality costs, such as lower wages
         or hiding costs. Third, the UI tax can only be levied on formal workers. Besides these changes,
         we maintain other assumptions in Chetty (2008) for comparison purposes: the incidence of taxes
         and benefits falls on formal employees and beneficiaries, respectively, and workers internalize all
         consequences of their choices except on the UI budget. We come back to these assumptions below.
             The worker’s problem in this adapted Baily-Chetty framework is to choose optimal levels of
         search and hiding efforts in each period t after layoff and possibly of a series of other variables (e.g.,
         savings, reservation wages). The solution to this problem determines St the survival rate in non-
                                                                           P−1
         formal employment (i.e., out of formal employment), DB ≡ ∑t=0         St the average paid UI duration,
         b × DB the average UI cost, DNF ≡ ∑t=0 ∞
                                                     St the average non-formal-employment duration, DF the
         average time spent formally employed subsequently, and τ × DF the average UI revenue.

                                                       Figure 1: Illustrations for our conceptual framework
             (a) Choice situation in a context of high informality                                                                                       (b) Mechanical and behavioral effects
                                                                                                             .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                                     Survival rates after increase in UI benefits
                                                                                                            Survival rate in non-formal employment




                                                Non-­‐employed	                                                                                                                               Survival rates before
                                                       bt	                                                                                                                                  increase in UI benefits


                                                                                   Hide	  new	  
                                                                                  formal	  job	  
                               	  Search	              	  Search	                wh+bt	  
                                                                                                                                                              Average paid UI duration
                                                                                                                                                            before increase in UI benefits
                                 cost	                     cost	                                                                                           (mechanical effect for db)

                                                                                       	  Hiding	                                                                                                     Mechanical
                                                                                         cost	                                                                                                         effect for dP
                                                       	  Search	  
                                                         cost	           Formal	  Job	  
                    Informal	  job	  
                                                                                                                                0




                        wi+bt	                                              wF	  -­‐τ	                                                            0          1          2            3              4               5
                                                                                                                                                                    Months since involuntary layoff



Panel (a) illustrates the choice situation of the representative worker of the Baily-Chetty framework in a context of high informality. Upon layoff, she is eligible for a
UI benefit level bt for a potential UI duration of P periods (bt = b × 1(t < P)). While non-employed, she can search for a new formal job but also for an informal job,
and she can keep searching for a formal job when working informally. Upon finding a job that would otherwise be formal, she can also ask her employer to “hide”
her on an informal payroll. She only loses eligibility for UI when formally reemployed, so she might be willing to trade off utility gains from drawing UI benefits
against utility losses from non-employment or informality, such as lower wages (wi , wh ) or hiding costs. The moral hazard problem with increases in UI benefits thus
now includes her increased incentives both to remain non-employed and to work informally. Panel (b) illustrates the mechanical and behavioral effects of an increase
in UI benefits. It displays hypothetical survival rates in non-formal employment before the policy (solid line) and the associated average paid UI duration (light-gray
area). First, increasing UI benefits increases UI costs through a mechanical effect. A higher benefit level (db) increases UI costs for a given average paid UI duration.
A higher potential duration (dP) increases UI costs by increasing the average paid UI duration mechanically: workers who would have remained without a formal job
after exhausting their benefits draw longer benefits mechanically (dark-gray area). Second, increasing UI benefits raises UI costs through a behavioral effect. Workers
are likely to delay formal reemployment, shifting survival rates upward (dashed line) and increasing average paid UI duration by the difference between survival rates
before and after the policy up to the potential UI duration. The average time spent formally employed subsequently will also decrease, reducing UI revenues.




                                                                                                        8
1.3       Efficiency costs and welfare effects of changes in UI benefits
We can derive the welfare effect of increases in UI benefits in this relatively general framework
through a perturbation argument. Increasing the benefit level db or the potential duration dP entails
two types of effects.14 This is illustrated in Figure 1b. First, there is a mechanical effect. UI
beneficiaries would enjoy a higher benefit level without changing their behavior. Workers who
would have remained without a formal job after exhausting their UI benefits would draw longer
                                                                                     B)
benefits mechanically. The mechanical effect thus increases UI costs by d(b×D     db    |M = DB and
d(b×DB )
   dP |M    = b × SP . These costs constitute a transfer from taxpayers to mechanical beneficiaries.
The resulting welfare effect is: (u0b − u0F ) × DB and (u0P − u0F ) × b × SP , where u0b and u0P are the
average marginal utilities of $1 for mechanical beneficiaries with increases in the benefit level and
the potential duration, respectively; u0F is the average marginal utility when formally employed.
    Second, there is a behavioral effect. Workers may change their behaviors in response to changes
in UI benefits. Behavioral responses do not generate first-order gains in workers’ utility (standard
envelope argument), but some of these responses may affect the UI budget. In particular, increasing
UI benefits reduces incentives to be formally reemployed, and increases incentives to stay non-
employed or to work informally. Consequently, survival rates in non-formal employment may
                                                                    B            P−1 dSt        dDB
increase, increasing paid UI duration and thus UI costs by b × dD db  |B = b × ∑ t=0 db  or b ×  dP |B =
      P dSt
b × ∑t=0  dP , depending on the policy. The average time spent formally employed subsequently
                                                      F
may also decrease, reducing UI revenues by τ × dD    h for x ∈ {b, P}. Thisibehavioral effect must be
                                                    dx
                                                                              B                 F
paid for, so the resulting welfare effect is: −u0F × b × dD           dD
                                                          dx |B − τ × dx   for x ∈ {b, P}.
    Putting everything together, we obtain the welfare effect of increases in UI benefits. It is com-
mon in public economics to measure welfare per unit impact on affected agents, so we normalize
the welfare effect (dW ) by the mechanical effect. We also divide by the average marginal utility of
$1 for formal workers to express welfare in a money metric (Chetty, 2006, 2008):
                                               B            F
                                                                !
                     u0b − u0F           b × dD
                                              db |B   τ × dD                u0b − u0F
                                                                                     
   dW /db                                                  db
                                                                                                                
            =                        −              −               =                       − ηDB ,b − ηDF ,b       (1)
   DB × u0F             u0F                 DB          DB                     u0F
                                               B            F
                                                                !
                     u0P − u0F           b × dD
                                              dP |B   τ × dD                u0P − u0F          P
                                                                                                   dSt /dP DB dDF /dP
                                                                                                                     
  dW /dP                                                   dP                                 ∑t=0
             =                       −              −               =                       −             − F×
b × SP × u0F            u0F                b × SP      b × SP                  u0F                 SP      D    SP
                                                                                                                    (2)

where the simplification in equations (1) and (2) uses the UI budget constraint: τ × DF = b × DB .
   Equations (1) and (2) specify the usual trade-off with increases in UI benefits between insur-
ance and efficiency. The welfare effect is positive if the marginal value of insurance exceeds the
  14 Wefollow a main strand in the literature by considering changes in those policy parameters separately. Follow-
ing Schmieder, von Wachter and Bender (2012a), a marginal change in potential UI duration (dP) corresponds to a
marginal change in bP , the benefit amount after the end of the preexisting potential UI duration, times b.


                                                            9
efficiency cost. The first parenthesis captures the marginal value of insurance, the relative welfare
gain from transferring $1 from formal workers to mechanical beneficiaries. It is likely positive
when insurance markets are incomplete. The second parenthesis, the ratio of the behavioral to the
mechanical effect, captures the efficiency cost, or the resources lost per $1 reaching mechanical
beneficiaries. It is common in public economics for the efficiency cost of a policy to be captured
by such a leakage ratio, which often translates into behavioral elasticities (η) as in equation (1).
Equations (1) and (2) show that the efficiency cost can be evaluated by estimating a few sufficient
statistics: the mechanical effect, and the impact of behavioral responses on the average paid UI
duration and on the average time spent formally employed subsequently. We estimate these statis-
tics and evaluate the efficiency cost for increases in potential UI duration in Sections 4 and 5. Note
that the first component of the efficiency cost is typically much larger than the second one because
the tax τ necessary to fund the UI program is much smaller than the benefit level b. This is why
we spend more time discussing impacts on the paid UI duration in the empirical analysis. Note
also that one assumption that is often made in the UI literature, but which we do not follow, is
that new jobs are assumed to never be lost, or DF = T − DNF . One can then estimate impacts
on non-formal-employment duration instead of impacts on the time spent formally employed sub-
                    F     dDNF
sequently, as | dDdx | = | dx |. This assumption would bias estimates of the efficiency cost in our
context because new formal jobs are often lost. Upon formal reemployment, suppose that a worker
would spend a share q ∈ [0, 1] of her remaining career formally employed: DF = q (T − DNF ). We
                 NF         F       dDNF
then have: | dDdx | ≥ | dDdx | = q | dx |. Moreover, increases in UI benefits may allow workers to
look for better and more stable jobs, so we could also have: dq           NF
                                                                 dx (T − D ) ≥ 0.
                                                                                   15

     Suppose that we estimate an efficiency cost of $.5 per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries.
The welfare effect would then be positive if the average marginal utility of $1 were at least 50%
higher for mechanical beneficiaries than for formal workers. Such a bound could be informative in
some settings. Yet, one must also evaluate the marginal value of insurance to pin down the welfare
effect. Therefore, although the focus of this paper is on the efficiency cost of increases in UI
benefits, we also provide some evidence to shed light on the marginal value of insurance in Section
6. This is challenging because marginal utilities are not easily measured. One approach, referred
to as the “consumption approach”, is to use the following approximation (Gruber, 1997a):16

                                       u0x − u0F     cF − cx
                                                 ' γ         , with x ∈ {b, P}                           (3)
                                          u0F          cF

The marginal value of insurance becomes the product of the relative difference in consumption
levels (c) between formal employees and mechanical beneficiaries, and the average coefficient
  15 A   comparable point is made in Schmieder, von Wachter and Bender (2012b).
  16 The   approximation assumes that third derivatives of utility functions are small (Chetty, 2006).



                                                            10
of relative risk aversion (γ). The applicability of this decomposition is often limited, however,
by the lack of suitable consumption data and by the fact that the relevant value of γ is typically
unknown.17 For instance, there is no publicly available data in Brazil to measure consumption dif-
ferences between formal employees and mechanical beneficiaries as in e.g., Kolsrud et al. (2015).
Nevertheless, available survey data allow us to measure differences in income levels. We can thus
assess the extent to which informal work opportunities allow displaced formal workers to mitigate
income drops after layoff. This is an important first step to evaluate their need for insurance.
    Finally, the marginal value of insurance and the efficiency cost of increases in UI benefits likely
vary with the preexisting benefit level and potential duration. However, the sign of the welfare
effect for a given starting point indicates whether the optimal benefit level b∗ or potential duration
P∗ is above or below the existing value of the policy instrument under a convexity assumption.18


1.4     The role of informal job opportunities
Equations (1) and (2) show that it is not necessary to estimate the effect of increases in UI benefits
on all margins of behaviors to estimate the efficiency cost. In particular, it is not necessary to know
whether workers remain non-employed or work informally when they delay formal reemployment.
A corollary is that equations (1) and (2) apply even in the absence of informal job opportunities.19
This result is the UI version of Feldstein (1999), who argues that it is not necessary to know
whether changes in tax rates affect taxable income through changes in labor supply or tax evasion
in order to estimate their efficiency cost. Both types of responses affect the tax base (resp. the
UI benefit and tax bases), and thus the government budget, similarly. Moreover, both types of
responses involve private utility costs, such as lower income or evasion costs (resp. lower wages or
hiding costs); they thus generate no first-order utility gains and constitute real social costs.
    Why does informality matter then? First, the size of the sufficient statistics capturing the ef-
ficiency cost may differ in labor markets with high informality. Ceteris paribus, the behavioral
effect will be larger if workers have an additional margin of behavioral responses, i.e., working
informally. However, the ceteris paribus assumption may not hold. There are many differences
    17 Chetty (2008) argues that the marginal value of insurance can also be decomposed into estimable sufficient statis-

tics under additional assumptions: the impacts of changes in incentives vs. liquidity on rates of (formal) reemployment.
However, the applicability of this decomposition is limited, at least in our context. Indeed, it requires the estimated
changes in rates of formal reemployment to correspond to partial derivatives of search efforts. This is unlikely in prac-
tice as changes in incentives or liquidity will modify several choice variables determining observed rates of formal
reemployment (e.g., search efforts for formal and informal jobs). This point is actually clearly made in Chetty (2008).
    18 Simulations in Chetty (2008) suggest that this assumption holds in a comparable framework. It holds, for instance,

if the marginal value of insurance (resp. the efficiency cost) is decreasing (resp. increasing) in the policy parameter.
    19 In fact, equations (1) and (2) translate to expressions in Chetty (2008) and Schmieder, von Wachter and Bender

(2012a) when all jobs are formal, if one assumes that new formal jobs are never lost (DF = T − DNF ). More recently,
Schmieder and von Wachter (2017) made the same point about the generality of our formulas in equations (1) and (2).



                                                          11
in those labor markets besides workers’ ability to respond to UI incentives. As a result, the effi-
ciency cost will not necessarily be higher. For instance, the two main views on the prevalence of
informality suggest that displaced formal workers may return slower to a formal job in those labor
markets, irrespective of (increases in) UI benefits. It may be more costly to find formal jobs, or
informal jobs may be attractive for reasons unrelated to UI. The mechanical effect will be larger
in both cases, as survival rates in non-formal employment will be higher to begin with. Moreover,
the behavioral effect may not be larger because the “potential” distortion will be smaller. To un-
derstand this, let’s consider the behavioral effect on the average paid UI duration and decompose
                                       dDB |B
it as follows: dDB |B = dDBmax |B × dD                                              B
                                         B | . The maximum behavioral effect, dDmax |B , captures the
                                         max B
potential distortion. It is the difference between the average paid UI duration that would prevail in
absence of behavioral responses to the increase in UI benefits and the potential UI duration, which
is an upper bound for the average paid UI duration. In Figure 1, it corresponds to the area until
the potential UI duration and above the survival rates prevailing before the increase in UI benefits
(solid line). It is necessarily limited when displaced formal workers return slower to a formal job.
             dDB |B
The ratio, dD  B | , captures how large the actual behavioral effect is relative to this upper bound.
               max B
The concern that informal work opportunities may exacerbate the efficiency cost must then rest on
the presumption that this ratio is much higher in a context of high informality. However, there is
no clear prediction as to how this ratio varies with informality (formally, comparative statics de-
pend on the unknown sign of third derivatives of search cost functions).20 Intuitively, employment
decisions may not necessarily be very responsive if it is costly to find formal jobs or if workers
are working informally for reasons unrelated to UI. Therefore, how the efficiency cost compares
in contexts of high vs. low informality is ultimately an empirical question.
    Second, the marginal value of insurance may also differ in labor markets with high informality.
The two main views on informality, which are consistent with a relatively low efficiency cost, have
in fact polar implications for the marginal value of insurance. The marginal value of insurance
may be low (resp. high) if it is relatively easy (resp. hard) to find informal jobs and those are close
substitutes for formal jobs (resp. imperfect means of self-insurance). Moreover, the marginal value
of insurance may also be higher if other standard means of consumption smoothing are more costly
in developing countries, such as formal credit or savings (Chetty and Looney, 2006). Therefore,
how the efficiency cost varies with the degree of informality is also an empirical question.
    Third, our measure of efficiency costs may be an upper bound. We assume that workers inter-
nalize all consequences of their choices except on the UI budget, which is equivalent to assuming
that private and social costs of behavioral responses are equal. This is why it is not necessary to
estimate all behavioral responses in our framework or in Feldstein (1999). However, Chetty (2009)
  20 Schmieder, von Wachter and Bender (2012a) make a comparable point about the size of the behavioral effect over
the business cycle.



                                                        12
argues that Feldstein (1999) overestimates the efficiency cost by assuming that private and social
costs of tax evasion responses are equal. Tax evasion responses always entail private costs but
sometimes also generate positive externalities such that their social costs can be lower than their
private costs. The same argument applies in our case. For instance, the fine when a worker is found
working informally is a private cost of informality responses, but it has a positive externality on the
government budget. Yet, many other private costs of informality responses do not generate such
externalities (e.g., lower wages, hiding costs), so our measure of efficiency costs is likely infor-
mative. Best et al. (2015) argue in fact that considering all private costs of tax evasion responses
(or informality in our case) as social costs is a natural starting point for developing countries. Im-
portantly, this is not in conflict with the large literature highlighting the potential negative effects
of informality responses to government policies (Levy, 2008). This literature argues that workers
choosing to work informally instead of formally may impose large efficiency losses. Our measure
of efficiency is very much in this spirit; it goes all the way to assuming that the efficiency losses are
as large as if workers had chosen to remain idle instead of engaging in some economic activity.21


1.5     Informality and the assumptions of our conceptual framework
Before turning to the empirics, we review assumptions of the Baily-Chetty framework that we
maintained for comparison purposes and discuss their relevance in a context of high informality.
    First, we abstract from the possible impact of UI on layoff decisions. This is because this
distortion can be tackled by the experience-rating of UI benefits. In practice, UI benefits are never
perfectly experienced-rated and this has been shown to increase layoffs in developed countries.
The same problem may be important in our context. For instance, a firm may report laying off a
worker eligible for UI, but keep her on an informal payroll. We show in the Web Appendix that
UI seems to distort reported layoff decisions at low tenure levels in Brazil.22 However, existing
institutions, e.g., high firing costs, appear to prevent such responses for workers with higher tenure.
    Second, we assume that the incidence of taxes and benefits falls on formal employees and
beneficiaries, respectively. These are reasonable assumptions at least in the long run. There is also
some empirical evidence that the incidence of taxes on formal workers falls on those workers in
Latin American countries, at least for those earning more than the minimum wage.23 We verify that
results are not driven by workers earning close to the minimum wage in our empirical application.
  21 Other  arguments that workers choosing to work informally generate negative externalities through, e.g., reduced
economic growth, would likely apply similarly – or even more severely – if these workers remained idle instead.
   22 This has been confirmed in a recent paper by Carvalho, Corbi and Narita (2017).
   23 See for instance, Cruces, Galiani and Kidyba (2010), Gruber (1997b), and Kugler and Kugler (2009). Table 6

in Cruces, Galiani and Kidyba (2010) shows that their less-than-full incidence result is driven by a tax change for
which they can only noisily estimate very short-term effects. The incidence of tax changes for which they can estimate
longer-term effects and for which the minimum wage is not binding falls on formal workers.


                                                         13
     Third, we consider the UI program in isolation. In reality, decreases in formal employment
due to increases in UI benefits may create fiscal externalities on other tax or benefit bases. This is
certainly the case in developed countries where formal labor income is an important tax base. De-
veloping countries rely less on labor income taxes,24 and it is not straightforward how decreases in
formal employment would affect tax bases that they rely more on (e.g., consumption). Moreover,
an increase in UI benefits may in fact increase formal employment in general equilibrium if workers
value it above the tax that they pay for it (Acemoglu and Shimer, 1999; Meghir, Narita and Robin,
2015). The challenge with estimating labor-market wide effects of changes in UI benefits, however,
is that it requires exogenous variation in UI benefits across labor markets. For instance, estimates
based on variation across workers within a labor market overestimate general-equilibrium esti-
mates in the presence of search frictions (Landais, Michaillat and Saez, forthcoming), which may
be important if informality is partly explained by the exclusion view. Finally, fiscal externalities
may also arise from impacts of increases in UI benefits on formal reemployment wages, even when
considering the UI program in isolation, if we assumed that the UI tax were proportional to wages
(Nekoei and Weber, 2017). However, we find no evidence of such an impact in our application.
     In sum, our assumptions constitute a natural starting point and a useful benchmark. Moreover,
they do not appear to bias our comparison of estimates of the efficiency cost in a context of high
informality with existing estimates from more developed countries in a predictable direction. Re-
laxing some of these assumptions, as it was done for the context of more developed countries in a
series of papers in recent years, will be an important next step for future research.


2      Empirical setting: motivation, background, and data
In this section, we present our empirical setting, relevant institutional details, and our data.


2.1      Why Brazil?
Brazil is an appealling empirical setting for several reasons. First, UI has existed in Brazil for many
years, so workers are aware of its associated incentives. Second, the longest potential UI duration
is five months in Brazil. We thus investigate the efficiency cost of increasing potential duration
from a relatively low level, which is the relevant starting case for developing countries. Moreover,
the potential UI duration is comparable in the US (23.8 weeks on average; excluding years with
extended benefits),25 which allows us to benchmark our results against US estimates.
    24 Most
          formal workers do not pay income taxes in Brazil. Payroll taxes are high but they are mostly benefit taxes,
so changes in formal employment affect both costs and revenue with ambiguous net effects on the government budget.
   25 Own calculations using data from the US Department of Labor (www.dol.gov).




                                                         14
    Third, Brazil is not an outlier in terms of informality: its average informality rate is close to
the average across Latin American countries (Perry et al., 2007). Figure 2a displays the average
composition of the labor force in Brazil over our main period of analysis (2005-2009; see data
section below). Every worker has a working card in Brazil. When an employer signs her working
card, which is mandatory, her hiring is reported to the government, and she becomes a formal
employee. Yet, hiring an employee formally is costly,26 and although firms face financial penalties
for not complying with labor laws, including hiring workers informally, the risk of detection is low
(Almeida and Carneiro, 2012). As a result, informality is high even in non-farm employment.27
In fact, Figure 2a shows that the share of non-farm private formal employees is about equal to the
share of non-farm informal workers (informal employees and self-employed workers).
    Fourth, there is a lot of heterogeneity in informality rates across labor markets in Brazil. Figure
2b shows that the shares of non-farm private formal employees and non-farm informal workers vary
greatly across states. These shares also strongly correlate with levels of income per capita, as they
do across countries (Perry et al., 2007). This heterogeneity allows us to directly investigate how
the efficiency cost varies with the degree of informality across labor markets.28
    Finally, we have access to comprehensive administrative data, which, combined with quasi-
experimental variation in UI benefits, allow us to estimate all the sufficient statistics entering in the
measure of efficiency cost. This wouldn’t be possible with the survey data available in Brazil or in
other developing countries. Yet, existing surveys also offer some advantages in Brazil (see below).


2.2     The Brazilian UI program
The Brazilian UI program, which current rules have applied to since 1994, works as follows. A
worker who is laid off from a private formal job and who has at least six months of job tenure
at layoff is eligible for UI benefits after a 30-day waiting period. There must also be at least 16
months between a worker’s layoff date and the layoff date of her last successful application. She
must apply in person for UI within 120 days of her layoff date. If she is deemed eligible, her UI
benefits are automatically deposited every 30 days at a state bank, Caixa, as long as her name does
not appear in a database where employers report new hirings monthly. The potential UI duration
depends on her accumulated tenure across all formal jobs in the 36 months prior to layoff. She
is eligible for up to three, four, or five monthly UI payments if she has more than 6, 12, or 24
  26 Payroll taxes include 20% for Social Security, 8% deposited in workers’ seniority account (FGTS), and 7.8% for
funding an array of programs (e.g., training, education). Formal employees are also entitled to the minimum wage, a
13th monthly wage, 30 days of paid leave per year, an overtime rate of 50% for hours exceeding 44 hours a week, etc.
   27 We do not consider farm workers in the paper because a negligible share of them is formal and draw UI.
   28 We consider the heterogeneity across Brazilian states, and do not consider alternative definitions of labor markets,

because it is not possible to construct measures of informality rates at lower levels of aggregation over our main period
of analysis (2005-2009) in Brazil. This can only be done using data from the decennial censuses.


                                                           15
                                       Figure 2: Labor market composition in Brazil (2005-2009)
                                                                                       (b) Share of private formal employees and informal
                  (a) Average composition of the labor force                           workers by state (out of the non-farm labor force)
                                                       Private formal employees
              Farm employment




                                                                                                                          .5
                                                                                                                                Informal workers                Private formal employees




                                                                                        Share of the non-farm labor force
                                     13.54%
           Unemployed




                                                                                                             .4
                            7.857%                     32.89%




                                                                                                 .3
                            18.76%


           Other non-farm




                                                                                                           .2
                                              26.96%

                                                                                                                               250    300     350     400      450     500       550     600
                                                           Informal workers                                                      Average monthly income per adult (US$2010, state average)


Source: PNAD 2005-2009 (the survey was not conducted in 2010). In panel (a), “informal workers” consists of informal employees (12.3%) and self-employed
workers (14.6%), and “other non-farm” of employers (3.5%), public employees (6.8%), domestic employees (7.1%), and unpaid workers (1.3%). In panel (b), each
dot is a state average; lines are unweighted linear fits. The average monthly income per adult is calculated for adults 18 to 54 years old.



        months of accumulated tenure, respectively. The benefit level depends on her average wage in the
        three months prior to layoff and ranges from 100% to 187% of the minimum wage (see the full
        schedule in the Web Appendix). The replacement rate is thus very high at the bottom of the wage
        distribution (100% for workers who earned the minimum wage). Importantly, however, all our
        results are robust to excluding beneficiaries with very high or very low replacement rates.
            A departure from our framework is that UI is financed by a .65% tax on firms’ sales in Brazil.
        We considered instead the case of a tax on formal workers, which is the main source of funding for
        UI in other countries, including developing countries (Velásquez, 2010). A tax on formal workers
        is the interesting case conceptually. They are the beneficiaries of the program and UI aims at
        providing insurance, not at redistribution. The incidence of a tax on formal workers is also likely
        to fall on those workers, and is certainly more likely to do so than a sales tax. We thus use Brazil
        as an empirical setting to estimate and illustrate the efficiency cost of increases in UI benefits in
        a context of high informality as derived in a benchmark framework. The odd financing of the
        Brazilian program is unlikely to invalidate this objective. A 2.5% payroll tax would be sufficient
        to fund UI (UI expenditures/total eligible payroll ' .025) and it is unlikely that the composition of
        the formal labor force would be markedly different substituting such a tax for the existing one.29
            Finally, as in many other countries with UI, displaced formal employees are entitled to some
        layoff benefits. In particular, employers must provide a one-month advance notice and a severance
        payment of 40% of the amount deposited in their seniority account (8% of their wage each month).
           29 Witha sales tax, u0F in equations (1) and (2) would become the marginal utility of those bearing the incidence of
        the tax. The tax may also increase the efficiency cost if its incidence does not fall on those benefiting from UI.



                                                                                  16
Formal employees are only allowed to withdraw from this account upon layoff or retirement.


2.3     Data
We provide a brief description of our data below and more details in the Web Appendix.
    Our analysis relies primarily on two administrative datasets. RAIS is a matched employee-
employer dataset covering by law the universe of formal employees, including public employees.
Every year, all tax-registered firms must report all workers formally employed at any point during
the previous year.30 RAIS has data on tenure, age, gender, education, sector, establishment size
and location, reason for separation, and since 2002, hiring and separation dates for every job spell
within a year. It also includes the average monthly wage over the spell and the December wage
for spells that survive until December 31st . We are the first researchers to use the UI registry. It
includes the application date, the amount, the month, and since 2005, the date of all UI payments.
We merge workers in both datasets through a unique ID number. We then use the data to measure
the paid UI duration, the non-formal-employment duration, and the time spent formally employed
after layoff for displaced formal employees (from now on we omit the term “private”), as well as to
estimate the impact of changes in UI benefits on these variables. Our main analysis uses data from
2005 to 2010, such that we have exact separation, hiring, and payment dates,31 but we also confirm
all our results using data from 2002 (imputing payment dates). To provide some perspective, there
were about 40,300,000 formal employees and 625,650 new UI beneficiaries in each month in 2009.
    We also use the microdata of two surveys conducted by the Brazilian Institute of Geography
and Statistics (IBGE). Both surveys ask for the labor market status of every household member
above ten years old, including information on wage (and other income), tenure, and the signing
of the working card. To guarantee confidentiality, survey respondents cannot be matched to other
datasets. We use yearly household surveys (PNAD), which are representative at the state level, to
measure informality rates in the 27 Brazilian states as in Figure 2. We also exploit monthly labor
force surveys (PME), which are only representative for the six largest metropolitan areas of Brazil,
but have a useful panel structure. Households are surveyed for two periods of four consecutive
months, eight months apart from each other. We use PME to assess the importance of informal
work opportunities for displaced formal employees and to explore their need for insurance.
   30 Compliance is high because of large penalties when the data are late or incomplete. The main purpose of RAIS is

to administer a federal wage supplement to formal employees. There are thus incentives for truthful reporting. RAIS is
also used by some ministries to monitor formal job takeup. RAIS has a slightly better coverage of formal employment
than the data used by the UI agency (MTE, 2008). Accordingly, a few workers reported as formally reemployed in
RAIS are still drawing benefits in the UI data. This slightly biases our estimates of the efficiency cost upward.
   31 The RAIS dataset does not include separation dates in more recent years.




                                                         17
3     Key empirical patterns
Before estimating the impacts and efficiency cost of an increase in UI benefits, we begin our empir-
ical analysis by documenting key empirical patterns for displaced formal workers in Brazil, which
motivate our analysis and drive our results in the next sections. Using the administrative data,
we document patterns of UI benefit collection and formal reemployment, which differ from those
observed in typical developed countries. We also document how these patterns compare across la-
bor markets with different informality rates within Brazil. A limitation of the administrative data,
however, is that we have no information on the labor status of a displaced formal worker who is
not yet formally reemployed. We then complement the administrative data by using PME to es-
timate patterns of overall reemployment (formal or informal). This allows us to shed light on the
importance of informal work opportunities by contrasting patterns of formal reemployment and
overall reemployment. We present four main lessons from the data, after summarizing the data
construction. More details and robustness checks are provided in the Web Appendix.


3.1    Data construction
Using the administrative data, we construct survival rates in non-formal employment, hazard rates
of formal reemployment, and the shares finding a new formal job, taking up UI, drawing UI, and
exhausting UI in each month after layoff. We construct the survival rate in non-formal employment
at the start of each month from the layoff and hiring dates. The share finding a new formal job in
each month is the difference between survival rates at the start of that month and at the start of the
following month. The hazard rate of formal reemployment is the ratio of that share to the survival
rate at the start of the month. We measure the shares taking up UI, drawing UI, and exhausting
UI in each month from the layoff, hiring, UI application, and UI payment dates. Specifically, we
consider a worker as taking up UI (resp. drawing UI, exhausting UI) in a month if she applies within
120 days of layoff and draws her first UI payment (resp. any UI payment, her last UI payment given
her potential UI duration) in that month before being formally reemployed.
    Using the panel structure of PME, we estimate displaced formal workers’ hazard rate of overall
reemployment in each month after layoff by maximum likelihood. It is then straightforward to
compute survival rates in non-employment and the share finding any new job in each month. We
can identify non-employed displaced formal employees because non-employed individuals are
asked about characteristics of their previous job (working card signed, reason for separation, tenure
at layoff). We estimate a piece-wise constant hazard function using information about the length
of their non-employment spell (in months) and whether they are still recorded as non-employed in
the next month. Specifically, we allow for different hazard rates in months 0, 1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8, and
9-10 since layoff. We restrict the time horizon after layoff and we group months by pair because

                                                 18
of the limited sample size. We allow for a different hazard rate in month 0 because of the 30-day
waiting period. Finally, we use sampling weights and cluster standard errors by individual.32
    Note that we cannot directly estimate hazard rates of formal reemployment or the share working
informally in each month after layoff in PME. This is because informal workers are not asked
about previous jobs or non-employment spells and because the panel is too short. For instance, if
we knew which workers remained without a formal job t months after layoff, we would be able
to estimate the hazard rate of formal reemployment in month t after layoff from two consecutive
interviews. However, although we have that information for those who remained non-employed,
we don’t have it for those working informally – henceforth, we also cannot estimate the share
working informally t months after layoff. This wouldn’t be a problem if we could follow workers
every month for an extended period after layoff. However, we can follow a worker who is observed
non-employed in her first month after layoff for at most three subsequent months. Therefore, we
cannot estimate hazard rates of formal reemployment beyond three months after layoff. These
limitations, which apply to labor force surveys in other Latin American countries as well, require us
to combine survey and administrative data to assess the importance of informal work opportunities.


3.2      Sample selection
The main takeaways in this section are based on estimates from the administrative data, which
are population estimates. Yet, to shed light on the role of informal work opportunities, we must
contrast those estimates to our maximum likelihood estimates based on survey data. Therefore, we
construct samples as comparable as possible in the two datasets, given constraints in PME surveys.
    We can only assess UI eligibility and potential UI duration for non-employed workers who
had more than 24 months of tenure at layoff in PME. This is because the surveys do not record
information about UI benefits or tenure in formal jobs prior to the last one in the 36 months before
layoff. We thus restrict our samples to those workers; their tenure at layoff is sufficient to know
that they are eligible for five months of UI. They accounted for 30% of displaced formal employees
and 37% of UI takers between 2005 and 2009. Note that considering UI for workers with some
   32 The likelihood function corrects for a stock sampling issue within month.  Define λm , the daily haz-
ard rate constant over month m since layoff.        Furthermore, define k(b) with b ∈ [0, 30], the distribu-
tion of survey interviews over days within a month.         To be recorded as non-employed, an individual
must survive b days without a job given that she survived m months. Finally, define di,m = 1 if in-
dividual i, non-employed since month m, is recorded as employed in the following month.               The like-
                                                      R 30                                  k(b)exp[−bλm ]
lihood for a given observation is then: Li,m = di,m 0 [1 − exp (− (30 − b) λm − bλm+1 )] R 30              db +
                                                                                                             0   k(s)exp[−sλm ]ds
              R 30                                       k(b)exp[−bλm ]
(1 − di,m )    0     [exp (− (30 − b) λm − bλm+1 )]   R 30                db.   PME interviews are evenly spread over a month, so
                                                       0 k(s)exp[−sλm ]ds
we assume k(b) = 1/30. Standard errors for the shares reemployed and the survival rates in non-employment are ob-
tained by the delta method. We do not study the formality of new jobs in PME because the reemployment of workers
with the working card signed, as reported in PME, may not be reported to the government immediately.



                                                                     19
attachment to a formal job is a natural starting case for developing countries. Moreover, we show
in the Web Appendix that the patterns based on the administrative data are similar if we consider
workers with lower tenure levels at layoff. We further select individuals 18-54 years old who were
laid off from a full-time private formal job between 2005 and 2009. We do not consider workers
laid off in 2010 to avoid right-censoring issues. We also restrict the sample to the six metropolitan
areas covered by PME. We show below and in the Web Appendix that the patterns based on the
administrative data are similar if we consider displaced formal workers from all Brazilian regions.
Ultimately, the PME sample includes 19,904 observations from 12,327 individuals contributing to
the likelihood function. The administrative sample includes 3,393,055 layoffs.
    A remaining concern for the comparability of these two samples is that PME may not be repre-
sentative of the population recorded in the administrative data. Such a concern may arise because
of attrition across survey rounds. Fortunately, attrition is limited in PME: our sample would only
be 5.4% larger in the absence of attrition. Yet, even in the absence of attrition, representativeness
may be an issue because the sampling structure of PME surveys does not directly aim at being
representative of our population of interest. For instance, we document some differences between
our two samples (e.g., in gender composition) when providing descriptive statistics in the Web Ap-
pendix. Nevertheless, we show in the Web Appendix that all our results are similar if we reweigh
the PME sample such that it compares better to the administrative sample based on observables.
    Finally, we construct three additional samples to document how the empirical patterns based
on the administrative data compare in labor markets with different levels of informality. We cannot
credibly investigate such heterogeneity for our survey estimates because PME only covers six
metropolitan areas. The first sample is a random sample of layoffs (10% or 845,591 layoffs)
constructed similarly as the administrative sample described above, but including layoffs from the
whole country. The second and third samples also include displaced formal employees from the
whole country, but only workers who were not eligible for any UI benefits. The second sample
is a random sample of layoffs (20%; 192,166 layoffs) involving workers who didn’t have enough
tenure at layoff and had no other formal job in the 36 months prior to layoff. The third sample is
a random sample of separations (25%; 27,814 separations) involving workers with more than 24
months of tenure at separation, but who were fired for cause, and thus not eligible for UI.


3.3   Four main lessons
We present the main takeaways in four lessons based on the empirical patterns in Figures 3 and 4.
    Figure 3 displays average patterns of UI collection, formal reemployment, and overall reem-
ployment using the comparable samples from the administrative and survey data. Panel (a) displays
the share taking up UI, drawing UI, and exhausting UI in each month since layoff. The other pan-


                                                 20
els display the survival rate in non-formal employment at the start of each month (panel b), the
hazard rate of formal reemployment in each month (panel c), and the share finding a new formal
job in each month (panel d). For exposition purposes, these patterns are presented for all workers,
for UI takers, and for those who took up UI in their first month of eligibility, separately. Panels
(b)-(d) also display our maximum likelihood estimates for the survival rates in non-employment,
the hazard rates of overall reemployment, and the shares finding any new job, respectively. These
patterns are presented for all workers only because we don’t observe UI benefit collection in PME.
    Figure 4 compares the empirical patterns based on the administrative data in Figure 3 across
labor markets with different levels of informality. The panels plot average state-level estimates for
UI and formal reemployment outcomes against average state-level informality rates. Lines display
the result of a WLS regression of these estimates on informality rates, weighting estimates by the
inverse of their standard error squared. We assign to each observation the informality rate in the
state and year of each layoff, which is measured in PNAD and is defined as the share of informal
workers in the non-farm labor force, and we then average informality rates within state.33

Lesson 1. Most UI takers exhaust their benefits, and average paid UI duration is high. This is
because the share finding a new formal job is low when workers are eligible for UI. The estimated
share finding any new job is higher, so many (but not all) UI beneficiaries likely work informally.
    Most UI takers exhaust their benefits. Figure 3a shows that 45.5% of the sample take up UI
in their first month of eligibility and that 41.1% exhaust their benefits four months later. In total,
80.6% of the sample take up UI and 83% of UI takers exhaust their benefits, for an average paid
UI duration of 4.63 months among UI takers. Exhaustion rates were only 35.6% over the same
period in the US, where potential UI duration is only slightly higher.34 The difference is due to
the lower rates of formal reemployment while workers are eligible for UI. For instance, Figure 3b
shows that 86.5% of the workers who took up UI in their first month of eligibility remain without
formal employment five months after layoff. The figure is lower for all workers because many UI
non-takers find a formal job during the 30-day waiting period. Figures 4a and 4b show that those
patterns generalize to the rest of Brazil: the takeup rate and the average paid UI duration among UI
takers are high in all Brazilian states. Moreover, we show in the Web Appendix that those patterns
are not specific to workers with very high replacement rates.
    Figure 3 also shows that many but not all UI beneficiaries likely work informally. For instance,
Figure 3d shows that the estimated share of all displaced formal employees finding any new job
exceeds the share finding a new formal job in the first few months after layoff. As a result, if 35.8%
  33 We define informal workers as self-employed workers and informal employees because 93.7% of displaced formal

workers who report their first new job as informal report one of these two categories (see footnote 34).
   34 Own calculations using data from www.dol.gov (excluding years with extended benefits). High exhaustion rates

are also found in Argentina and China (González-Rozada, Ronconi and Ruffo, 2011; Vodopivec and Tong, 2008).



                                                       21
      Figure 3: UI benefit collection, formal reemployment, and overall reemployment patterns after layoff
                                                                                                                           (b) Survival rate in non(-formal)-employment at the
                                                          (a) UI benefit collection in each month                          start of each month
                                                                                                                                                                                             Survival rate in non-formal employment
               1




                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                               (all workers) (UI takers) (UI takers in
                                                         Share drawing UI                                                                                                                                                 first month)
               .9




                                                                                                                               .9
               .8




                                                                                                                               .8
               .7




                                                                                                                               .7
               .6




                                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                               Share exhausting UI
               .5




                                                                                                                               .5
                                                                 Share taking up UI
               .4




                                                                                                                               .4
               .3




                                                                                                                               .3
               .2




                                                                                                                               .2
                                                                                                                                                                     Survival rate in non-employment
               .1




                                                                                                                               .1
                                                                                                                                                                        (all workers; with 95% CI)
               0




                                                                                                                               0
                                                     0     1     2      3     4     5      6      7     8      9     10                                              0    1      2     3     4     5      6      7      8     9       10
                                                                            Months since layoff                                                                                            Months since layoff



             (c) Hazard rate of finding a new formal job vs. finding (d) Share finding a new formal job vs. finding any new
             any new job in each month                               job in each month
               .03 .06 .09 .12 .15 .18 .21 .24 .27




                                                                                                                               .03 .06 .09 .12 .15 .18 .21 .24 .27


                                                                                   Hazard rate of finding any new job                                                     Share finding any new job
                                                                                      (all workers; with 95% CI)                                                          (all workers; with 95% CI)




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Share finding a new formal job
                                                           Hazard rate of finding                                                                                                          (all workers) (UI takers) (UI takers in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       first month)
                                                             a new formal job
                                                     (all workers)       (UI takers in
                                                                          first month)
                                                               (UI takers)
               0




                                                                                                                               0




                                                     0     1     2      3     4     5      6      7     8      9     10                                              0    1      2     3     4     5      6      7      8     9       10
                                                                            Months since layoff                                                                                            Months since layoff


Displaced formal employees eligible for five months of UI after layoff (after a 30-day waiting period). UI benefit collection and formal reemployment patterns are
constructed using administrative data. Overall reemployment patterns are estimated using survey data (PME). Panel (a) displays the share taking up UI, drawing
UI, and exhausting UI in each month since layoff. The following panels display the survival rate in non-formal employment at the start of each month (panel b),
the hazard rate of formal reemployment in each month (panel c), and the share finding a new formal job in each month (panel d). These patterns are presented for
all workers, for UI takers, and for those who took up UI in their first month of eligibility, separately. All these statistics are population means, so we don’t include
confidence intervals. Panels (b)-(d) also display the estimated survival rate in non-employment, the hazard rate of overall reemployment, and the share finding any
new job, respectively, with their 95% confidence intervals. These estimates are presented for all workers because we don’t observe UI benefit collection in PME.



         of them remain non-employed five months after layoff, which is comparable to US figures (Chetty,
         2008), 77.6% remain without formal employment (Figure 3b). Many displaced formal employees
         are thus likely working informally, including many UI beneficiaries because 68.8% of all displaced
         formal employees are still drawing UI benefits in the following month (Figure 3a).35
             The average paid UI duration can be high because of large behavioral responses to UI incentives
         or because displaced formal employees would not return rapidly to a formal job even in absence of
            35 Amongthose who report being reemployed informally in the first five months after layoff in our PME sample,
         32.7% and 61% report being reemployed as self-employed workers and informal employees, respectively.


                                                                                                                          22
                                     Figure 4: UI benefit collection and formal reemployment across Brazilian states
                                                                                     (c) Mechanical effect of one-month in-
(a) UI takeup rate for workers eligible for (b) Average paid UI duration for workers crease in potential UI duration for work-
5 months of UI                              eligible for 5 months of UI              ers eligible for 5 months of UI




                                                                                   4.85




                                                                                                                                                       .9
       1
       .95




                                                                                   4.8




                                                                                                                                                       .85
                Slope: .077 (.065)




                                                                                4.7 4.75
                                                                                           Slope: .605 (.084)
       .9




                                                                                                                                                           .8
                                                                                                                                                                 Slope: .442 (.050)




                                                                              (months)




                                                                                                                                                  (months)
  (share)
    .85




                                                                                                                                                    .75
                                                                                   4.65
       .8




                                                                                                                                                       .7
       .75




                                                                                   4.6




                                                                                                                                                       .65
                                                                                   4.55
       .7




                                                                                                                                                       .6
                .25           .3           .35            .4            .45                .25          .3           .35            .4      .45                 .25           .3           .35            .4            .45
                           Average state-level informality rate                                      Average state-level informality rate                                  Average state-level informality rate



(d) Maximum behavioral effect of one- (e) Survival rate without a formal job 10 (f) Survival rate without a formal job 10
month increase in potential UI duration months after layoff for workers eligible months after layoff for workers not eligi-
for workers eligible for 5 months of UI for 5 months of UI                       ble for UI
                                                                                   .7
       .7




                                                                                                                                                       .7
                                                 Slope: -1.054 (.099)                                                                                                 Low tenure
                                                                                   .65
       .65




                                                                                                                                                       .65
                                                                                           Slope: .594 (.110)                                                   Slope: .478 (.070)
                                                                                   .6
           .6




                                                                                                                                                          .6
  (months)




                                                                              (share)




                                                                                                                                                  (share)
                                                                                 .55
    .55




                                                                                                                                                   .55
                                                                                   .5
       .5




                                                                                                                                                       .5
                                                                                   .45




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fired for cause
       .45




                                                                                                                                                       .45
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slope: .810 (.129)
                                                                                   .4
       .4




                                                                                                                                                       .4

                .25           .3           .35            .4            .45                .25          .3           .35            .4      .45                 .25          .3         .35           .4          .45
                           Average state-level informality rate                                      Average state-level informality rate                                  Average state-level informality rate



The figure displays state-level estimates plotted against average state-level informality rates. Lines display the result of a WLS regression of these estimates on
informality rates, weighting estimates by the inverse of their standard error squared, with their 95% confidence intervals (dashed lines). The estimated slope is
provided in each panel with its standard error in parenthesis. Panels (a)-(e) are based on a random sample of layoffs that is constructed similarly as the sample used
in Figure 3 (displaced formal workers with more than 24 months of tenure at layoff), but including layoffs from the whole country. These workers are eligible for
five months of UI. Panel (f) is based on two random samples that are constructed similarly as the sample used in Figure 3, but that only include workers not eligible
for UI: the “low tenure” sample includes workers who didn’t have enough tenure at layoff to be eligible for UI (and had no other job in the previous 36 months); the
“fired for cause” sample includes workers with more than 24 months of tenure at separation, but who were fired for cause and thus not eligible for UI.



                UI incentives. We discuss suggestive evidence of behavioral responses in the next lesson.

                Lesson 2. The share finding a new formal job in each month increases and peaks exactly after
                benefit exhaustion, suggesting clear behavioral responses to UI incentives. The share finding a
                new formal job also starts exceeding the share finding any new job exactly after benefit exhaustion,
                suggesting that informality responses partly drive behavioral responses to UI incentives.
                    Patterns in Figures 3c and 3d suggest clear behavioral responses to UI incentives. The hazard
                rate of formal reemployment and the share of displaced formal employees finding a new formal
                job in each month increase and peak exactly after most of them exhaust their UI benefits. For
                instance, the share more than doubles in the month of UI exhaustion for those who took up UI in
                their first month of eligibility, and peaks in the following month. Such a pattern is not as severe


                                                                                                                 23
in most developed countries (Card, Chetty and Weber, 2007b).36 It is similar but attenuated in the
other samples in Figures 3c and 3d, because of UI non-takers and because those who took up UI
later also exhaust their benefits later. We show in the Web Appendix that this pattern generalizes
to the rest of Brazil, and that it is not driven by workers returning to the same employer.
     Figure 3d also suggests that informality responses drive part of the behavioral responses to UI
incentives. The estimated share of all displaced formal employees finding any new job does not
increase after UI exhaustion. In fact, the share finding a new formal job in each month becomes
larger than the share finding any new job exactly after most UI takers exhaust their benefits.37
Therefore, the increase and peak in the share finding a new formal job after UI exhaustion, which
is indicative of behavioral responses to UI incentives, is unlikely due to an increase in the number
of workers leaving non-employment. In that case, it can only be due to a shift from informal to
formal jobs: a decrease in the number finding an informal job among those finding a new job, or
an increase in the number finding a formal job among those working informally.
     The existence of behavioral responses implies that (increases in) UI benefits (would) generate
some distortion. Yet, it does not imply that the efficiency cost is necessarily high. For instance, the
efficiency cost may be limited if displaced formal employees would not return rapidly to a formal
job even in absence of UI incentives. We discuss related evidence in the next lesson.

Lesson 3. Rates of formal reemployment are low even when workers are no longer or not eligible
for UI. Consequently, the mechanical effect of increases in UI benefits would be relatively large,
the maximum behavioral effect would be limited, and the efficiency cost may not be relatively high.
    Figure 3 shows that, despite the existence of behavioral responses, rates of formal reemploy-
ment remain low even when workers are no longer eligible for UI. For instance, Figure 3b shows
that 77% of displaced formal employees who took up UI in their first month of eligibility remain
without a formal job one month after benefit exhaustion, and would draw an extra month of UI
mechanically following an increase in potential UI duration (the mechanical effect of an increase
in the UI benefit level would also be large as the average paid UI duration is high). In fact, 48.4%
of them remain without a formal job ten months after layoff. The figure is higher for the sample of
all UI takers. This is much higher than the comparable figure in the US, given that it is even higher
than the UI exhaustion rate over the same period (excluding again years with extended benefits).
Figure 4 shows that those patterns generalize to the rest of Brazil. Figure 4c shows that the average
mechanical effect of a hypothetical one-month increase in potential UI duration is high in all states,
ranging from .7 to .8 month.38 Figure 4e shows that the share of UI takers remaining without a
  36 van Ours and Vodopivec (2006) find a sizeable spike in Slovenia.
  37 The  hazard rates of formal and overall reemployment cannot be compared because the shares that remain without
any job and without any formal job (the denominators of the hazard rates) are very different around UI exhaustion.
   38 The mechanical effect is equal to the share of UI takers exhausting their UI benefits and remaining without a

formal job one month after benefit exhaustion.


                                                        24
formal job ten months after layoff ranges from about 40% to 60% across Brazilian states.
    Importantly, the low rates of formal reemployment even after benefit exhaustion are unlikely
due to some long-term effect of UI eligibility in earlier months. Figure 4f shows that the share re-
maining without a formal job ten months after layoff is even higher for displaced formal employees
who are not eligible for any UI benefits. The average paid UI duration would thus be mechanically
high if we were to extend UI eligibility to these workers (about 70% of them remain without a
formal job five months after layoff; see survival rates in the Web Appendix).
    Figure 3 also shows that the estimated survival rates in non-employment remain much lower
than the survival rates in non-formal employment after benefit exhaustion. This suggests that the
decision of displaced formal employees to work informally is not only due to UI incentives. Re-
latedly, most formal employees spend a significant amount of time out of formal employment over
their career. We show in the Web Appendix that a random sample of workers formally employed
in 2000 spent, on average, only 62% of their career formally employed in the next 10 years (81.3
months), were laid off 2.1 times from a formal job, and drew a total of 7.6 months of UI.
    The low rates of formal reemployment in Brazil imply not only that the mechanical effect of
increases in UI benefits is large, but also that the potential distortion is limited. For instance, Fig-
ure 4d shows that the maximum behavioral effect on average paid UI duration of a hypothetical
one-month increase in potential UI duration ranges from .4 month to .7 month.39 As a result, the
efficiency cost of increases in UI benefits may not be relatively high in Brazil. For instance, the
ratio of the maximum behavioral effect in Figure 4d to the mechanical effect in Figure 4c provides
an upper bound for the first component of the efficiency cost of an increase in potential UI dura-
tion (see equation 2). It ranges from .5 to 1, implying that at most $.5 to $1 would be lost due to a
behavioral effect on average paid UI duration per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries. In compar-
ison, Katz and Meyer (1990) and Landais (2015), who study increases in potential UI duration in
the US, estimate a behavioral effect on average paid UI duration that is larger than the mechanical
effect, implying that more than $1 would be lost per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries in their
cases. Therefore, the efficiency cost may not be relatively high in Brazil, despite the prevalence
of informal work opportunities. In the next section, we directly estimate the efficiency cost of an
increase in potential UI duration, and how the actual and maximum behavioral effects compare.
However, we first document that differences across labor markets within Brazil are consistent with
the differences between Brazil and countries with lower informality as discussed above.

    Lesson 4. The average paid UI duration is higher in labor markets with higher informality
  39 The maximum behavioral effect of an increase in potential UI duration on average paid UI duration is equal to the
extended potential UI duration (6 months) minus the sum of the existing average paid UI duration in Figure 4b and
the average mechanical effect in Figure 4c. Note that the maximum behavioral effect of an increase in the UI benefit
level would also be limited. It is equal to the difference between the existing potential UI duration (5 months) and the
existing average paid UI duration in Figure 4b, which ranges from .2 month to .35 month.


                                                          25
and displaced formal workers return more slowly to a formal job even when they are no longer
or not eligible for UI. As a result, the mechanical effect (resp. the maximum behavioral effect) of
increases in UI benefits is larger (resp. smaller), and the efficiency cost may not be higher.
     Figure 4b shows that the average paid UI duration is higher in states with higher informality.
Again, this could be because behavioral responses to UI incentives are larger or because displaced
formal employees would return more slowly to a formal job even in absence of UI incentives. We
estimate how the behavioral effect of an increase in potential UI duration differs across states in
Section 5. However, Figures 4c, 4e, and 4f already document that rates of formal reemployment
are lower in states with higher informality, even when displaced formal employees are no longer
or not eligible for UI. Figures 4c and 4e show that the mechanical effect of a hypothetical one-
month increase in potential UI duration, and the share of displaced formal employees who remain
without a formal job ten months after layoff, are strongly increasing in informality rates. Moreover,
these patterns are unlikely due to some long-term effect of UI eligibility in earlier months. Figure
4f shows that the share remaining without a formal job ten months after layoff is also strongly
increasing in informality rates for workers who were not eligible for any UI benefits.
     The lower rates of formal reemployment imply not only that the mechanical effect of increases
in UI benefits will be larger, but also that the potential distortion will be smaller in states with higher
informality. For instance, Figure 4d shows that the maximum behavioral effect on average paid UI
duration of a hypothetical increase in potential UI duration is strongly decreasing in informality
rates. Therefore, the efficiency cost of an increase in potential UI duration would be decreasing in
informality rates, unless the ratio of the actual to the maximum behavioral effects is much larger
in states with higher informality. We directly estimate how the efficiency cost of an increase in
potential UI duration differ across states with different levels of informality in Section 5.
     Finally, we confirm our findings through a regression analysis in the Web Appendix. We es-
timate correlations between informality rates and individual-level UI and formal reemployment
outcomes, using the same samples as in Figure 4. This allows us to estimate correlations with
informality rates holding (un)employment rates constant. Informality and unemployment rates are
correlated in middle-income countries. The above results could thus, in theory, come from underly-
ing correlations with unemployment rates, which have been studied in contexts of lower informal-
ity. This approach also allows us to use more disaggregated measures of the relevant informality
rate, namely state-level informality rates disaggregated by year and gender. Labor markets became
more formal over time in Brazil and women remain less likely to work in the formal sector (see
Web Appendix). Furthermore, this approach allows us to show that the correlations in Figure 4 are
not simply due to fixed differences across states or to difference in workers’ observables: results
are similar including year fixed effects, state fixed effects, and a rich set of individual controls.
     In sum, the potential distortion appears to increase as an economy formalizes. The concern


                                                    26
that informal work opportunities exacerbate the efficiency cost thus rests on the assumption that
the actual behavioral effect is much larger compared to the maximum behavioral effect in a context
of high informality, which we evaluate in the next sections.


3.4    Generalizability of the empirical patterns
In addition to the robustness checks mentioned above, we show in the Web Appendix that all the
patterns based on the administrative data generalize to samples from earlier years, from other parts
of Brazil, with different tenure levels at layoff and different levels of potential UI duration. The
average paid UI duration is always very high compared to the potential UI duration. Rates of
formal reemployment always increase sharply after benefit exhaustion, but remain relatively low.


4     The efficiency cost of increases in potential UI duration
In Section 3, we documented evidence of behavioral responses to UI incentives, which are likely
due in part to informality responses. We also documented that displaced formal employees return
slowly to a formal job even when they are no longer or not eligible for UI. Consequently, the
efficiency cost of (increases in) UI benefits may be limited, despite evidence of incentive effects.
In this section, we directly estimate the impacts and efficiency cost of increases in UI benefits. We
exploit variation in potential UI duration at a tenure-based cutoff through a regression discontinuity
(RD) design. We then compare our estimates with existing estimates from contexts of low(er)
informality. We also confirm our results using another empirical strategy in the Web Appendix.
We present the RD design in the paper because it allows us to study how the impacts and efficiency
cost vary across labor markets with different informality rates in the next section.
    Note that, in theory, one could also exploit variation in the UI benefit level from kinks in the
benefit schedule through a regression kink (RK) design. We show in the Web Appendix that there
is no evidence of behavioral responses around those kinks, despite large changes in slope. The
conclusion of this section – that the efficiency cost is relatively low – would thus carry over to
increases in the UI benefit level. However, this could be because the kinks are located at relatively
high levels of the replacement rate in Brazil (80% and 68%). Beneficiaries may be less responsive
to changes in benefit levels at high replacement rates, especially when some of them are working
informally. This is why we focus on variation in potential UI duration, for which we have variation
at all levels of the replacement rate, and for which we find clear evidence of behavioral responses.




                                                 27
4.1    A tenure-based eligibility cutoff
Displaced formal employees are eligible for three, four, or five months of UI if they have more
than 6, 12, or 24 months of accumulated tenure in the 36 months prior to layoff. We exploit the
24-month cutoff for workers who had a single formal job in the previous 36 months in this section
using the administrative data. We cannot exploit this cutoff in PME because we only know UI
eligibility and potential UI duration for workers with more than 24 months of tenure at layoff.
    Our focus on workers who had a single formal job in the previous 36 months is due to a data
limitation. The measure of tenure in RAIS underestimates the measure used by the UI agency by
up to two months for every job spell. First, there is a mandatory one-month advance notice of
layoff in Brazil. Firms either lay off workers immediately, paying an extra monthly wage, or keep
workers employed during the period. We cannot separately identify these cases in RAIS and the
advance notice period counts for UI eligibility. Second, a partial month of tenure can count as a full
month for UI eligibility. We thus measure the running variable, and consequently UI eligibility,
more precisely for workers who had a single formal job spell in the previous 36 months, which
is useful for our empirical strategy. These workers constitute 50.2% of all workers and 51.6% of
UI takers with tenure levels around the 24-month cutoff. Importantly, this selection is unlikely to
drive our results. We obtain similar results with the other empirical strategy, which does not impose
such a selection. Moreover, rates of formal reemployment are comparable in our RD sample (see
below), for all workers with more than 24 months of tenure at layoff (see Figures 3 and 4), and for
a random sample of all displaced formal workers over the same period (see Web Appendix).
    We focus on the 24-month cutoff because the usual conditions supporting the validity of a RD
design appear to hold at this cutoff: the layoff density is smooth and there is no difference in sample
composition at the cutoff (see below). This should not be surprising. There is no other policy
varying discontinuously at this cutoff. Moreover, the decision to lay off workers with relatively
high tenure at a firm (or to report them as laid off) may not be very responsive to variation in their
UI benefits upon layoff, even in the absence of experience-rating of UI benefits. They may have
accumulated job-specific human capital and firing costs are sizable for these workers. In particular,
termination of an employment contract for workers with more than 12 months of tenure must be
overseen by a union or a Labor Ministry representative. This increases firing costs because of the
administrative burden it imposes and because of firms’ often imperfect compliance with workers’
dues. In contrast to the 24-month cutoff, we show in the Web Appendix that the layoff density is
not smooth around the other eligibility cutoffs. It increases discontinuously at six months of tenure.
The decision to lay off workers recently hired at a firm may be more responsive to UI eligibility.40
   40 This has been again confirmed in a recent paper by Carvalho, Corbi and Narita (2017). The layoff density also

increases discontinuously at another eligibility cutoff for such workers, when they reach 16 months between their
layoff date and the layoff date of their last UI spell (Gerard, Rokkanen and Rothe, 2016).


                                                        28
It decreases discontinuously at 12 months of tenure, which is when firing costs also increase.
    Our main sample of analysis includes all individuals in the administrative data, 18-54 years old,
laid off between 2005 and 2009, and who had a single full-time private formal job in the previous
36 months. Workers with less than 22 months (resp. more than 24 months) of tenure at layoff were
eligible for four months (resp. five months) of UI. Workers with 22 to 24 months of tenure were
eligible for either four or five months of UI because of the noise in our measure of the running
variable. We restrict the sample to workers who had between 16 and 30 months of tenure such that
we have a six-month window on each side of the cutoff, for which we assess workers’ potential UI
duration precisely. The final sample includes 2,283,765 observations. Its composition is discussed
below and more details on its construction are provided in the Web Appendix.


4.2       Graphical evidence
We begin by providing some graphical evidence in Figure 5. Panels (a) and (b) display survival
rates in non-formal employment and hazard rates of formal reemployment, constructed as in sec-
tion 3, for UI takers eligible for four vs. five months of UI in our sample. Hazard rates are very
low while workers are eligible for UI. They start increasing sharply after four months for workers
eligible for four months of UI, but only after five months for those eligible for five months of UI.
Survival rates then remain higher for a few months for workers eligible for five months of UI.
Yet, the behavioral effect suggested by these patterns is small compared to the mechanical effect,
because survival rates remain relatively high even for workers eligible for four months of UI. Note
also that the survival and hazard rates are very similar in Figure 5 and in Figure 3 for UI takers
eligible for five months of UI, despite the differences between the samples used in the two figures.
     Panels (c)-(i) display a series of RD graphs, which plot the average of some selected variables
by tenure levels around the cutoff. First, panels (c)-(e) show that there is no visible change in
the distribution and composition of our sample around the cutoff (we show that there is no visible
change in the average of other worker characteristics around the cutoff in the Web Appendix). This
graphical evidence supports the validity of our RD design.
     Second, panel (f) disentangles the behavioral and mechanical effects of the increase in poten-
tial UI duration on the average paid UI duration of UI takers (UI takeup is constant at around
86%; see Web Appendix). For this purpose, it displays two variables. The first variable is the
actual change in the average paid UI duration at the cutoff, which is defined as follows: DBi ≡
∑Pj=1 1(DrawingUIi, j = 1), where P = {4, 5} is the potential UI duration and where DrawingUIi, j =
1 indicates that worker i drew a jth month of UI. The change in this variable at the cutoff captures
the total effect on average paid UI duration.41 However, to separate the behavioral and mechanical
  41 As   in Section 3, we consider a worker as taking up UI (resp. drawing a jth month of UI) if she applied within 120



                                                           29
                                                                             Figure 5: Graphical evidence for the regression discontinuity (RD) design
(a) Survival rate in non-formal employ- (b) Hazard rate of formal reemployment (c) Share of observations by tenure at lay-
ment (UI takers)                        (UI takers)                            off (density of running variable)




                                                                                                                     .12
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Eligible for
   1




                                                                                 Eligible for 5 months of UI                                                                                                5 months of UI                        Eligible for 4 months of UI     Eligible for 5 months of UI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .02
   .9




                                                                                                                     .1
   .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .015
   .7




                                                                                                                     .08
   .6




                                                                                                                     .06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .01
   .5




                                                                               Eligible for 4 months of UI                                                                                  Eligible for
   .4




                                                                                                                                                                                           4 months of UI




                                                                                                                     .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .005
   .3
   .2




                                                                                                                     .02
   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
   0




                                                                                                                     0
                                       0         1     2     3    4     5     6     7     8    9    10   11    12                                 0         1    2     3     4     5     6     7     8      9   10   11      12            16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
                                                                      Months since layoff                                                                                        Months since layoff                                                     Tenure at layoff (months)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (f) Behavioral and mechanical effects on
                                                           (d) Replacement rate                                                                                                   (e) Age                                         average paid UI duration (UI takers)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Eligible for 4 months of UI    Eligible for 5 months of UI
  .75 .76 .77 .78 .79 .8 .81 .82 .83 .84 .85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.8
                                                                                                                    28 28.5 29 29.5 30 30.5 31 31.5 32




                                               Eligible for 4 months of UI           Eligible for 5 months of UI                                          Eligible for 4 months of UI            Eligible for 5 months of UI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Behavioral effect




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Average "counterfactual"
               Replacement rate




                                                                                                                               Age (in years)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       paid UI duration




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (months)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mechanical effect




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Average paid UI duration




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.8
                                               16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30                                                              16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30                                             16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
                                                            Tenure at layoff (in months)                                                                              Tenure at layoff (in months)                                                              Tenure at layoff (months)



(g) Survival rate in non-formal employ- (h) Non-formal-employment duration after (i) Months formally employed in the 3
ment 3 years after layoff (UI takers)   layoff censored at 3 years (UI takers)   years after layoff (UI takers)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16.5
                        .3




                                                                                                                                                          Eligible for 4 months of UI             Eligible for 5 months of UI                       Eligible for 4 months of UI   Eligible for 5 months of UI
                                                                                                                                      18.5




                                               Eligible for 4 months of UI            Eligible for 5 months of UI
  Share still without new formal job




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                              .28




                                                                                                                                      18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14.5 15 15.5
                                                                                                                      17 17.5
                       .26




                                                                                                                    (months)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (months)
               .24




                                                                                                                                      16.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14
    .22




                                                                                                                                      16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13.5
                                                                                                                                      15.5
                        .2




                                               16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30                                                              16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30                                             16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
                                                            Tenure at layoff (in months)                                                                               Tenure at layoff (months)                                                                Tenure at layoff (months)



Workers with tenure levels below 22 months (resp. between 22 and 24 months, above 24 months) were eligible for 4 months of UI (resp. either 4 or 5 months of UI,
5 months of UI). Panels (a) and (b) display survival rates in non-formal employment and hazard rates of formal reemployment for workers with tenure levels between
16 and 22 months and between 24 and 30 months. Panels (c)-(i) display averages by tenure levels (.1 month bins) around the cutoff. Panel (c) displays the density
of the running variable, and panels (d) and (e) display worker characteristics (replacement rate and age). Panel (f) displays the paid UI duration (black dots) and the
“counterfactual” paid UI duration (gray dots), which allows us to decompose the total effect on paid UI duration into behavioral and mechanical effects. Finally,
panels (g)-(i) then focus on longer-term outcomes, restricting attention to workers laid off between 2005 and 2007 such that we can follow the sample for three years
after layoff. Panel (g) displays the share still without a formal job three years after layoff, and panels (h) and (i) display the non-formal-employment duration and the
number of months spent formally employed in the three years after layoff. Below the cutoff (resp. above the cutoff), the line is estimated using an edge kernel and
observations in a bandwidth of six months below 22 months of tenure (resp. above 24 months of tenure).




                                                 days of layoff and drew her first UI payment (resp. her jth month of UI) before being formally reemployed.



                                                                                                                                                                                      30
effects, we must also measure the average paid UI duration that would prevail absent behavioral
responses to the increase in potential UI duration. We do so by displaying the second variable, the
average of the following counterfactual paid UI duration (for the lack of a better term):

         4
  fB ≡
  Di     ∑ 1(DrawingUIi, j = 1) + 1(DrawingUIi,4 = 1) 1(NotFormallyReemployedi,4,1 = 1),
         j=1


where NotFormallyReemployedi,4,1 indicates whether worker i remains without formal employ-
ment one month after drawing her fourth month of UI. With perfect assignment and compliance,
actual and counterfactual paid UI duration would be equal for workers eligible for five months of
UI. The counterfactual paid UI duration would capture the sum of the paid UI duration and the me-
chanical effect of the increase in potential UI duration for workers eligible for four months of UI.
The change in the average of this variable at the cutoff would thus capture the behavioral effect.
The difference between the extended potential UI duration (five months) and the counterfactual
paid UI duration also captures the maximum behavioral effect on average paid UI duration.
    The average paid UI duration is around 3.9 months for workers with less than 22 months of
tenure. It then increases between 22 and 24 months of tenure, as an increasing share of workers
were eligible for a fifth month of UI. This increase would start at lower tenure levels and would
be much less sharp if we had not selected workers with a single formal job spell in the previous
36 months. The average paid UI duration reaches around 4.75 months for workers with more
than 24 months of tenure, who were all eligible for five months of UI. The total effect is thus
large (.85 month). However, it is mostly due to a mechanical effect. The average counterfactual
paid UI duration is around 4.65 months for workers eligible for four months of UI, indicating that
most of them would draw a fifth month of UI mechanically, and that the maximum behavioral
effect on paid UI duration is around .35 month. The average counterfactual paid UI duration starts
increasing at exactly 22 months of tenure and reaches 4.75 months above the cutoff, indicating
that the behavioral effect on paid UI duration only amounts to about .10 month or about a third of
its maximum value. Note that the averages of the actual and counterfactual paid UI durations are
similar above the cutoff indicating that assignment and compliance are not an issue in our case.
    Third, panels (g)-(i) consider behavioral responses for longer-term outcomes. We use an hori-
zon of three years after layoff because panel (g) shows that there is no change at the cutoff in
the share remaining without formal employment by then. Panels (h) and (i) show that UI takers
eligible for a fifth month of UI had a longer non-formal-employment duration and spent fewer
months formally employed in those three years. In contrast, we show in the Web Appendix (and in
regression results below) that there is no change around the cutoff in the probability to be formally
employed and in the wage conditional on formal employment three years after layoff.



                                                 31
4.3       Empirical strategy
We turn now to the econometric analysis to obtain precise estimates of all those effects. Our
empirical strategy is as follows. Let Ti be the normalized tenure at layoff for worker i, such that
Ti = 0 at the 24-month cutoff. In the absence of noise in the eligibility of workers with 22 to 24
months of tenure, we would simply regress an outcome yi on a constant, an indicator for tenure
levels above the cutoff 1(Ti ≥ 0), and a control function in tenure f (Ti ):

                                    yi = α + β 1(Ti ≥ 0) + f (Ti ) + εi ,                                  (4)

The average treatment effect at the cutoff is captured by β under a continuity assumption for the
control function at Ti = 0. As common in the RD literature, we approximate the control function
with local linear functions over a bandwidth h on each side of the cutoff using a kernel function K.
We then address the ambiguous eligibility of workers with 22 to 24 months of tenure by excluding
them from our regressions (we are left with 1,969,137 observations). The value of the outcome at
the cutoff from below is thus estimated by a local linear function fitted only to observations below
22 months. This approach is comparable to other “donut hole” approaches in the RD literature.
It is illustrated in panels (c)-(i) in Figure 5. The line below the cutoff (resp. above the cutoff) is
estimated using observations in a bandwidth of six months below 22 months of tenure (resp. above
24 months of tenure). The estimated impact is the difference between the two lines at the cutoff.42
     In our main specification, we use the theoretically optimal edge kernel (Cheng, Fan and Mar-
ron, 1997) and a bandwidth of six months below 22 and above 24 months of tenure. A visual in-
spection of the data in Figure 5 suggests that a six-month bandwidth fits the data well. In contrast,
a smaller bandwidth (e.g., less than two months) appears to miss overall trends for some outcome
variables (e.g., Figure 5h; we present results with smaller bandwidths as robustness checks). This
is important because we need to predict the trend in the outcomes between 22 and 24 months using
only observations below 22 months. This is also why we cannot use optimal bandwidths from the
theoretical RD literature. Finally, we cluster standard errors at the level of the running variable.


4.4       Main results
Table 1 displays the estimated impact of the one-month increase in potential UI duration (βb) and
the estimated level at the cutoff from below (α
                                              b ) for several variables.
    Results in panel A support the validity of our RD design. We find again no evidence of a dis-
continuity in the distribution or the composition (age, gender, education, replacement rate) of our
  42 We show in the Web Appendix that using polynomials of degrees higher than one does not provide a great fit
given our “donut hole” approach. However, our conclusions are robust to using quadratic functions.



                                                      32
sample at the cutoff. Estimates are neither statistically nor economically significant, and results are
similar if we consider other worker characteristics or use smaller bandwidths (see Web Appendix).
The average worker at the cutoff is 29.9 years old, is more likely to be male (58.2%), has 9.16
years of education, and is offered a replacement rate of 79.1% by the UI program.
    Next, we turn to UI outcomes in panel B. Since we do not find any impact on UI takeup in
column 1, we focus on UI takers in the other columns. We find a small increase in average paid UI
duration up to the fourth month of UI, providing evidence of behavioral responses in anticipation
of the fifth month of UI. We estimate a total effect on average paid UI duration of .861 month.
Increasing potential UI duration is thus costly in Brazil. However, it is mostly due to a mechanical
effect. We estimate an increase in the average counterfactual paid UI duration, which captures the
behavioral effect, of only .126 month from a level of 4.624 months at the cutoff from below.43
                                                                                    .126
The behavioral effect on average paid UI duration thus leads to a loss of .861−.126       =$.171 per
$1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries. This first component of the efficiency cost is relatively
low because the mechanical effect is large and the potential distortion is limited, and not because
workers who would otherwise have found a formal job rapidly are not responsive to the change in
UI incentives. Indeed, the ratio of the actual to the maximum behavioral effects is relatively high,
     .126
at 5−.4.624 =33.5%, but it is not high enough for the behavioral effect to be relatively large.
    Finally, we consider longer-term outcomes for UI takers (last column in panel B, and panel
C). We estimate increases of .29 month and .389 month in non-formal-employment duration one
year and three years after layoff, respectively. The three-year impact measures the total change
in non-formal-employment duration because we find no impact on the share remaining without
formal employment three years after layoff (we present impacts on hazard rates and survival rates
in each month after layoff in the Web Appendix). We estimate a decrease in the time spent for-
mally employed in the three years after layoff of .243 month. Therefore, estimating impacts on
non-formal-employment duration and assuming that they translate into symmetric impacts on sub-
sequent formal employment, as often done in the UI literature, can be misleading. We show in the
Web Appendix that the difference is due to the fact that, upon formal reemployment, workers spend
only a share q = .746 of their remaining career in the three years after layoff formally employed
(we don’t find a significant impact on this share). Finally, we find no effect on the probability to be
formally employed three years after layoff or on the wage among those formally employed then.44

  43 To confirm that the average counterfactual paid UI duration closely approximates the average paid UI duration
for workers eligible for five months of UI, we also ran a similar regression as in column (3) on the following variable:
∑4j=1 1(DrawingUIi j = 1) + 1(DrawingUIi4 = 1) 1(Ti ≥ 0) 1(NotFormallyReemployedi1 = 1), which captures the
paid UI duration below the cutoff and the counterfactual paid UI duration above the cutoff. We find an impact of .87
months, which is very close to the estimate in column 3.
   44 Moreover, we find no impact on the withdrawal of additional UI benefits in the three years after layoff (insignifi-

cant impact of .003 month for a constant of .917 month).


                                                          33
            Table 1: Regression discontinuity estimates of the impact of the one-month increase in potential UI duration

      A. VALIDITY CHECKS (VARIABLES AT LAYOFF)
                       Share of observations    Age                                        Male                 Years of             Replacement
                          by tenure level     (years)                                    (dummy)               education                  rate
                                 (1)             (2)                                         (3)                   (4)                    (5)
      Tenure≥24 months         -.0003          .0816                                       .0061                 -.0301                 -.0037
                              (.0019)         (.0769)                                     (.0072)               (.0236)                (.0046)
      Constant               .0073***        29.93***                                    .5819***              9.163***               .7908***
                              (.0017)         (.0617)                                     (.0065)                 (.02)                (.0042)
      Observations          1,969,137        1,969,137                                   1,969,137             1,969,137              1,969,137
      B. IMPACTS (FIRST YEAR AFTER LAYOFF)
                                                                        Paid UI duration                     Counterfactual       Duration without
                                         UI                    Anticipated                Total                 paid UI              a formal job
                                       takeup                    (P = 4)              (P = {4, 5})              duration         (censored at 1 year)
                                     (dummy)                    (months)               (months)                (months)                (months)
                                         (1)                        (2)                    (3)                     (4)                     (5)
      Tenure≥24 months                  .006                    .0426***               .8605***                .1259***                .2904***
                                      (.0037)                    (.0055)                (.0084)                 (.0093)                 (.0664)
      Constant                       .8626***                   3.821***               3.877***                4.624***                9.087***
                                      (.0032)                    (.0047)                 (.007)                  (.008)                 (.0585)




34
      Observations                   1,969,137                 1,704,333               1,704,333               1,704,333              1,704,333
      C. IMPACTS (THREE YEARS AFTER LAYOFF)
                         Not yet formally   Duration without                         Months formally                 December 3 years later
                       reemployed 3 years     a formal job                             employed in             Formally       Real monthly wage
                           after layoff   (censored at 3 years)                     3 years after layoff       employed     if formally employed
                            (dummy)             (months)                                 (months)              (dummy)            (R$, logs)
                                (1)                  (2)                                     (3)                   (4)                 (5)
      Tenure≥24 months        -.0004             .3894**                                 -.2432**                .0005               -.0018
                             (.0054)              (.1813)                                 (.0976)               (.0036)             (.0077)
      Constant              .2351***            16.87***                                14.89***               .4969***            6.804***
                             (.0048)                (.16)                                 (.0814)               (.0032)             (.0064)
      Observations           917,344             917,344                                  917,344               917,344             448,800
      Standard errors clustered by tenure level in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. The table displays RD estimates for the
     one-month increase in potential UI duration at the 24-month tenure cutoff. All specifications include linear controls in tenure (normalized to the
     cutoff) on each side of the cutoff and use an edge kernel. Panel A presents supportive evidence for the validity of the RD design by testing for
     a discontinuity in the density of the running variable (column 1; the outcome is the share of the sample by .1-month tenure bin) or in average
     worker chararacteristics at the cutoff. Panels B and C present treatment effects in the short and longer-term. The sample in Panel C is restricted to
     workers laid off between 2005 and 2007, such that we can follow the sample for three years after layoff. Columns (4) and (5) consider outcomes
     in December because we only measure monthly wages precisely in December in RAIS. In all cases, the constant captures the estimated average
     outcome at the cutoff from below.
4.5    Efficiency cost
We now evaluate the efficiency cost of the one-month increase in potential UI duration. The only
                                                              DB
statistic that we have not yet estimated is the coefficient D  F in equation (2), which scales down

the behavioral effect on the time spent formally employed subsequently. It corresponds to the
average number of periods of UI benefit collection per period of formal employment financing the
UI system. Chetty (2008) and Schmieder, von Wachter and Bender (2012a) approximate it by the
unemployment rate. This would be misleading in our context because of the large share of informal
workers. We approximate it instead by the number of UI beneficiaries per private formal employee
between 2005 and 2009, as in Landais (2015). We obtain an average ratio of .086, implying
that there were about 11.5 private formal employees per UI beneficiary. This is consistent with
descriptive statistics discussed earlier: a random sample of workers spent on average 82.4 months
formally employed and drew a total of 7.7 months of UI between 2000 and 2010, for a ratio of
.093. The resulting efficiency cost amounts to .126+.086×.243
                                                    .861−.126    = .20 (with a standard error of .023
obtained by the delta method) or $.2 per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries.


4.6    Comparison with estimates from contexts of low(er) informality
Our estimate of the efficiency cost, which may constitute an upper bound in our context, is compar-
atively low despite the high degree of informality in Brazil. For instance, Katz and Meyer (1990)
and Landais (2015) estimate a behavioral effect on average paid UI duration that is larger than the
mechanical effect using data from the US. This implies an efficiency cost above $1 per $1 reaching
mechanical beneficiaries, not even accounting for changes in the time spent formally employed
subsequently. The comparison with Landais (2015) is particularly interesting. He also considers
marginal changes in potential UI duration across workers within a labor market. The average po-
tential UI duration in his sample (20-27 weeks) is comparable to the potential UI duration on the
right of our cutoff (five months or 22 weeks). Yet, informal work opportunities were limited in the
US in the late 1970s - early 1980s, the period covered by his sample. We estimate a larger impact
on average paid UI duration following a marginal change in potential UI duration (.86 vs. .2-.4).
However, the efficiency cost is larger in his case because the mechanical effect is smaller: only
11%-18% of UI beneficiaries exhaust their UI benefits. Landais (2015) concludes that one half to
two-thirds of the increase in average paid UI duration is due to behavioral responses. Interestingly,
the efficiency cost is larger in his case, despite the fact that the behavioral effect is smaller as a
share of its maximum value. The efficiency cost is thus smaller in our context because the poten-
tial distortion is smaller, and not because workers who would find a formal job rapidly in absence
of the increase in potential UI duration are less responsive to UI incentives.
     The UI program has not changed much in the US since the early 1980s, but exhaustion rates


                                                 35
have increased. For instance, Card and Levine (2000) document exhaustion rates around 35%
for the mid-1990s in the US. Yet, findings in their paper also suggest a higher efficiency cost for
the US. Their estimates imply that a one-month increase in potential UI duration leads to .077-
month in average paid UI duration up to the pre-existing potential UI duration (as in column B2
in Table 1). This effect alone, which can only be due to behavioral responses and is likely to
largely underestimate the behavioral effect on average paid UI duration up to the new potential UI
duration, already implies an efficiency cost higher than ours. Assuming a mechanical effect of .35
month, they would obtain .077/.35 =$.22 per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries.
    Comparisons with estimates from other countries with lower informality is complicated be-
cause the potential UI duration is often longer.45 Yet, estimates for Austrian and Slovenian UI
beneficiaries eligible for 20 to 30 weeks and three to six months of UI, respectively, imply an ef-
ficiency cost at least as large as ours, despite the lower degree of informality in these countries
(Card, Chetty and Weber, 2007a; van Ours and Vodopivec, 2006).46 Finally, comparisons with
other Latin American countries is complicated because the few papers that study the impact of UI
on some labor market outcomes do not report the estimates necessary for the efficiency cost.47


4.7     Robustness checks
We present robustness checks for our impacts of interest in the Web Appendix. We consider
smaller bandwidths around the cutoff and quadratic functions in tenure. Results are quantitatively
similar with two exceptions. The impacts on non-formal-employment duration and on the time
spent formally employed after layoff are smaller (in absolute values). If anything, we may thus
overestimate the efficiency cost in our main specification. Our results are also unchanged if we
include a rich set of individual controls, if we only include workers laid off between 2005 and
2007 as in panel C in Table 1, if we include workers laid off since 2002, or if we exclude workers
with very high and very low replacement rates. The efficiency cost resulting from those estimates
ranges from $.148 to $.201 per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries.
    We further confirm all our results by using the other source of quasi-experimental variation in
potential UI duration in Brazil, namely temporary extensions of UI benefits. We exploit a policy
(fully described in the Web Appendix) that extended UI benefits by two months in March 2009
for workers laid off in December 2008 from a list of 42 sector-state pairs. We use a difference-
in-difference strategy comparing workers laid off in December vs. November 2008, from eligible
  45 Similarly, recent estimates from the US that use variation during the Great Recession are capturing the effect of

an increase in potential UI duration for workers whose potential UI duration is already much longer than 26 weeks.
  46 Details for all these comparisons with existing estimates are provided in the Web Appendix.
  47 For instance, estimates from proportional hazard models, as in Gonzalez-Rozada and Ruffo (2016), do not map

easily into the correct measure of efficiency cost.



                                                         36
vs. ineligible sector-state pairs. We obtain an efficiency cost of $.155 per $1. The slightly lower
estimate is likely due to the fact that workers did not learn about the policy directly upon layoff.


5     Efficiency cost and informality rates
We showed in Section 4 that the average efficiency cost of an increase in potential UI duration was
not necessarily high in a context of high informality, compared to estimates from richer countries.
In this section, we directly estimate how the efficiency cost of the increase in potential UI duration
varies across Brazilian labor markets with different informality rates. Our findings allow us to
reinforce and shed further light on the conclusions of the cross-country comparison in Section 4.
    The empirical exercise in this section relates to a literature that correlates the effects of changes
in UI benefits with unemployment rates (e.g., Schmieder, von Wachter and Bender, 2012a). Such
correlations do not imply causal relationships as unemployment or informality rates are not policy
parameters that can be modified ceteris paribus. High unemployment rates may simply indicate
labor markets where the cost of finding a job is high or the return from doing so is low. Our point is
precisely that labor markets with high informality are not only labor markets where it is easier for
displaced formal workers to respond to UI incentives. For instance, we showed in Section 3 that
displaced formal workers return slower to a formal job in states with higher informality in Brazil
even when they are no longer or not eligible for UI. It may be harder for them to find a formal job
in these labor markets or they may choose to work informally for reasons unrelated to UI. As a
result, the efficiency cost may not be higher in contexts of higher informality.


5.1    Main empirical strategy and results
Our main empirical strategy consists in estimating the same RD specifications as in Table 1 for
each of the 27 Brazilian states separately, and then regressing our estimates on state-level infor-
mality rates (constructed as in Figure 4 for the RD sample), weighting estimates by the inverse
of their standard error squared. Figures 6 and 7 display our results. All estimates are based on
samples restricted to UI takers because we show in the Web Appendix that there is no systematic
correlations between UI takeup and informality rates.
     Figure 6 considers UI collection outcomes. Panels (a), (b), and (c) first replicate descriptive
patterns shown in Figure 4 for our RD sample (without the increase in potential UI duration). Panel
(a) displays the average paid UI duration at the cutoff from below. It is large in every state com-
pared to the potential UI duration of four months, ranging from 3.8 months to 3.95 months, and
it is increasing in informality rates. Panel (b) displays the mechanical effect of the one-month in-
crease in potential UI duration, which is the estimated discontinuity at the cutoff for the difference


                                                   37
                   Figure 6: Heterogeneity of regression discontinuity estimates with labor market informality (I)
(a) Average paid UI duration at the cutoff (b) Mechanical effect on average paid UI (c) Maximum behavioral effect on average
from below                                 duration                                 paid UI duration
        4




                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                          .45
                 Slope: .195 (.072)                                                       Slope: .346 (.057)
        3.95




                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                   .75
   (months)




                                                                           (months)




                                                                                                                                                  (months)
     3.9




                                                                                                                                                   .35
                                                                                .7
        3.85




                                                                                                                                                          .3
                                                                                                                                                                Slope: -.547 (.100)
        3.8




                                                                                .65




                                                                                                                                                          .25
                   .25          .3             .35             .4   .45                  .25           .3            .35             .4   .45                      .25          .3            .35             .4   .45
                           Average state-level informality rates                                  Average state-level informality rate                                     Average state-level informality rate



                                             (e) Behavioral effect on average paid UI (f) Ratio of actual to maximum behavioral
(d) Total effect on average paid UI duration duration                                 effects on average paid UI duration
       .95




                                                                               .25




                                                                                                                                                          .5
                                                                                                                                                                    Slope: -.120 (.211)
               Slope: .123 (.073)                                                         Slope: -.229 (.095)
                                                                               .2
       .9




                                                                                                                                                          .4
    (months)




                                                                          (months)




                                                                                                                                                (ratio)
                                                                            .15
  .85




                                                                                                                                                          .3
                                                                               .1
       .8




                                                                               .05




                                                                                                                                                          .2
                  .25           .3            .35             .4    .45                  .25          .3            .35             .4    .45                     .25           .3            .35             .4   .45
                           Average state-level informality rate                                  Average state-level informality rate                                      Average state-level informality rate



The figure displays results from estimating specifications as in Table 1 in each Brazilian state separately. State-level estimates are plotted against average state-level
informality rates. Lines display the result of a WLS regression of these estimates on informality rates, weighting estimates by the inverse of their standard error
squared, with their 95% confidence intervals (dashed lines). The estimated slope is provided in each panel with its standard error in parenthesis.



                between actual and counterfactual paid UI durations (see Figure 5f). It is again large in every state
                and strongly increasing in informality rates. The slope implies that the mechanical effect increases
                from .71 month to .79 month over our range of informality rates. The patterns in panels (a) and (b)
                imply that the maximum behavioral effect on average paid UI duration (5 − 4.624 = .376 month
                in Table 1) is limited in every state and is decreasing in informality rates. This is shown in panel
                (c). The slope implies a decrease from .41 month to .29 month over our range of informality rates.
                This also implies that at most $.58 to $.37 would be lost due to a behavioral effect on average paid
                UI duration per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries in our RD sample.
                    Panels (d), (e), and (f) then present results for the impact of the one-month increase in potential
                UI duration at the cutoff. Panel (d) shows that the total effect on the average paid UI duration
                is large in every state. It is slightly larger in states with higher informality, but the slope is not
                significant. Given that the mechanical effect is increasing in panel (b), the relatively flat slope
                in panel (d) implies that the behavioral effect on average paid UI duration must be decreasing
                in informality rates. This is shown in panel (e). The slope is significant and implies a decrease


                                                                                                                38
               Figure 7: Heterogeneity of regression discontinuity estimates with labor market informality (II)
(a) Non-formal-employment duration at (b) Impact on non-formal-employment du- (c) Impact on non-formal-employment du-
the cutoff from below (after 3 years) ration at the cutoff (after 1 year)     ration at the cutoff (after 3 years)
      22




                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                      -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slope: -2.683 (1.625)
              Slope: 17.767 (2.435)




                                                                                                                                                                                            2
      20




                                                                                                                                                                                            1
  (months)




                                                                                       (months)




                                                                                                                                                                    (months)
                                                                                                                                                                          0
    18




                                                                                                             Slope: -.863 (.347)




                                                                                                                                                                     -1                     -2
      16




                                                                                                                                                                                            -3
      14




                                                                                                                                                                                            -4
               .25           .3            .35             .4   .45                                          .25           .3            .35             .4   .45                                                    .25           .3            .35             .4   .45
                        Average state-level informality rate                                                          Average state-level informality rate                                                                    Average state-level informality rate



(d) Number of months formally employed (e) Impact on number of months formally
in the next 3 years at the cutoff from below employed in the next 3 years at the cutoff                                                                                                                                      (f) Efficiency cost




                                                                                                                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                         3




                                                                                                                                                                       ($/$ reaching mechanical beneficiaries)
      16




                                                                                         2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slope: -.640 (.232)
      15




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                         2




                                                                                                             Slope: 2.967 (1.208)
                                                                           1 1.5
   (months)




                                                                        (months)
        14




                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
  13




                                                                      .5




               Slope: -16.579 (2.057)
                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                0
      12




                                                                                         -.5
      11




                                                                                                                                                                    -.2
                                                                                         -1




               .25           .3            .35             .4   .45                                          .25           .3            .35             .4   .45                                                    .25           .3            .35             .4   .45
                        Average state-level informality rate                                                          Average state-level informality rate                                                                    Average state-level informality rate



The figure displays results from estimating specifications as in Table 1 in each Brazilian state separately. State-level estimates are plotted against average state-level
informality rates. Lines display the result of a WLS regression of these estimates on informality rates, weighting estimates by the inverse of their standard error
squared, with their 95% confidence intervals (dashed lines). The estimated slope is provided in each panel with its standard error in parenthesis. The efficiency cost
is decreasing in informality rates because the mechanical effect on average paid UI duration is increasing (see Figure 6), the behavioral effect on average paid UI
duration is decreasing (see Figure 6), and the behavioral effect on the average number of months spent formally employed after layoff is becoming less negative.



              of 35.9% over our range of informality rates, from .145 month to .093 month. Finally, panel (f)
              displays the ratio of the actual to the maximum behavioral effects on average paid UI duration (the
              ratio of the estimates in panels (e) and (c); standard errors are obtained by the delta method). It is
              relatively high, ranging from 20% to 50%, but there is no evidence that workers’ ability to respond
              to UI incentives increases with informality rates. Therefore, the behavioral effect on average paid
              UI duration is smaller in states with higher informality, because the potential distortion is smaller,
              and not because workers who would not draw a fifth month of UI mechanically are less responsive
              to UI incentives. Of course, workers’ ability to respond to UI incentives may start decreasing at
              lower levels of informality than those observed in Brazil and other Latin American countries.
                  Figure 7 considers longer-term outcomes. Panel (a) displays the average non-formal-employment
              duration (censored after three years) at the cutoff from below. It is large and strongly increasing
              in informality rates; the difference reaches four months over our range of informality rates. This
              confirms patterns shown in Figure 4, namely that displaced formal workers return slower to a for-


                                                                                                                                   39
mal job in labor markets with higher informality, irrespective of increases in potential UI duration.
There is thus less room to begin with for UI to distort their formal reemployment decisions. Pan-
els (b) and (c) then display the impact of the one-month increase in potential UI duration at the
cutoff on the same variable. It is decreasing in informality rates. We present results censoring the
duration at both one year (panel b) and three years (panel c) after layoff, because state-specific
estimates becomes noisier for smaller states with the longer horizon.
    Next, panels (d) and (e) present results for the number of months formally employed in the
three years after layoff. Panel (d) displays the average at the cutoff from below. It is lower in states
with higher informality, implying that there is again less room to begin with for UI to distort this
outcome. This is mostly because displaced formal employees take longer to find a new formal
job, as shown in panel (a). It is also partly because, upon formal reemployment, workers spend a
smaller share q of their remaining career formally employed. We show in the Web Appendix that
this share decreases significantly from about 75% to 73% over our range of informality rates. Panel
(e) then displays the impact of the one-month increase in potential UI duration at the cutoff. The
impact is negative in most states (estimates are noisy in smaller states), but less negative in states
with higher informality rates. This is because the impact on non-formal-employment duration is
smaller, as shown in panels (b) and (c). Indeed, we find no differential impact on the share q of
workers’ remaining career formally employed (see Web Appendix).
    Finally, in panel (f), we combine our estimates to evaluate the efficiency cost (standard errors
are obtained by the delta method). As in Section 4, we use the average number of UI beneficiaries
per private formal employee in each state between 2005 and 2009 to approximate the scaling
            DB 48
coefficient D F.   The efficiency cost is lower in states with higher informality rates. The slope is
significant and implies that the efficiency cost decreases by over 60% over our range of informality
rates, from $.245 to $.1 per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries.
    In sum, these findings reinforce that the efficiency cost of increases in UI benefits is not neces-
sarily higher in labor markets with higher informality. Displaced formal workers return slower to
a formal job absent any change in potential UI duration, which leads to a larger mechanical effect,
and limits the consequences of behavioral responses, including informality responses.


5.2    Robustness checks
We show in the Web Appendix that the patterns in Figures 6 and 7 hold for the same robustness
checks as in section 4. The efficiency cost is always decreasing in informality rates. Estimates be-
come in fact more precise and patterns clearer when we increase sample sizes by including workers
laid off since 2002. We also confirm our results through another regression analysis in the Web
  48 These   ratios are slightly increasing in informality rates, but not significantly so (see Web Appendix).



                                                            40
Appendix. We estimate correlations with informality rates directly by using a variant of equation
(4), in which all the right-hand-side variables are interacted with informality rates. This approach
has the same advantages as those highlighted for a similar approach in Section 3. It allows us to
estimate correlations with informality rates holding (un)employment rates constant (also interact-
ing all the right-hand-side variables with (un)employment rates) and to use more disaggregated
measures of the informality rate prevailing in a given labor market (state-level informality rates
disaggregated by year and gender). It also allows us to show that our correlations are not simply
due to fixed differences across states or to differences in workers’ observables: results are similar
including year fixed effects, state fixed effects, and a rich set of individual controls.
    In sum, the efficiency cost increases as labor market formalizes in Brazil, because the potential
distortion increases and workers’s actual ability to respond to UI incentives does not decrease.


6       Marginal value of insurance and welfare effect
We estimated an average efficiency cost of $.2 per $1 reaching mechanical beneficiaries for an
increase in potential UI duration in Brazil. The welfare effect would then be positive if the average
marginal utility of $1 was at least 20% larger for mechanical beneficiaries than for formal employ-
ees. In comparison, this bound would be at least five times larger in the US given results in Katz
and Meyer (1990) and Landais (2015). Moreover, the measure of efficiency costs may be an upper
bound in our context, so the welfare effect may be positive for even lower levels of the marginal
value of insurance. To provide some benchmark, Chetty (2008) argues that the average marginal
utility of $1 is 150% larger for UI beneficiaries than for formal employees in the US.49
    A relatively low efficiency cost, however, does not imply that the welfare effect is positive in
Brazil. A low efficiency cost is in fact consistent with a low marginal value of insurance if it is
relatively easy to find informal jobs and those are close substitutes for formal jobs. Yet, a low
efficiency cost is also consistent with a high marginal value of insurance if it is relatively hard to
find a new formal job and informal jobs are imperfect means of self-insurance.
    Although the focus of this paper is on the efficiency side, we end by shedding some light
on the marginal value of insurance. There is no publicly available data in Brazil to evaluate the
marginal value of insurance directly, for instance through a “consumption approach” (Gruber,
1997a; Kolsrud et al., 2015). Nevertheless, we use PME to explore the extent to which informal
work opportunities (and other household members’ labor supply) allow displaced formal workers
to mitigate disposable income drops following layoff. This is an important first step in order to
evaluate their need for insurance, particularly if other standard means of consumption smoothing
    49 There
          is a typo in footnote 34 in Chetty (2008): the marginal value of insurance is the ratio of the liquidity to the
moral hazard effect (∂ s0 /∂ w) and not to the total effect (∂ s0 /∂ b); therefore, it is equal to .6/.4 = 1.5, and not to .6.


                                                             41
(e.g., formal credit) are more costly in developing countries (Chetty and Looney, 2006).50 Using
PME, we already showed in Figure 3 that not all displaced formal workers who remain without
a formal job find an informal job rapidly in Brazil. In fact, the share of workers eligible for five
months of UI that remain non-employed six months after layoff (about 30%) is comparable to US
figures (Chetty, 2008). We complement this finding in the present section by investigating changes
in earnings and disposable income following layoff in PME.
    Unfortunately, we cannot systematically estimate how our results vary with informality rates in
this section because PME only covers six metropolitan areas. Yet, we show in the Web Appendix
that results are similar in the two areas with the lowest informality rates and in the other four areas.


6.1     Earnings and disposable income drops following layoff
We would ideally compare earnings and disposable income for the same individuals when they are
formally employed and after they exhaust their UI benefits (resp. when they draw UI benefits) in
order to measure disposable income drops for mechanical beneficiaries of increases in the potential
UI duration (resp. in the UI benefit level). Unfortunately, PME has no information on UI benefit
collection and its panel is too short to follow workers from layoff to UI exhaustion. PME has also
no information on earnings in prior jobs. We thus proceed as follows given the data limitations.
    We start with the same sample of non-employed displaced formal workers eligible for five
months of UI as in Section 3, for the same reasons discussed in that section. We then restrict
attention to those who were also surveyed in the previous or the following month. As a result,
we observe workers non-employed, formally employed in the month before layoff, or employed
in their first month of reemployment in a formal or an informal job. Finally, we use the data as a
repeated cross-section in the following specification for the outcome y of worker i:

                            yikt = α + ∑ ∑ βkt 1(Statusi = k & Periodi = t) + εi ,                                   (5)
                                          k   t


where k = {FormReemp, In f Reemp, Nonemp} indicates workers formally reemployed, informally
reemployed, or non-employed, and t = {be f ore, around, a f ter} workers observed before, around,
and after UI exhaustion (months 0–4, 5–7, and 8–10 after layoff, respectively). Workers formally
employed in the month before layoff constitute the omitted group. The estimated βc      kt ’s for k =
{In f Reemp, Nonemp} allow us to shed light on the relative earnings and disposable income of
UI beneficiaries (for t = {be f ore, around}) and UI exhaustees (for t = {around, a f ter}) who are
working informally and remain non-employed, respectively.51 They are displayed in Table 2, in
  50 Brazil   had the highest real interest rates in the emerging world between 2000 and 2009 (Segura-Ubiergo, 2012).
  51 This interpretation assumes that their first month of reemployment is informative for the disposable income in later

months of displaced formal workers reemployed informally. Our approach may underestimate disposable income gaps


                                                           42
percentage of the average outcome prior to layoff (omitted group). Standard errors are clustered
by individual and obtained by the delta method. All regressions use sampling weights.
    Outcomes in columns (1)-(2) and (3)-(4) are workers’ real net earnings and real disposable
income, respectively. We account for taxes on formal earnings to construct net outcomes (see Web
Appendix). Disposable income is defined as a family’s net monthly income per capita using an
equivalence scale of one half for children. The definition accounts for income smoothing across
family members, as well as for possible labor supply responses from other household members.
    There is a concern of selection bias with a specification such as equation (5). For instance,
we would underestimate (resp. overestimate) earnings and disposable income drops for displaced
formal workers reemployed informally, if these workers are positively selected (resp. negatively
selected), i.e., if they had a disposable income above average (resp. below average) prior to layoff.
We assess the severity of this issue by comparing estimates from specifications that omit (col. 1
and 3) or include (col. 2 and 4) a rich set of individual controls (gender, age, education, tenure,
sector). We show in the Web Appendix that these controls capture most of the selection effect for
differences in earnings and disposable income between formal employees and informal or non-
employed workers in the overall population. We would thus expect these controls to have a strong
influence on our coefficient estimates if these estimates were largely driven by selection effects.
    Table 2 shows that our estimates are relatively similar before, around, and after UI exhaustion.
Displaced formal workers do not appear to accept jobs with differentially higher (for formal jobs)
or lower (for informal jobs) wages when eligible for UI. Informally reemployed workers have av-
erage earnings and disposable income levels about 45% and 32% lower than formally employed
workers before layoff. Non-employed workers have average disposable income levels about 50%
lower and 30% of them have no disposable income at all. The differences are smaller for formally
reemployed workers. Importantly, our estimates are essentially unchanged when we include the
individual controls. They are also similar if we use the same controls to reweight the sample so that
it compares better to the subsample of workers formally employed before layoff or to a compara-
ble sample of workers in the administrative data (see Web Appendix). Moreover, the disposable
income gaps are even larger when we include worker fixed effects (see Web Appendix).52 It is
therefore unlikely that our estimates are largely driven by selection effects.
    Results in columns (1)-(4) indicate that displaced formal workers who remain without a formal
job experience much lower disposable income levels, even when reemployed informally. We can
because earnings have often already decreased in the month just prior to layoff and because some workers informally
reemployed may quickly lose their informal job. We may instead overestimate these gaps if some workers report being
formally reemployed but are kept on an informal payroll temporarily. Finally, note that abstracting from the facts that
UI takeup is imperfect and not observed in PME is unlikely to severely bias our results: UI takeup is above 80%, and
50% of UI non-takers are formally reemployed 30 days after layoff (see Section 3).
   52 Results are also similar if we use a sample of workers laid off since 2003 (see Web Appendix).




                                                         43
compute overall estimates for UI beneficiaries and UI exhaustees, combining results in Table 2
and estimates of the shares of non-employed and informally reemployed workers among them. We
calculate these shares from the survival rates in non-employment and non-formal employment in
                        5             5                              8             8
Figure 3: sharebnon = ∑t=1  St,non / ∑t=1 St = .643 and sharePnon = ∑t=6 St,non / ∑t=6 St = .378, where
St and St,non are the survival rates in non-formal employment and in non-employment. We then
obtain a drop in disposable income of 43.7% for UI beneficiaries and of 38.5% for UI exhaustees.53
    A caveat with these figures is that they do not account for the UI benefits that workers can
receive while eligible for UI. We thus gauge the role of UI benefits in columns (5)-(6). Specifically,
we add the average UI benefit level from a comparable sample of workers in the administrative
data when constructing the disposable income of the non-employed and informally reemployed
workers. In so doing, the drop in disposable income disappears for the informally reemployed
workers and it is reduced to 11%-15% for non-employed workers. Taking into account UI benefits
then reduces our overall estimate of the drop in disposable income for UI beneficiaries to 5.7%.54
The figure of course doesn’t change for UI exhaustees as they do not draw UI benefits anymore.



6.2     Marginal value of insurance and welfare effects
The above estimates allow us to shed some light on the marginal value of insurance for mechanical
beneficiaries of increases in UI benefits. A drop in disposable income of only 5.7% suggests that
the marginal value of insurance is limited for increases in the UI benefit level. Workers may be able
to find additional ways to self-insure against such small income shocks. Therefore, without esti-
mating its efficiency cost, it appears that an increase in the UI benefit level is unlikely to generate
large welfare gains in Brazil. In contrast, a drop in disposable income of 38.5% indicates that in-
formal work opportunities do not allow UI exhaustees to fully mitigate the income shock following
layoff without UI. The size of the marginal value of insurance for an increase in the potential UI
duration will then depend on workers’ ability to find other ways to self-insure against such income
shocks and on the curvature of their utility function. This is illustrated in Table 3. The marginal
                                                      F −DispIncP
value of insurance is calculated as: γ × ρ × DispIncDispIncF
                                                                  , where the drop in disposable income
is multiplied by a coefficient of relative risk aversion (γ ) and a parameter capturing the sensitivity
of consumption to disposable income shocks (ρ). The marginal value of insurance would exceed
our estimate of efficiency cost (.2), and welfare effects would thus be positive, for a benchmark
coefficient of risk aversion of 2, as long as disposable income gaps are less than four times as large
as consumption gaps. Chetty and Szeidl (2007) argue that the coefficient of risk aversion may
  53 The  drop for UI beneficiaries is calculated as: (1 − .643) × −.33−.3092
                                                                          2      + .643 × −.5092−.4958
                                                                                                2      = −.437. The drop
                                                   −.3092−.3283           −.4958−.4943
for UI exhaustees is calculated as: (1 − .378) ×         2      + .378 ×        2      = −.385.
   54 The drop for UI beneficiaries is calculated as: (1 − .643) × .0477+.0653 + .643 × −.1283−.1105 = −.057.
                                                                        2                     2



                                                          44
                 Table 2: Estimates of earnings and disposable income gaps by reemployment status vs. prior to layoff

                                                                Earnings (∆%)           Disposable income (∆%)        Disposable income + UI (∆%)
                                                              vs. prior to layoff          vs. prior to layoff              vs. prior to layoff
                                                               (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)
      Formally reemployed before UI exhaustion             -.1599***     -.1733***       -.0848**       -.0904**       -.0848**          -.0903**
                                                             (.0408)       (.0328)        (.0429)        (.0389)        (.0429)            (.0387)
      Formally reemployed around UI exhaustion              -.234***     -.2583***       -.114**        -.135***        -.114**          -.1341***
                                                             (.0488)       (.0418)        (.0512)        (.0457)        (.0512)            (.0456)
      Formally reemployed after UI exhaustion               -.269***     -.2909***        -.0962         -.1128*         -.0962            -.113*
                                                              (.057)       (.0539)        (.0667)        (.0637)        (.0667)            (.0636)
      Informally reemployed before UI exhaustion           -.4814***     -.4617***       -.33***       -.2947***         .0477            .0859**
                                                             (.0276)       (.0248)        (.0348)        (.0305)         (.043)            (.038)
      Informally reemployed around UI exhaustion           -.4293***     -.3833***      -.3092***        -.25***         .0653            .126***
                                                             (.0453)        (.038)        (.0419)         (.036)        (.0499)            (.0437)
      Informally reemployed after UI exhaustion            -.5071***     -.4963***      -.3283***      -.2902***         .0141             .0511
                                                             (.0347)       (.0339)        (.0451)        (.0403)        (.0535)            (.048)
      Non-employed before UI exhaustion a                                               -.5092***      -.5273***      -.1283***          -.147***




45
                                                                                          (.0191)         (.016)        (.0288)            (.024)
      Non-employed around UI exhaustion b                                               -.4958***      -.5241***      -.1105***          -.1412***
                                                                                          (.0229)        (.0195)        (.0322)            (.0269)
      Non-employed after UI exhaustion c                                                -.4943***      -.5273***      -.1106***          -.1473***
                                                                                          (.0241)        (.0216)         (.033)            (.0283)
      Observations                                            5,059         5,059         34,608         34,608         34,608             34,608
      Including controls                                       No            Yes            No            Yes             No                Yes
      Standard errors clustered by individual and obtained by the delta method in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, ***1%. The table
     displays results from estimating variants of equation (5). In particular, it displays estimates of the average earnings (columns 1-2) and disposable
     income (columns 3-4) of displaced formal workers who are reemployed formally, who are reemployed informally, or who remain non-employed,
     before, around, or after UI exhaustion. We express our estimates in percentage of the average levels for formal employees prior to layoff. The
     outcome in columns (5)-(6) is constructed by adding the average UI benefit level for a comparable sample of displaced formal workers in the
     administrative data when constructing the disposable income of displaced formal workers who are reemployed informally or remain non-employed.
     Controls in columns (2), (4), and (6) include dummies for separation years, calendar separation months, metropolitan areas, gender, education levels
     (9), and sector of activity in the current (for formal employees prior to layoff) or last formal job (otherwise; 24 sectors), as well as second–order
     polynomials in age and tenure in the current (for formal employees prior to layoff) or last formal job (otherwise). Estimations are performed using
     sampling weights. a 31% have no disposable income. b 29% have no disposable income. c 28% have no disposable income.
 Table 3: Calibrations for the marginal value of insurance of an increase in potential UI duration


                                                          Sensitivity of consumption
                             Coefficient of relative     to disposable income shocks
                               risk aversion (γ)          .25     .5      .75     1
                                         .5              .049    .097    .157       .193
                                          1              .096    .193    .289       .385
                                          2              .193    .385    .578        .77
                                          4              .385     .77    1.154      1.54
  The table displays calibrations for the marginal value of insurance of increases in potential UI duration. The
                                                                F −DispIncP
 marginal value of insurance is calculated as: γ × ρ × DispIncDispIncF
                                                                            , where γ is a coefficient of relative risk
 aversion, and ρ captures the sensitivity of consumption to disposable income shocks. Calibrations use an estimate
 of the disposable income drop of 38.5% (see text).


be even higher for layoff shocks due to consumption commitments. However, more evidence is
needed on the sensitivity of consumption to income shocks for displaced formal workers in order
to provide a complete evaluation of the welfare effects of an increase in potential UI duration.



7    Conclusion
This paper studied the efficiency cost of increases in UI benefits in a context of high informality,
by combining an optimal UI framework and empirical evidence for Brazilian UI beneficiaries. Its
findings run counter to widespread claims in policy circles that heightened concerns about the
usual moral hazard problem – that UI distorts incentives to return to a formal job – preclude the
existence or expansion of UI in this context. We argued that the associated efficiency cost is not
necessarily higher. We then found that it was rather low in Brazil compared to countries with low
informality, and that is was lower in labor markets with higher informality within Brazil. These
results are based on a benchmark measure of efficiency that constitutes a natural starting point.
We discussed other mechanisms that could affect the size of the efficiency costs; more research is
needed to evaluate their empirical relevance for countries with high informality.
    Our results suggest shifting the focus from efficiency concerns, as in the current policy debate,
to workers’ actual need for insurance in a context of high informality. Our evidence in that respect
remains suggestive. The fact that displaced formal workers return slowly to a formal job irrespec-
tive of (increases in) UI benefits, which drives our efficiency results, implies that UI is relatively
costly. For instance, a flat payroll tax that would fund the UI system would have to be about three
times higher in Brazil than in the US (2.5% vs. 0.8%). Moreover, it implies that formal employ-
ment may not be the normal state of the world for many formal workers in our context. Their
demand for UI may then be relatively low given the cost, especially in the first months after hiring.

                                                          46
Yet, other means of consumption smoothing, besides informal employment, are often more costly
in developing countries. There is also evidence that Brazilian workers are willing to trade off lower
formal wages for mandated benefits, including benefits related to job loss (Almeida and Carneiro,
2012). How workers’ demand for insurance varies with informality thus remains an open question.
     Our findings have implications for other policies that aim at helping displaced formal workers
in developing countries. UI Savings Accounts are sometimes presented as an alternative to UI in
these countries because of the heightened efficiency concerns. We show that those concerns may
not be founded, at least for modest potential UI durations. Yet, given that the average paid UI
duration is close to the potential UI duration, a program giving UI takers the net present value of
the average UI benefits per UI spell lump-sum at takeup may be attractive. It would provide most
workers with a comparable degree of insurance but eliminate the (limited) moral hazard problem.55
     The findings of this paper have also broader implications for our understanding of social poli-
cies in developing countries. First, many social programs generate incentives for people to carry
out their economic activities informally in these countries. For the same reasons as for UI, they
are viewed as imposing high efficiency costs. Our results cast doubt on whether these concerns are
necessarily founded in these cases too. Consider for instance a welfare program for households
with formal income levels below a threshold. The moral hazard problem may be more severe when
households can become eligible not only by reducing their labor supply but also by working infor-
mally. Yet, many households likely have low formal income levels absent program incentives (i.e.,
a large mechanical effect). Whether the efficiency cost will be high is thus an empirical question.
Second, our results indicate that efficiency concerns may sometimes become more relevant when
a country’s economy formalizes. The potential distortion of social policies will likely increase
(i.e., a larger share of workers will be formally employed absent policies’ incentives), and unless
agents’ ability to respond to policies’ incentives decreases (e.g., it becomes harder to work infor-
mally), their efficiency costs will increase as well. This appears to be the case for UI in Brazil: the
potential distortion is larger in labor markets with lower informality, but there is no evidence that
agents’ ability to respond to UI incentives is lower.56 Of course, agents’ ability to respond to UI
incentives may start decreasing at lower levels of informality than those observed in Brazil.




  55 We   thank Johannes Schmieder for this observation.
  56 This could also explain why Bergolo and Cruces (2016) found a sizable drop in formal employment at an eligibility

cutoff for a CCT program, at a time where formal employment rates were increasing even among CCT beneficiaries.


                                                           47
References
Acemoglu, D., and R. Shimer. 1999. “Efficient Unemployment Insurance.” Journal of Political
Economy, 107(5): 893–928.
Acevedo, G., E. Patricio, and C. Pagés. 2006. “Unemployment Insurance in Chile: A New Model
of Income Support for Unemployed Workers.” Social Protection Discussion Paper, World Bank.
Almeida, R., and P. Carneiro. 2012. “Enforcement of Labor Regulation and Informality.” Amer-
ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(3): 64–89.
Amarante, V., R. Arim, and A. Dean. 2013. “Unemployment Insurance Design and Its Effects:
Evidence for Uruguay.” Revista Desarrollo y Sociedad, 71: 7–42.
Azuara, O., and I. Marinescu. 2013. “Informality and the Expansion of Social Protection Pro-
grams: Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Health Economics, 32(5): 909–921.
Bachas, P., and M. Soto. 2016. “Not(ch) Your Average Tax System: Corporate Taxation Under
Weak Enforcement.” Mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.
Baily, M. 1978. “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance.” Journal of Public Eco-
nomics, 10: 379–402.
Banerjee, A., B. Olken, R. Hanna, and G Kreindler. forthcoming. “Debunking the Stereotype
of the Lazy Welfare Recipient: Evidence from Cash Transfer Programs Worldwide.” World Bank
Research Observer.
Bergolo, M., and G. Cruces. 2014. “Work and tax evasion incentive effects of social insurance
programs: Evidence from an employment-based benefit extension.” Journal of Public Economics,
117: 211–228.
Bergolo, M., and G. Cruces. 2016. “The Anatomy of Behavioral Responses to Social Assistance
When Informal Employment Is High.” IZA Discussion Paper, 10197.
Best, M., A. Brockmeyer, H. Kleven, J. Spinnewijn, and M. Waseem. 2015. “Production vs
Revenue Efficiency With Limited Tax Capacity: Theory and Evidence From Pakistan.” Journal of
Political Economy, 123(6): 1311–1355.
Bosch, M., and R. Campos-Vasquez. 2014. “The Trade-Offs of Welfare Policies in Labor Markets
with Informal Jobs: The Case of the “Seguro Popular” Program in Mexico.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4): 71–99.
Bosch, M., and W. Maloney. 2010. “Comparative Analysis of Labor Market Dynamics Using
Markov Processes: An Application to Informality.” Labour Economics, 17(4): 621–631.
Botelho, F., and V. Ponczek. 2011. “Segmentation in the Brazilian Labor Market.” Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 59(2): 437 –463.
Camacho, A., E. Conover, and A. Hoyos. 2014. “Effects of Colombia’s Social Protection System
on Workers’ Choice between Formal and Informal Employment.” World Bank Economic Review,
28(3): 446–466.
Card, D., and P. Levine. 2000. “Extended Benefits and the Duration of UI Spells: Evidence from
the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program.” Journal of Public Economics, 78: 107–138.
Card, D., R. Chetty, and A. Weber. 2007a. “Cash–on–Hand and Competing Models of In-
tertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(4): 1511–1560.


                                             48
Card, D., R. Chetty, and A. Weber. 2007b. “The Spike at Benefit Exhaustion: Leaving the Un-
employment System or Starting a New Job?” American Economic Review, 97(2): 113–118.
Carillo, P., D. Pomeranz, and M. Singhal. 2017. “Dodging the Taxman: Firm Misreporting and
Limits to Tax Enforcement.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(2): 144–164.
Carvalho, C., C. Corbi, and R. Narita. 2017. “Unintended consequences of unemployment in-
surance: Evidence from stricter eligibility criteria in Brazil.” Economic Letters.
Cheng, M., J. Fan, and J.S. Marron. 1997. “On Automatic Boundary Corrections.” Annals of
Statistics, 25: 1691–1708.
Chetty, R. 2006. “A General Formula for the Optimal Level of Social Insurance.” Journal of Public
Economics, 90: 1879–1901.
Chetty, R. 2008. “Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance.” Journal
of Political Economy, 116(2): 173–234.
Chetty, R. 2009. “Is the Taxable Income Elasticity Sufficient to Calculate Deadweight Loss? The
Implications of Evasion and Avoidance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1: 31–52.
Chetty, R., and A. Finkelstein. 2013. “Social Insurance: Connecting Theory to Data.” Handbook
of Public Economics, 5: 111–193.
Chetty, R., and A. Looney. 2006. “Consumption Smoothing and the Welfare Consequences of
Social Insurance in Developing Economics.” Journal of Public Economics, 90: 2351–2356.
Chetty, R., and A. Szeidl. 2007. “Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122(2): 831–877.
Cruces, G., S. Galiani, and S. Kidyba. 2010. “Payroll taxes, wages and employment: Identifica-
tion through policy changes.” Labour Economics, 17: 743–749.
Cunningham, W. 2000. “Unemployment Insurance in Brazil: Unemployment Duration, Wages,
and Sectoral Choice.” Mimeo, The World Bank.
Feldstein, M. 1999. “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 81(4): 674–680.
Fields, Gary. 1975. “Rural–Urban Migration, Urban Unemployment and Underemployment, and
Job Search Activity in LDCs.” Journal of Development Economics, 2(2): 165–187.
Gadenne, L. 2014. “Nonlinear commodity taxation in developing countries: theory and an appli-
cation to India.” Mimeo, University College London.
Garganta, S., and L. Gasparini. 2015. “The impact of a social program on labor informality: The
case of AUH in Argentina.” Journal of Development Economics, 115: 99–110.
Gasparini, L., F. Haimovich, and S. Olivieri. 2009. “Labor Informality Bias of a Poverty–
Alleviation Program in Argentina.” Journal of Applied Economics, 12(2): 181–205.
Gerard, François, Miikka Rokkanen, and Christoph Rothe. 2016. “Bounds on Treatment Ef-
fects in Regression Discontinuity Designs under Manipulation of the Running Variable, with Ap-
plications to Unemployment Insurance in Brazil.” NBER Working Paper, 22892.
Gonzalez-Rozada, M., and H. Ruffo. 2016. “Optimal unemployment benefits in the presence of
informal labor markets.” Labour Economics, 41: 204–227.
González-Rozada, M., L. Ronconi, and H. Ruffo. 2011. “Protecting Workers against Unemploy-
ment in Latin America and the Caribbean: Evidence from Argentina.” Inter–American Develop-
ment Bank Working Paper, 268.

                                               49
Gordon, Roger, and Wei Li. 2009. “Tax Structure in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles and a
Possible Explanation.” Journal of Public Economics, 93 (7-8): 855–866.
Gruber, J. 1997a. “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance.” Ameri-
can Economic Review, 87 (1): 192–205.
Gruber, J. 1997b. “The Incidence of Payroll Taxation: Evidence from Chile.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 15(3): S72–S101.
Hijzen, A. 2011. “The Moral–Hazard and Liquidity Effects of Unemployment Compensation in
Brazil: Evidence and Policy Implications.” Mimeo OECD.
Imbert, C., and J. Papp. 2015. “Labor Market Effects of Social Programs: Evidence from Indias
Employment Guarantee.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7 (2): 233–263.
Jensen, Anders. 2016. “Employment Structure and the Rise of the Modern Tax System.” Mimeo,
London School of Economics.
Katz, L., and B. Meyer. 1990. “The Impact of the Potential Duration of Unemployment Benefits
on the Duration of Unemployment.” Journal of Public Economics, 41: 45–72.
Kolsrud, Jonas, Camille Landais, Peter Nilsson, and Johannes Spinnewijn. 2015. “The Opti-
mal Timing of UI Benefits: Theory and Evidence from Sweden.” CEP Discussion Paper, 1361.
Kugler, A., and M. Kugler. 2009. “Labor Market Effects of Payroll Taxes in Developing Coun-
tries: Evidence from Colombia.” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 57(2): 335–358.
Landais, C. 2015. “Assessing the Welfare Effects of Unemployment Benefits Using the Regression
Kink Design.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(4): 243–78.
Landais, C., P. Michaillat, and E. Saez. forthcoming. “A Macroeconomic Approach to Optimal
Unemployment Insurance I: Theory.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Levy, S. 2008. “Good Intentions, Bad Outcomes: Social Policy, Informality and Economics
Growth in Mexico.” Brookings Institution Press, 357pp.
Margolis, D. 2008. “Unemployment Insurance versus Individual Unemployment Accounts and
Transitions to Formal versus Informal Sector Jobs.” CREST Working Paper, 2008–35.
Meghir, C., R. Narita, and J.-M. Robin. 2015. “Wages and Informality in Developing Countries.”
American Economic Review, 105(4): 1509–1546.
MTE. 2008. “CAGED e PME: Diferenças Metodológicas e Possibilidades de Comparação.” Nota
Técnica Ministerio do Trabalho e Emprego, IBGE, mimeo.
Naritomi, J. 2015. “Consumers as Tax Auditors.” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Nekoei, Arash, and Andrea Weber. 2017. “Does Extending Unemployment Benefits Improve
Job Quality?” American Economic Review, 107(2): 527–561.
Perry, G., W. Maloney, O. Arias, P. Fajnzylber, A. Mason, and J. Saavedra-Chanduvi. 2007.
“Informality: Exit and Exclusion.” The World Bank, Washington DC.
Robalino, D., and A. Vodopivec, M.and Bodor. 2009. “Savings for Unemployment in Good or
Bad Times: Options for Developing Countries.” IZA Discussion Paper, 4516.
Schmieder, J., and T. von Wachter. 2017. “A Context-Robust Measure of the Disincentive Cost of
Unemployment Insurance.” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 107(5): 343–
48.
Schmieder, J., T. von Wachter, and S. Bender. 2012a. “The Effects of Extended Unemploy-
ment Insurance Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Regression Discontinuity Estimates over
Twenty Years.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 701–752.

                                             50
Schmieder, J., T. von Wachter, and S. Bender. 2012b. “The Long-Term Effects of Unemploy-
ment Insurance Extensions on Employment.” American Economic Review, 102(3): 520–525.
Segura-Ubiergo, Alex. 2012. “The Puzzle of Brazil’s High Interest Rates.” IMF Working Paper,
62.
Ulyssea, Gabriel. 2017. “Firms, Informality and Development: Theory and evidence from Brazil.”
Mimeo, Puc-Rio.
van Ours, J., and M. Vodopivec. 2006. “How Shortening the Potential Duration of Unemploy-
ment Benefits Affects the Duration of Unemployment.” Journal of Labor Economics, 24: 351–378.
Velásquez, M. 2010. “Seguros de Desempleo y Reformas Recientes en America Latina.” Macroe-
conomia del desarrollo (United Nations), 99.
Vodopivec, M. 2013. “Introducing Unemployment Insurance to Developing Countries.” IZA Jour-
nal of Labor Policy, 2(1): 1–23.
Vodopivec, M., and M. Tong. 2008. “China: Improving Unemployment Insurance.” World Bank
Social Protection Discussion Paper, 0820.




                                             51
