                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOW YOU PAY AFFECTS HOW YOU DO:
          FINANCIAL AID TYPE AND STUDENT PERFORMANCE IN COLLEGE

                                         Peter Cappelli
                                         Shinjae Won

                                      Working Paper 22604
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22604


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




Thanks to Iwan Barankay, Katherine Milkman, and Judd Kessler for helpful comments, to the
National Center for Educational Statistic’s site license program for access to the data, and to
Wharton’s Center for Human Resources for support. Data can be accessed through application to
the National Center on Educational Statistics at the US department of Education. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Peter Cappelli and Shinjae Won. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How You Pay Affects How You Do: Financial Aid Type and Student Performance in College
Peter Cappelli and Shinjae Won
NBER Working Paper No. 22604
September 2016
JEL No. D03,I21,I23,J38

                                         ABSTRACT

Students receiving financial aid pay different amounts for equivalent education and do so in
different ways: Grants, which do not have to be repaid, loans, which are paid back in the future,
and work-study, pay-as-you-go. We examine the effects of need-based aid independent of study
ability on student outcomes – grade point average in particular - controlling for student
background and attributes they had prior to college. We also analyze grades within colleges. The
results suggest that students receiving need-based grants do significantly better in college than
those not receiving financial aid while those paying for college with loans perform significantly
worse than students receiving other forms of aid.


Peter Cappelli
The Wharton School
Center for Human Resources
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6358
and NBER
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu

Shinjae Won
University of Illinois
School of Labor and Employment Relations
504 East Armory Avenue
Champaign, IL 61820
Shinjae@illinois.edu
                             How You Pay Affects How You Do:
                   Financial Aid Type and Student Performance in College


Introduction:

College educations are now a central feature of modern economies, and financial aid has been
the main policy instrument for increasing access to them. The typical question raised about
financial aid is how it affects college completion. But financial aid raises other interesting
questions as well that stem from the fact that students in the same college receiving the same
education are paying different prices for that education. Financial aid is also delivered in very
different ways, each with different requirements. The question we examine below is how getting
aid, and getting it through different mechanisms, affects student outcomes in college.

The three basic forms of aid are grants, which do not have to be repaid; loans, which are repaid
at a later date; and work-study, which is essentially paid in the form of student employment at
the same time as receiving the education. These very different ways of paying for college may
well have very different effects on student outcomes. Surprisingly, this issue has rarely been
examined.

Ideas as to what those effects might look like can be found in behavioral fields. For example,
grants – free money – may make students who receive it enjoy their education even more
because they do not have to pay for it but take it less seriously for the same reason. The literature
on gifts, on the other hand, suggests an opposite conclusion, that grants may create a need to
reciprocate by working harder. Work-study programs might have the opposite effect of
reminding students about the cost of their education, making it less enjoyable but also making
them take it less seriously. Delaying payment, as with loans, may have effects that are
somewhere in between, enjoying it more when they are in school, taking it less seriously, but
then appreciating it less when they are paying for it. We examine these hypotheses below.

Studying relationships like these in a field setting is obviously challenging because individuals
typically have control over how they pay for items as well as how they respond to them.
Omitted variables and endogeneity are therefore substantial concerns. We have some advantages
in addressing these concerns. The rich variety of information available in the data offers
                                                                                                    2
extensive controls for factors that might affect student outcomes independent of the influence of
financial aid, such as academic ability before entering college and various attributes of family
background. The fact that the financial aid in the period we study was not based on merit or
academic ability reduces the most obvious concern about endogeneity, that more able students
get aid. Standardized aid practices in that period made it difficult for students to shop for
different financial aid packages across colleges. We can also examine outcomes in contexts
where sorting behavior is less of an issue.

We compare situations where college education was paid by grants that did not have to be
repaid, by work-study programs where one “paid” as they went to school, and by loans that had
to be repaid at later dates. We then examine how these different payment arrangements affected
subsequent student outcomes in college and after graduation using unique longitudinal data from
the US Department of Education’s Post Baccalaureate and Beyond study, which gathered data on
students who graduated from four-year colleges in 1993 and then followed them over time. The
estimates control for attributes of student ability before college, including aptitude test scores, as
well as aspects of family background that may affect student performance. The data also allow
us to examine student outcomes within the same college. We also examine the relationships
using regression discontinuity and instrumental variables techniques for robustness purposes.

The most important outcome we study is academic performance in college. We assert that grades
are strongly influenced by student effort, controlling for factors like basic ability, and that the
motivation to work hard can be shaped by the nature of the payment arrangements described
above.

We find that students receiving financial aid actually do better in school than those not receiving
financial aid, despite the extensive literature showing that unmeasured attributes associated with
lower income should cause them to perform less well. That result is consistent with the gift
exchange idea in that students receiving grants, which do not need to be repaid, perform better
than those receiving other forms of financial aid. Students who take out loans, in contrast,
perform worse than those receiving other forms of financial aid. We find across specifications
that student who receive grants have grades that are about 0.12 points higher on a 4.00 scale than
students who do not, controlling for other attributes, about one quarter of a standard deviation.
                                                                                                      3
Students who receive student loans receive grades roughly 0.8 to 0.10 points lower than those
receiving financial aid in other forms, again other things equal and across different
specifications.

The tests of behavioral ideas such as mental accounting and gift exchange have grown
increasingly sophisticated in their ability to address methodological concerns. We examine
several behavioral ideas simultaneously in a field setting, and we do not claim that the results
here provide strong tests of those ideas. Instead, we see the results as offering practical evidence
concerning a very significant public policy practice and probable explanations for those
outcomes that are consistent with some behavioral models.

Prior Research: The College Context

Both the antecedents and consequences of college education have been the subject of extensive
study. Education has important effects on individual outcomes as well as more generally on
societal outcomes such as inequality. Recent concerns about growing income inequality that is
driven by college attainment have made access to college an increasingly relevant topic (see
McCall 2000 for an overview).

College educations are expensive to produce, and access to them depends on having the
resources needed to pay the tuition and associated expenses (see Dynarski 2002 and Hoxyby
2004 for an overview of the economic issues). Alwin (1974) early on noted that the selection
effects associated with college entrance, including income, affect admissions but also overall
student outcomes in important ways. Largely because of that relationship, public policy as well
as the practices of individual schools over time created financial aid to expand access to college
to those who otherwise did not have the ability to pay. Baker and Velez (1996) found that
financial aid had substantial effects on increasing access to college among those who previously
would not have attended. But the remediation was not perfect. Steelman, Carr, and Powell
(1989), for example, explain how family size and birth order affects resources for college: Larger
families have fewer resources per child but that also creates more opportunity for the latter
children to receive need-based financial aid. Downey (1995) extends the argument about family
size to student performance.

                                                                                                     4
One of the challenges in assessing the effects of need-based financial aid is that receiving it is
correlated with many other factors that affect student outcomes directly, such as the socio-
economic status of the family (Buchmann and DiPrete 2006) and the demographic diversity of
the student (Alon and Tienda 2007). Those factors are associated with reduced student
performance. Assessing the independent effect of financial aid on student performance is
therefore a fundamental empirical challenge. The first challenge, though, is to think about how
financial aid should affect student performance.

Research on Payments and Consumption:

A key conceptual attribute of financial aid is that it changes not only who pays for college but
how it is paid for. Financial aid shifts much and in some cases all of the costs of attending
college from the student and their families to the college and typically the government. (See
Solelus 2000 for evidence on how families pay for college.) Financial aid also takes different
forms, as discussed in more detail below, which change how payments take place. With college
loans, for example, students pay for college but do so well after graduating when presumably
they have wages and salaries high enough to do so. With work-study programs, students pay as
they go. Grants mean that students do not pay at all, now or in the future.

As Thaler (1980; 1985) noted, being reminded about the costs of a purchase makes us take that
purchase more seriously. The separation in time of the payment of goods and services from the
purchase of them, as Prelec and Loewenstein (1998) described it, also affects the enjoyment of
the consumption and the seriousness with which we take it: the unpleasant experience of paying
interferes with the pleasant experience of consumption.

Uncoupling occurs when something is purchased and consumed now but paid for later, as one
might see with credit card purchases or loans. Studies since Hirschman (1979) have shown that
consumers spend more, ceteris paribus, when they make purchases on credit. Soman (2001)
argued that we spend more using credit in part because we do not have as much of the unpleasant
effect of actually paying for the purchases at the time we make them, which otherwise acts as a
restraint. Soman (2001) and Soman and Lam (2002) report that when we have to pay the bill for
things we consumed earlier, it is an unpleasant reminder that has a negative effect on our

                                                                                                     5
happiness. Because we have mental budgets allocated for different areas of consumption, when
we pay the bill for last month’s use, it makes us feel that our phone budget is depleted at the
point when we are paying. We are less likely to spend more on phone calls at that point when
we are paying for last month’s calls.

The implications of these arguments for the financial aid arrangements described above are
reasonably straight-forward. When we receive education through grants, it is essentially free
money, and we might enjoy it more but take it less seriously as a result; with work-study, we are
reminded of the cost as we consume it and take it more seriously but enjoy it less; when we use
loans to pay for it after the fact, we might take it less seriously than if we were paying for it and
enjoy it more but report less enjoyment in the future when we are repaying the loan.

There are alternative explanations to the free money account associated with receiving a grant,
however. The notion of gift exchanges suggests that something of value for free – a gift – may
create a sense of obligation to the giver that may make one feel uncomfortable, at least until the
obligation has been discharged. Evidence for this process ranges from consumer marketing
campaigns (Bagozzi 1974), where retailers create an obligation among potential customers, to
organ donors and transplants (Sque and Payne 1994), where the recipients of the organs feel an
obligation to the organ donors that they cannot reciprocate. Research in economics on this point
is extensive, including a series of studies by Fehr and colleagues (e.g. Fehr, Kirchsteiger, and
Riedl (1993) and Fehr, Kirchler, Weichbold, and Gchter (1998)) who pioneered such
experiments, Hannan, Kagel, and Moser (2002) explore how differences in context and the
attributes of subjects affect reciprocity responses, Maximiano, Sloof, and Sonnemans (2007),
shows that gift exchanges can operate with groups.

As Charness, Frechetter, and Kagel (2004) find, gift exchange outcomes in laboratory settings
can be reasonably sensitive to differences in context. That notion makes field research outside
laboratory contexts especially important for external validity. Field studies of gift exchange have
been more limited. 2


2
  Fehr, Goette, and Zehnder (2009) provide an extensive overview of both the experimental and field research on
research related to fairness in labor markets, of which gift exchange studies are one part. In related research, Lee and
Rupp (2007) find that involuntary wage cuts, which could be interpreted as something like a negative gift, are
                                                                                                                      6
In the financial aid context, students who receive financial aid in the form of a grant, which does
not need to be repaid, may well perceive it as a gift, especially knowing that they would be
extremely unlikely to attend college without it. If so, students may also feel an obligation to
reciprocate and may do so by working harder in their coursework. Another way to discharge the
obligation might be to become involved in activities that support the institution that is giving
them their education and its mission. DesJardin et al (2002) speculated that this may be the case
when receiving some forms of financial aid. Meer and Rosen (2012) provide some evidence for
this with respect to alumni giving where students who received aid that had to be paid back in the
form of loans were less likely to donate later to their alma mater than those who either did not
receive financial aid or had it in forms other than loans.

An alternative to the mental accounting interpretation with respect to enjoyment is the concept of
rationalization, where individuals make sense of their choices after the fact in ways that reduce
the cognitive dissonance that those choices might otherwise produce. 3 In a typical example,
individuals who might objectively conclude that they have overpaid for something and
experience discomfort from that decision could rationalize away the discomfort by persuading
themselves that the item was more valuable or more worthwhile than objectively it was. Recent
studies of rationalization range from individuals who make sense of their decision to use tanning
beds (Banergee, Hay, and Green 2013) to tourists who rationalize away the risk of traveling in
areas where terrorists operate (Fuchs, Uriely, Reichel, and Maoz 2013). In perhaps the closest
context to the study here, Kay, Jimenez, and Jost (2002) find that students rationalized the need
for tuition increases over which they had no control.

Rationalization might suggest that being more aware of the cost of something we purchased,
especially if it is expensive, may make us value the consumption of it more, possibly taking it
more seriously as a result. In the context of financial aid, we might expect that students who are

associated with more flight delays in the airline industry. Falk (2007) finds gift exchange relationships in the field
setting of charity donations, and most relevant here, Gneezy and List (2006) find these effects in the context of
temporary jobs. They also find these effects diminish quickly, however, and that in terms of effect sizes, they are
smaller than one might expect from spending the resources in other ways. In a field experiment, Bellemare and
Shearer (2009) find that Canadian tree planter productivity increases in response to a surprise pay raise, controlling
for planter fixed effects.
3
 The research on rationalization is voluminous, starting with Festinger (1957). There are literally thousands of
articles using the notion of rationalization to explain individual perceptions of their circumstances.
                                                                                                                    7
paying for their education at least in part themselves may well experience dissonance when
comparing their situation to other students whose education is being paid for by parents or
through grants. If so, rationalization might well be expected as a means for reducing that
dissonance.

A student’s willingness to pursue post-graduate education, independent of their grades, may also
be affected by a unique mental accounting hypothesis, that students with loans outstanding may
well feel that they have fewer resources in their mental bank account for education and be less
inclined to pursue post-graduate education as a result.

We can examine the above questions by looking at relationships between the type of financial
aid received and student achievement, measured by grades, and the relationships with subjective
measures of satisfaction with their college experience while in college and after graduation, their
extra-curricular activities in college, and their interest in attending graduate school.

Which of the above concepts best fits the relationships with financial aid is an empirical
question. Whether students perceive a grant as found money and respond to it that way or as a
gift that requires a payback, for example, may depend on many factors that we cannot observe,
such as how the aid is presented to them by the school, how their family and peers see it, and so
forth. The analyses below, therefore, are best seen as providing suggestive evidence as to which
conceptual framework best fits the financial aid context as perceived by students. We make no
claim that these analyses offer rigorous assessments of the above concepts, which have been
studied extensively elsewhere.

The Practice of Financial Aid:

Before examining the relationships, it is important to outline the context in which financial aid
took place when the data we use were collected. That begins with the notion of financial aid
itself.

We can think of financial aid as assistance that lowers the price of attending college. Need-based
financial aid is tailored to the financial needs of the individual student. While financial aid
policies and practices in the US have varied over time, the focus here is on the policies of the late

                                                                                                    8
1980s, when the graduates we examine began college, and for four-year, bachelor degree
programs, which have been the focus of both public and private policy.

The different forms of payment, as driven and supported by Federal Government policy, have
remained essentially the same over time:

   •   Grants. This is aid that does not have to be repaid.
   •   Work-Study. Federal funds are provided to schools to employ eligible students in part-
       time campus jobs
   •   Loans. These are repayable after graduation. Virtually all post-secondary educational
       loans in this period were governed by Federal policy.

Students do not repay grants. The grants are given by the school to the student, although the
funding came from the Federal Government. They could be seen as house money in the mental
accounting sense or as a gift in the social exchange sense.

Work-study programs represent a “pay as you go” context where payment (in the form of work)
accompanies consumption. Students participating in work-study are constantly reminded of the
cost of their education because they are paying for it by working as long as they receive that aid.
They may take their education more seriously but also will enjoy it less, as we would expect
from the mental accounting view. Or they may experience dissonance from working more than
their peers for their education, which might cause them to rationalize that their education was
more important than it was for their peers. While this might also make them take their education
more seriously, it would make them view the experience more positively than would their peers.
The concrete attribute of work-study programs is that they take time away from academic work,
making it more difficult for students to devote as much time and effort to the work as they might
otherwise have done (see, e.g., Triventi 2014).

Loans represent a context where payment is delayed until after graduation, essentially paying on
credit. Here the hypothesis might be similar: Compared to students who themselves are not
paying for college (i.e., parents or grants are paying), students receiving loans may be reminded
that they have to pay for college eventually, and this may make them both take the experience
                                                                                                    9
more seriously and enjoy it less. Compared to work-study students, though, those paying through
loans have not experienced the cost yet and therefore may not take their education as seriously
and may enjoy it more. Rationalization offers an alternative hypothesis for satisfaction with
college after the fact: Students who pay for college through loans, especially when others around
them are not paying for it, may rationalize their experience after the fact in ways that make their
college experience seem more worthwhile in hindsight. They might therefore report greater value
from college than either work-study students or those whose education was free to them.

The complications associated with examining these relationships empirically are considerable, as
discussed below, but the context in which financial aid was delivered in the period we examine –
the late 1980s – helps address some of those challenges.

The modern notion of financial aid in the US begins in the 1950s at private colleges where some
resources were made available to support students who otherwise could not afford to attend
college. A seminal development in financial aid was the creation in 1954 of the College
Scholarship Service (CSS) by 95 schools in the northeast. It borrowed a model developed first at
Harvard and then used at schools in the west to determine the financial need of applicants. The
CSS established the criteria to measure college students and their families' ability to contribute to
their education, criteria based on family income. By 1956, most private schools that offered aid
to students were using that standard model. Applicants paid a fee to the CSS, which then
determined the ability of the applicant and their family to pay, and suggested to the individual
college the amount of aid necessary to allow that student to enroll. The principle that financial
aid should be based on need – family income – and that the determinations should be common
across schools was well in place.

Public policy entered financial aid with the 1958 National Defense Education Act. It pioneered
loans, backed by the government, to support low-income students. The Educational Opportunity
Grants program created need-based grants for low-income students that did not need to be
repaid, and the 1964 Educational Opportunity Act created work-study programs by giving
schools funds for employing low-income students in on-campus jobs. A series of other acts
helped cement the need-based aspect of financial aid: The 1965 Higher Education Act provided
Federal Government-backed insurance for privately issued, need-based student loans, as well as
                                                                                             10
rules governing those loans, and more need-based grants for undergrads (this program became
known as Pell Grants in 1972). Legislation in the 1980s sought to ensure that financial aid was
targeted only to those in financial need, and the Higher Education Amendments of 1992
mandated the use of a common formula for determining need and the associated aid, eliminating
the use of the CSS’s application. Some private schools continued to use a modified version of
the CSS application to award their own, non-governmental aid, which was still need-based. 4

The intent and effect of public policy was to increase access to post-secondary education,
especially at the more expensive four-year programs, in a manner that was consistent across
applicants and colleges: Students with similar need got similar financial aid. The practices of
colleges went even further toward standardization, motivated first by the notion that giving
access to more low-income students was a very important goal and second that the best way to
do so was to target the available aid to those with the greatest need. It was not possible to use
public sources of financial aid to compete for students. Perhaps more important, the idea that
schools would base aid even from private sources on something other than financial need, such
as merit, was anathema to the participants in the higher education system.

The phrase “need-blind admission policy” that was common during the period we study here
(late 1980s and early 1990s) meant that admission decisions were made without considering the
financial aid implications associated with each applicant. As late as 1993, the National
Association of College Admissions Counselors reaffirmed its commitment to need-blind
admissions as the only form of financial aid (Cage 1993). Our review of media stories about
financial aid in the period before the mid-1990s using the EBSCO database of practitioner and
academic publications found that the only articles about financial aid that was not need-blind
were those reporting on individual schools whose difficult financial circumstances threatened a
break with the practice. There was no serious discussion of other approaches.

The reluctance to use aid in any way other than to support financially needy students is
illustrated by the creation of the Overlap Group, a collection of the wealthiest schools that would
4
  A number of sources describe the key legislative developments and practices in US financial aid. Among them is
http://www.finaid.org/educators/history.phtml and Clotfelter (1991). Jackson (2010) identifies New Deal-related
decisions that were precursors to contemporary financial aid while Chen and St. John (2011) review developments at
the state and local level.
                                                                                                               11
have been the most able to use private aid to compete for the best students. The purpose of the
Group was to ensure that students who were accepted to more than one school received identical
financial aid packages from each school (see Matsen 1995), eliminating even inadvertent
competition. The group operated during the period we examine here. In 1993, a consent decree
following US Justice Department anti-trust investigations allowed schools to keep sharing
information about the financial need of students but not on the financial aid awards they were
making (Matlock 1994).

Merit-based aid, where financial assistance is based on the abilities of the applicant rather than
their financial need, became a factor in financial aid only recently See Appendix A for details.
We can identify those limited instances in the data (below).

A complicating factor in assessing the effects of financial aid could be whether the threat of
losing financial aid motivated students receiving it to perform better. For the analysis here, the
relevant requirements are those promulgated by the US Department of Education in 1983, which
required that colleges ensure that students are receiving Federal financial aid are making
“satisfactory progress” as defined by the standards that the College uses for students not
receiving such financial aid. 5 In other words, the standard for being kicked out of school was the
same as the standard for losing financial aid. Students interested in remaining in college faced
the same standard whether or not they received financial aid.

Challenges in Examining the Effects of Financial Aid

Perhaps the most fundamental challenge in examining the effects that need-based financial aid
have on student outcomes is sample heterogeneity, that family financial attributes, which


5
  Colleges are allowed to maintain higher standards of satisfactory progress for students receiving Federal financial
aid than for other students, although why they would want to do so is not at all obvious. Federal regulations in this
period say: “Bear in mind that as a rule, the Department does not regulate schools' satisfactory progress standards”
with two exceptions. The first was a minimum “C” average by the end of the second year, but there were many
exceptions to that requirement. The second was that whatever maximum time the school has established for
completing a degree program, students who exceed 150 percent of that time will no longer be eligible for Federal
aid. Students attending college part-time are eligible for aid, however. This requirement also has many exceptions,
which makes it difficult to tell whether it has any differential effect on students receiving aid. Losing aid at one
school did not make students ineligible for receiving aid if they were accepted at another school. See FSA Handbook
for 1996. https://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/doc0262_bodyoftext.htm.
                                                                                                                 12
determine access to aid, are also directly associated with student outcomes. The evidence that
family income and attributes correlated with family income affect student performance in college
is voluminous. Students from poorer families tend to attend lower-quality high schools and as a
result are less prepared for college but poorer households have fewer resources for learning,
parents who provide less support, and so forth. (For reviews of the evidence, see Walpole 2003,
Stinebrickner and Stinebrinckner 2003, and Rouse and Barrow 2006. Delaney, Harmon, Ryan
2013 provide new examples of attributes that affect student achievement and that are difficult to
measure.)

The data described below allow us to control for family financial resources and related family
attributes. Unobserved attributes in this context, which no doubt are important, are likely to bias
estimates of financial aid’s effects downward. We consider that issue below.

The fact that students choose which colleges to apply to and then to attend may also confound
any relationship with student outcomes. One of the goals of financial aid was to allow students
to choose the college they want to attend based on factors other than costs. In that sense,
students receiving financial aid become more like students whose families have enough financial
resources to pay for college without aid. Students on financial aid may still be more cost-
sensitive than students not on financial aid, however, and may be disproportionately drawn
toward colleges that are cheaper. If so, a sorting concern begins with the fact that college grades
typically measure performance relative to other students in the same institution. If so, it is easier
for a given student to do well in colleges that are less selective/have less able students. If such
schools are also cheaper, they may attract better quality students among those needing aid than
they attract from the pool of students not needing aid.

The relationships between cost and competitiveness or selectivity are not straight-forward,
though, which makes a sorting explanation less obvious. Flagship state universities like U.C.
Berkeley in this period were among the cheapest programs but also the most competitive; among
private colleges, the most selective schools also provide the most financial aid; if more able
students sorted themselves into less selective colleges, those colleges would then by definition
become more selective. Although there is evidence that differences in aid does affect the choices


                                                                                                      13
that students make to matriculate among schools where they have been accepted, the effects
seem to be quite modest (Nurnberg , Schapiro, Zimmerman 2012).

Nevertheless, we consider the most likely source of any sorting, which would appear to be
between private and public colleges. Our discussions with former U.S. Department of Education
officials involved in financial aid in this period suggests that the level of government grants was
roughly targeted to cover tuition costs at public universities. Loans and work-study programs
were commonly used to offset living expenses. At private universities, loans and work-study
programs, which are less desirable than grants, and family contributions likely made up the gap
between grant aid and tuition costs. Public universities would therefore be more attractive to
price sensitive students, and those receiving financial aid may on average be more price-sensitive
than those not receiving need-based aid.

We address the concern about possible sorting across colleges with additional analyses first by
controlling for objective measures of student academic ability before they apply to college and
for the selectivity of the college, which may relate to how difficult it is for a given student to
succeed there. Second, we analyze the results within colleges, which controls for the difficulty
associated with the relative aspect of academic success. Then we examine the results within the
public and private institutions separately to address the concern that students with choices
between private and public schools (possibly those who are disproportionately able) may be
sorting themselves into the cheaper state systems.

Selection effects may be more important for students not receiving financial aid but whose
family income is close to eligibility. For them, differences in tuition cost are likely to be a major
factor in choosing where to apply and which college to accept, especially in comparison to those
just over the eligibility criteria and for whom financial aid outcomes may reduce the influence of
tuition costs. For that reason among others, we repeat the analysis using a regression
discontinuity design based on each student’s Pell Grant Index, the score calculated by the
Federal Government to determine eligibility for need-based aid. Finally, we use instrumental
variable techniques to address general aspects of sample heterogeneity.

Research on the Effects of Financial Aid:
                                                                                                     14
The research on need-based financial aid is extensive, most all of which assesses the effects on
student access to higher education (who enrolls) and persistence in college (who graduates).
Dresch (1975) pioneered the notion that students might respond differently to how financial aid
is structured, specifically that grants have a different effect on student enrollment than does the
equivalent lowering of tuition. Pascarella and Terenzini (2005) survey the literature and
conclude that, overall, students receiving financial aid per se are just as likely to persist in
college and to graduate as compared to those who do not received financial aid, a good outcome
given that the goal of financial aid was to reduce differences between those two groups.
Demming and Dynarsky’s (2009) survey finds support for the idea that need-based aid increases
persistence and graduation rates among participants.

In terms of recent studies in aid per se, merit-based aid has become a popular topic (e.g.,
Cohodes and Goodman 2013) as has state-level innovations in aid, such as those creating
financial incentives to perform well (e.g., Scott-Clayton 2011). For need-based aid, Brown et al.
(2012), confirms the basic result that financial aid does indeed increase the likelihood of
completing college. Castleman and Long (2013) find that Florida’s program increased
persistence and graduation rates,

The most extensively studied form of financial aid may be work-study programs. Stinebrickner,
and Stinebrickner (2003) find a negative relationship between work-study hours and student
academic performance. Pascarella and Terenzini (2005: 410) summarize speculation that work-
study programs might enhance learning when the work assignments relate to the student’s
studies, as opposed to simply taking time away from a student’s studies. More recently, Darolia
(2014) reports little overall effect of work-study participation on student grades in a national
sample, Scott-Clayton and Minaya (2014) find mixed effects on student outcomes, extending
Scott-Clayton (2011) earlier findings.

The effects of student loans on the experience of students in college appears to be the least
studied of the components of financial aid. As Demming and Dynarsky (2009 p.8) noted, “While
loans are the dominant form of federal aid today, we unfortunately know little about how they
affect behavior.”

                                                                                                   15
Alon (2005) observed that some of the inconsistency in results across prior studies had to do with
unexplained endogeneity and omitted variables in those studies. Specifically, those receiving aid
had attributes that reduced persistence compared to students not receiving aid, but when such
attributes were controlled for, the evidence suggested that aid did increase persistence.

Overall, relatively few studies examine relationships between aid and student achievement, and it
is difficult to find evidence on outcomes such as student satisfaction with education. Student
performance per se has been studied extensively but almost exclusively through the lens of
psychology, examining attributes of the individual and assessments that could be used to predict
achievement (for an example, see Schmitt et al. 2007). An important exception is the recent
study by Hamilton (2013), published after our study was near completion. She asks a different
but related question, whether greater financial help from parents causes students to perform
worse in college. The hypothesis is not expressed in terms of mental accounting, but it is
consistent with the notion that if something is free it should be undervalued. She finds support
for that hypothesis, that where parents pay more, student performance is less. But the analyses
control for financial aid, so the results likely apply to “pocket money” from parents above and
beyond tuition, room, and board.

The Data and Methods:

We use data from the Baccalaureate & Beyond Longitudinal Study (B&B) conducted by the US
Department of Education’s National Center for Education Statistics to examine these questions.
The data collected information from a nationally representative sample of students who received
a bachelor’s degree during the 1992–1993 academic year. Financial aid decisions for this cohort
would have been made in late 1980s. The sampling frame was drawn from a survey of post-
secondary institutions, the National Postsecondary Student Aid Survey, and was weighted to
reflect the population of all such graduates in that year and to create a sample that was
representative of all four-year college graduates. Extensive information was collected from the
students about their backgrounds, their families, and their academic and related experiences
before they attended college and also while in college.



                                                                                                   16
The study contacted them again in 1994, 1997, and 2003, this time collecting information about
their work experiences and their life. The 1992-1993 data had 11810 respondents; the 2003
resurvey contained 10440. We discuss survivor bias below. The response rate for each wave of
the survey was roughly 90 percent. NCES replenished some of the sample in each wave with
subjects identified in the original data collection exercise, so the number of individuals who
completed all three waves was less than the number completing the survey in 2003. The
information contained in the surveys is voluminous although response rates for many of the
individual survey items are low. A detailed description of the sampling methodology and
outcomes is provided in NCES Chapter 2 (2005). Use of the B&B data is restricted by NCES
and requires a site license.


A problem we face with this sample design is that we cannot observe how financial aid affects
the decision to attend college. To the extent that student abilities are roughly correlated with
family socio-economic status, financial aid may allow less able students to attend college. How
that relationship actually affects student outcomes is difficult to address empirically, and
relatively few prior studies do so. We consider this issue further below.


A second limitation of the data is that it is restricted to those who graduated from college during
1992 and 1993. That means we cannot observe any effects that aid might have on student
outcomes through relationships with retention/dropping-out. The effects we examine, such as
overall grade point averages, require college completion, but if aid alters the composition of the
student cohort that graduates, then that effect on outcomes such as grades should be considered.
Whether the students who would have dropped out in the absence of need-based aid are better or
worse performers than equivalent students who would not have dropped out is difficult to know.
Again, if we believe that student abilities and performance are related to family socio-economic
background and that students from the poorest backgrounds might be the most likely to drop-out
in the absence of need-based aid, then the selection effect might be expected to lower average
outcomes of students with financial aid by keeping in the worst performers. Whether this
relationship would be net of effects associate with selection into college is not obvious, however,
and we do not have the data available to address these questions empirically.

                                                                                                   17
Examining selection effects associated with drop-outs is extremely difficult because drop-outs
can return to college years later and complete their degree. The usual approach, therefore, is to
measure graduation rates within a given time period, such as six-year graduation rates. The data
here capture all graduates in 1992-’93, which has the advantage of including students who may
have taken many years to complete their degree and not censuring those who have not graduated
within a given time period. Nevertheless, the analyses here are clearly limited to students who
have graduated from college, which ignores selection effects associated with admissions and
with retention.


We explore the effect of different types of aid on the following variables, which are described in
Table 1b. The correlations between the variables are reported in Table 1a. As the descriptive
statistics indicate, grants are far and away the most common form of financial aid. As we
discuss in more detail below, all students receiving any kind of need-based financial aid in this
period first received a grant from the Federal Government. Those with greater need also
received work-study aid and/or took out loans to pay for their education. It was not possible to
get loans backed by the Federal Government or work-study funding without having a grant.

                                           ----------------
                                TABLE 1a and TABLE 1b HERE
                                           ----------------

Academic performance Academic performance in college is, we argue, a good assessment of
effort and the seriousness with which students pursued their education when we can control for
academic ability. There may be many ways in principle to judge academic performance, but in
practice few are available. Grade point averages (GPA) are the most common measure and the
one most likely to reflect the demands associated with the effort required across classes, e.g.,
attendance in some, class participation in others, and so forth. GPA is no doubt a function of
ability and effort. To the extent that students with lower (higher) academic ability are on average
sorted into schools with lower (higher) standards, the fact that GPA is a within-school measure
may cancel out some of the ability differences.

                                                                                                    18
We also include in the analysis rank measures of the academic status of each school to help
control for the fact that a given GPA at a school with more rigorous academic standards may
well require more effort than the same GPA at a school with lower standards, even given
differences in student ability across student bodies. GPA may also require different levels of
effort depending on the courses students are taking. For robustness purposes, we also examine
the GPA within standard subject majors that were calculated for the dataset by the National
Center for Educational Statistics: math and humanities. Finally, we examine grades within
schools for those colleges that have several students are in the database – fixed effects by school.

We also assess attitudes toward one’s education, which are the focus of much of the above
behavioral research. The B&B survey asked respondents in 2003 how satisfied they were with
their college experience, specifically whether the graduate considered that the effort, financial
cost, and the level of effort required to earn their undergraduate degree were worthwhile,
respectively. There was virtually no variance in the first and third item (almost everyone
answered yes). We therefore use the second item, whether my college experience was worth the
cost, as our measure. The drawback to this measure for our purposes is that because it is not
asked while the respondents are in school, it is not a good measure of any coincident mental
accounting effect. Precisely because it is asked later, it may capture rationalization on the part of
respondents.

The student’s willingness to enroll in further education in subsequent years, other things equal,
may reflect satisfaction with their bachelor degree education. For students paying for their
education in part through loans, those loans may have a disproportionate effect on their mental
bank account for future education, testing a specific aspect of the mental accounting literature. A
crucial issue in assessing the willingness to enroll outcome will be the ability to control for other
factors affecting that decision.

We also examine whether students volunteer to work on programs of service while in college,
another possible avenue through which reciprocity could occur.




                                                                                                    19
Independent Variables: As noted above, we consider three types of financial aid variables:
grants, work-study, and loans. For each type, we created a dummy variable indicating whether
the student received each of them. 6

Estimation:

We removed from our sample all those reporting that they received any merit-based aid
(presumably any aid based on the student’s attributes), including athletic scholarships, as well as
those receiving financial support from the military, in order to focus on the effects of need-based
aid. 7

The data provide a range of variables on family background in addition to those that are used to
determine financial aid, such as the educational level of each parent, race, and family structure,
and we include those measures as control variables. We add a control for those students who are
financially independent because financial aid in that case is determined by attributes of the
student and not their families. We also control for demographic variables of the individual
student that might be related to outcomes such as sex, age, race and marital status.




6
  The three categories are not mutually exclusive, however. In particular, all the students who take out loans and
who participate in work-study also received some amount of grant money, but not all the students receiving grants
take out loans. The experience of the students can be divided into the following categories, which are exhaustive
and mutually exclusive:
     (1) Those who do not receive any financial aid;
     (2) Those who only receive a grant;
     (3) Those who receive grant and participate in work study;
     (4) Those who receive grant and take out loans;
     (5) Those who receive grant, participate in work study, and take out loans.
One conclusion from the above is that it is not possible to observe students who only receive loans or who only
participate in work-study programs. For robustness check, we also tested the effect of each of the financial aid in a
clean fashion, by restricting our sample to a pair of the above five groups for each of the type of aids. To see the
effect of grant, for example, we compared (1) and (2); for work study, we compared (2) and (3); for loans, we
compared (2) and (4). This approach effectively defines the comparison group so that it only differs in the specific
type of aid of interest. For work-study, for example, we are observing the effect of participating in work-study net
of any effects associated with receiving grants; similarly for loans. The results from this analysis is consistent with
the results reported with models using the three dummy variables at the same time.
7
  Separate analyses for these omitted groups, available on request, show that GPA is higher, other things equal, for
students receiving merit aid not counted as athletic based and lower for those receiving athletic scholarships.
Whether these results reflect unmeasured ability defined broadly or are the result of the aid per se (merit awards
change one’s self-image while athletics takes time away from studies) is impossible to say.
                                                                                                                     20
More important, we can identify measures of the student’s academic ability before they entered
college using SAT and ACT scores, which are correlated with academic achievement. Even
though these two tests measure different aspects of ability – SAT in this period tested aptitude
regarding reasoning and verbal abilities and ACT focused on achievement based on what is
learned in school – the correlation between the two test scores is high (0.64, p<0.01) for the
subset of students (8.17%) who took both SAT and ACT. Controlling for ability makes it easier
for us to assert that the outcomes we see on performance result from effort, and effort can be
influenced strongly by the behavioral effects being tested by the hypotheses.

To control for the possibility that opportunities for student outcomes vary across colleges (i.e.,
the same GPA may require much more effort at one school than another), we control for school
quality using U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges rankings in 1992 from the U.S. News
Magazine. It ranked 1,600 schools using indicators of the quality of the program, such as student
selectivity, academic reputation, graduation and retention rates and financial resources.
Although there are certainly concerns about the validity of these rankings, it is the only one
available in this period for an assessment of the many colleges in our data. We used the original
data from U.S. News & World Report in this period to create five groups of institutions based on
these indicators, and we assigned the value of 1 to 5 based on the data. 8Those that were not part
of this ranking system were given the value of 6 because the survey did not rank schools with
very low standards. We also include tuition cost across schools as a possible measure of quality.

Because the large dataset includes many students who attended the same college - graduating the
same year - we can also examine grades for students within the same college.

We test the following competing hypotheses for the effects of need-based financial aid:

H1a. Students receiving grants should perform less well in school compared to students not
receiving any financial aid (i.e., where their families are paying) because there is no apparent
cost to the education. This is related to the mental accounting literature.

8
 For the methodology implemented in this ranking system, see http://www.usnews.com/education/best-
colleges/articles/2012/09/11/methodology-undergraduate-ranking-criteria-and-weights-2.


                                                                                                     21
H1b. Students receiving grants may perceive them as a gift that creates the need to reciprocate,
perhaps by taking their studies more seriously. A need to reciprocate may take the form of a
greater likelihood of volunteering for good works on campus. This is a social or gift exchange
argument.

We would not expect that students who participated in work-study or received loans would
perceive that aid as a gift per se as the students are effectively paying for them. There are also
competing hypotheses:

H2a. Students participating in work-study programs or receiving loans should perform better in
college because they are more aware of the costs than those receiving only grants.

H2b. Student participating in work-study programs per se should perform worse academically
because their jobs take time and energy away from academic effort.

Awareness of the costs of education may also affect enjoyments of the college experience:

H3. Students receiving grants should enjoy college more than those whose families are paying
for it and should be more likely to report that college was “worth the cost.” They may also
report a greater willingness to continue on to graduate education for this reason.

H4a. Students participating in work-study programs and receiving loans should enjoy college
less than those who are receiving financial aid in the form of grants alone because they are
reminded of the cost. They are less likely to report that college was “worth the cost.” They may
be less inclined to continue on to graduate education for this reason.

H4b. Students in work-study programs and receiving loans may rationalize the fact that they are
paying a larger cost for college than peers receiving only grants and may therefore report a
greater sense that college was worth the costs.

Finally, the mental accounting literature suggests a hypothesis concerning willingness to attend
and pay for education in the future:


                                                                                                     22
H5. Students paying for their college in part through loans will report less willingness to attend
graduate school because their “mental account” of spending for college is lower, controlling for
actual resources.

Descriptive Statistics:

Table 1a and Table 1b present means, standard deviations, and a correlation matrix for the
variables used in the analysis. The sample is 57% female and 17% non-white. Eighteen percent
of the respondents were married at the time of graduation, and two-thirds attended state
institutions. Table 2 shows additional descriptive statistics for the financial aid variables.
Roughly half of the sample received any kind of financial aid, and grants alone on average
covered about one quarter of the total cost of education.

                                            ----------------
                                    TABLES 1a, 1b & 2 HERE
                                            ----------------

Table 3 presents simple difference of means tests associated with the above hypotheses. Student
academic performance as measured by GPA is actually higher for students who received grants
and lower for those who received loans and work-study aid, the opposite of what mental
accounting models might suggest but consistent with gift-exchange relationships. (Overall GPA
was reported using a maximum value of 400.) Note that we expect omitted variables here to
produce the opposite effect, that receiving aid is associated with attributes that lead to worse
student performance.

                                            ----------------
                                          TABLE 3 HERE
                                            ----------------

The difference of means tests for attitudes toward one’s college experience are less clear, given
the lack of significant relationships. Among the interesting relationships is evidence that
students receiving grants are less willing to continue their education, which suggests negative

                                                                                                   23
feelings about their undergraduate experience. They are also more likely to volunteer than others,
a relationship consistent with social or gift exchange. Respondents who are paying off their
education through loans report less satisfaction with education, which is consistent with the
mental accounting model, i.e., being reminded of the costs. We examine below whether these
relationships hold up with more thorough analyses.

Results:

The results of OLS analyses in Table 4 find that students receiving financial aid have higher
GPA’s than those who do not, other things equal, and are more likely to participate in voluntary
work, lending support to the gift exchange notion in H1b (Table 4, Models 1 and 4). The signs
on willingness to enroll and on satisfaction with their experience at college are positive and the
coefficient on the latter is close to traditional measures of significance.

                                            ----------------
                                          TABLE 4 HERE
                                            ----------------

The results using institution fixed-effects for the within-college models (Models 5-8) suggest
similar relationships. Students who receive grants are more likely to receive higher grades, and
students who take out loans show worse performance in terms of overall GPA. We find no effect
of participating in work-study.

The within-college models cannot address whether students might be sorting themselves across
colleges in ways that made it easier for financial aid recipients to have better outcomes, counter
to the usual assumption that financial aid recipients should do worse because of unobserved
attributes associated with lower socio-economic status. The most obvious way to address the
sorting of more able students is to control for measured ability, which we do. The remaining
issue therefore concerns unobservable ability. We examine the possible sorting of those with the
choice to attend private or public colleges among financial aid recipients and who may be more
able into lower-cost public colleges. While public colleges per se are not less selective than
private colleges, it is possible that some crowding out of admissions at the more selective public

                                                                                                   24
colleges might mean that better students among those who are cost-sensitive might end up at less
selective public colleges.

Examining such sorting might suggest the use of a Roy selection model of the kind that Bojas
(1987) used to examine whether more able individuals were more likely to immigrate to
countries where they could earn more. The question we ultimately want to address, though, is
whether any such self-selection influences the overall relationship between financial aid and
student performance, which is a different issue.

The data show that while students in private colleges on average have higher ability compared to
students in public colleges (difference = 71.45, p <0.000), students on financial aid in public
colleges have marginally lower ability (SAT and ACT scores) compared to the students who do
not receive financial aid in those college (difference = 0.06, p = 0.99). That would be
incompatible with the sorting view, but the difference is not significant. Aid recipients in private
colleges have significantly lower SAT and ACT scores compared to non-recipients (difference =
34.01, p=0.0012), which is consistent with the notion that there is sorting of more able students
receiving aid away from private institutions.

Because we control for measured academic ability, the issue is with unmeasured aspects of
ability. The test of whether sorting on unmeasured ability occurs will turn on the results for
private colleges, where the expected outcome would be different than the one we are testing: if
more able (unobserved ability) students receiving financial aid sorted from private to cheaper
public institutions, we would expect to see better outcomes among aid recipients in public
colleges, which we already find, but we would expect worse outcomes for them among the
private colleges. We report OLS results separately for private and for public schools in Table 5.
Students receiving financial aid in the form of grants have higher grade point averages in private
colleges, which is inconsistent with a sorting story. The difficulty in finding relationships with
other variables for private colleges alone may have to do with the smaller sample size there.

                                           ----------------
                                         TABLE 5 HERE
                                           ----------------
                                                                                                     25
The nature of financial aid eligibility suggests an additional empirical test of the relationship
with student outcomes. Specifically, eligibility is based on objective criteria such that
applications below a cut-off score were eligible for aid while those above were not. Regression
discontinuity design (RDD) was first used to examine a very similar situation, the effects of
receiving scholarships on subsequent academic rewards (Thistlewaite and Campbell 1960).
Among the many RDD studies that have been used in related contexts are Van der Klauuw
(2002) examining financial aid and enrollment decisions within one college, Cohodes and
Goodman (2014) examine new state-level merit aid programs in Massachusetts, and Castleman
and Long (2013) looking at need-based aid in Florida. Nielsen, Sørensen, and Taber (2010) do
something similar in exploiting a kinked aid formula in Denmark to look at enrollment decisions.


Lee and Lemieux’ (2010) review notes the important constraints in using RDD analyses,
including whether the subjects of the treatment can manipulate their score on the running
variable that defines the treatment. If they cannot precisely shape their scores, then the variation
in treatment outcomes near the cut-off for treatment can be considered randomized. A variety of
new approaches now allow RDD estimates to be expanded to situations where cutoff is fuzzy,
where other factors play a role, and where it is not directly observable to participants and
observers (see Porter and Yi 2015).


In this case, the financial aid criterion that creates the running variable is a formula, now known
as the Pell Grant Index (PGI), based on attributes of the financial situation of one’s family or of
the individual student for those financially independent. Calculators are available now to help
predict one’s eligibility for financial aid, but in the period we examine, no such tools were
available. Applicants had to submit their forms based on their finances and then hear back as to
their eligibility. Neither the formula nor the cutoff score for eligibility were available in advance
to applicants. While it is true that one could always increase the odds of being eligible by
earning or holding less money, doing so was costly. Lying about one’s finances was a crime,
and the Government verified applicants with audits in 32 percent of the cases for the period we




                                                                                                    26
examine. Twenty-six percent of those who applied did not meet the eligibility criteria. 9 As a
result, it is difficult to argue that applicants could easily adjust their scores and influence their
treatment. The cutoff for eligibility, in turn for treatment, is of the sharp variety.


The dataset provides the PGI score for each individual from administrative records, and the
cutoff for eligibility in this period was a score below 2200.




9
 See Pell Grant Program End-of-Year Report, 1988-1989. US Department of Education - Office of Postsecondary
Improvement. Washington, D.C. https://www2.ed.gov/finaid/prof/resources/data/pell-historical/pell-eoy-1988-
89.pdfFederal
                                                                                                         27
                                           ----------------
                                         TABLE 6 HERE
                                           ----------------

The above discussion raises an issue as to whether our results might be sensitive to variations
within the income levels of the comparison group. Specifically, many students who are not
receiving grants/any financial aid may come from families that are very wealthy, such that the
cost of college is not a serious consideration for them and the experience is essentially seen as
free. Or they may come from families just above eligibility for financial aid, such that the cost of
college is a serious financial burden for their families and something that might well affect the
motivation of the student. In other words, assuming that all students who receive no financial aid
respond equally to that situation may not be appropriate.

We examined this possibility further in analyses, available on request, where we compare the
effect of grants first using as the comparison group students not receiving financial aid whose
parents earned less than the median income and second a comparison group of students not
receiving financial aid whose parents earned more than the median income. Those receiving
                                                                                                    28
grants perform significantly better in both cases, but the size of the coefficients was smaller
where the comparison was with students from poorer families. This might suggest that students
work harder when college costs are more of a burden to their families than when they are not, an
issue that perhaps further analyses could explore.

Finally, we use instrumental variable analysis to address further whether unobserved initial
differences between students receiving financial aid and those not receiving aid might explain
the positive effect we see. We instrument the “received any grant” variable with the dummy
variable that indicates whether the student applied for financial aid or not. This choice has a
strong analogy to Angrist’s (1990) classic use of the military draft lottery as an instrument for
military service during the period of selective service via the draft: Although applying for
financial aid is a necessary condition for receiving aid, as was one’s lottery number a necessary
condition for being drafted, it is far from a sufficient condition.

In the period we examine, 26 percent of applicants did not qualify for a grant, and 24 percent of
those who were eligible did not receive one (see footnote 9). More recently, 15.47% of the
students who applied for financial aid did not receive any, and 2.3 million who were eligible for
aid did not apply, the equivalent of 20% of those who did apply (Kantrowitz 2009). The
instrument is correlated with the probability of receiving financial aid (correlation = 0.8496).
There is not a strong case for thinking that applying for aid per se has any effect on student
performance other than through its effect on receiving financial aid, the exclusion restriction:
The practice in college applications was to include material about financial aid along with
admissions material, so there was no need to seek out information about applying for aid. The
burden of applying for aid might be different from that in applying for admission, of course.
Wealthier families whose finances are likely to be more complicated would find it more difficult
to do, but they also have greater resources for compiling the material; poor families are likely to
have simple finances, but they may have less ability to gather and report the information. Fifty-
nine percent of those in our sample applied for aid for aid. The results, presented in Table 7, are
consistent with other specifications.




                                                                                                    29
                                           ----------------
                                         TABLE 7 HERE
                                           ----------------

Conclusions:

There is considerable evidence for the idea that how one pays for something might affect how
one experiences it. That notion is especially relevant in the context of higher education, where
huge sums of taxpayer money shape how millions of students pay for college. There has been
surprisingly little research to examine the effects of the different forms of financial aid. One
outcome, academic performance, has life-long implications for the participants as it affects how
much they learn, access to further education and, to some extent, to jobs.

Results suggest that how one pays for college does affect performance in college as measured by
grades. We find that students receiving financial aid grants perform significantly better than
those who are not receiving financial aid, consistent with a social or gift exchange notion that the
grants create pressure to reciprocate by taking academic performance more seriously. There is
considerable consistency across specifications as to the size of the effect, grades about 0.08 to
0.15 points higher on a 4.00 scale, about one quarter of a standard deviation. Students who
receive student loans receive grades roughly 0.6 to 0.12 points lower than those receiving
financial aid not in the form of loans, again other things equal and across different specifications.

The fact that students with loans viewed their education as less worthwhile than those who only
received grants is consistent with the notion of mental accounting, where the reminder of the
payment makes them more critical of what they paid for. Students receiving grants only were
somewhat more likely to do volunteer work, consistent with the notion that the latter experienced
less of a social or gift exchange because they were paying for part of their education. The
addition of loans may cause students to ignore the “gift” they also received in the form of grants,
at least in comparison to those who only had grants.

Overall, though, the notion that making students more responsible for the costs of their education
will make them take it more seriously is not supported by these results. Indeed, adding loans to a
student’s financial aid package is associated with worse performance.
                                                                                                    30
The general view has been that students who receive financial aid have unobserved attributes that
cause them to perform worse in college. No doubt some of those attributes are unobserved here
as well. Controlling for them should increase the estimates. The possibility remains that some
unobserved attributes associated with financial aid may actually increase student achievement
and continues to be worth considering.

The Hamilton (2013) study noted above also uses the B&B data and finds that the greater the
contribution that parents make to a student’s college-related expenses, the worse the student
performs in terms of GPA. The implication is that if education is free to the student, they will
not take it as seriously nor perform as well, a conclusion at odds with our results here that
students who receive grants only, essentially free money, perform better while students who are
paying for their education through loans that must be paid back perform worse.

The implicit assumption in Hamilton study is that if parents supply less financial support, then
the students have to pay more themselves. That assumption is not true, however, with the
exception of mature students who are financially independent of their parents. Those students
are truly responsible for the costs of their own education. (Using our estimation models,
available on request, such students perform significantly worse in terms of GPA, other things
equal.) The actual trade-off is between parental support and financial aid, and that is not a
choice within the control of parents or students. Students whose parents could afford to pay for
their children’s college education cannot receive financial aid in this period, and that includes
getting access to loans. What parents can control is pocket money, the amount over and above
the tuition and fee requirements that are covered by financial aid. Hamilton’s analyses controls
for financial aid, so for students receiving substantial amounts of aid, parent contributes by
definition are limited to pocket money, which has quite different implications. 10


10
  It is possible that parents can require that their children pay back the parent’s contribution or contribute money
they earned in high school, but such arrangements are not observable in these data. One puzzling aspect of
Hamilton’s (2013) findings is that the students who perform best are those whose families are providing no financial
support at all. Even a small payment by parents at any income level is associated with a sharp decline in GPA. A
possible explanation for this result has to do with scholarships that are not need-based, merit-based scholarships,
which are not controlled for in Hamilton’s analysis. Even though they were quite rare in this period, such merit-
based scholarships would be about the only way that a wealthy child could go through college without support from
their families. A “full-ride,” complete athletic scholarship or possibly one of the few merit scholarships like the
National Merit Scholarship program would create the kind of omitted variable bias that could explain the finding
                                                                                                                 31
The implications for policy here are straight-forward. The tendency in recent years to shift
financial aid to loans may well come with a cost in terms of student achievement. The general
notion that making students pay for their education will also make them take it more seriously
and that this, in turn, will make them perform better should be questioned.




here: Highly able students who then perform very well require no financial support from even wealthy parents. The
merit-based scholarship control variable in our analyses is strongly correlated with all measures of academic
performance. Perhaps because we include merit aid in our analyses, we do not replicate Hamilton’s findings
concerning parental support. The relationships are insignificant except for Math GPA where greater support is
associated with higher GPA. We also do not impute estimates to fill in missing data.
                                                                                                               32
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alon, Sigal and Marta Tienda. 2007. Diversity, Opportunity, and the Shifting Meritocracy in
     Higher Education. American Sociological Review. 72(4): 487-511.

Alon, Sigal. 2005. Model Mis-Specification In Assessing The Impact of Financial Aid on
     Academic Outcomes. Research in Higher Education. 46(1):109-125.
Alwin, Duane F. 1974. College Effects on Educational and Occupational Attainments. American
     Sociological Review, 39(2): 213-223.
Arkes, Hal. R. and Catherine Blumer. 1985. The Psychology of Sunk Cost. Organizational
     Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 35: 124-140.
Bagozzi, R.P. 1974. “Marketing as an Organized Behavioural System of Exchange.” Journal of
    Marketing, 38: 77–82.
Baker, Therese L. and William Vélez. 1996. Access to and Opportunity in Postsecondary
     Education in the United States: A Review. Sociology of Education. 69(2): 82-101.
Banerjee, Smita C., Jennifer L. Hay, and Kathryn Greene. 2013. Cognitive Rationalizations for
     Tanning-Bed Use: A Preliminary Exploration. American Journal of Health
     Behavior. 37(5): 577-586.
Bellemare, C., & Shearer, B. 2009. Gift giving and worker productivity: Evidence from a firm-
     level experiment. Games and Economic Behavior, 67(1), 233-244.
Brown, Meta; Karl Scholz, John; Seshadri, Ananth. 2012. A New Test of Borrowing Constraints
    for Education. Review of Economic Studies. 79(2): 511-538.
Buchmann, Claudia and Thomas A. DiPrete. 2006. “The Growing Female Advantage in College
    Completion: The Role of Family Background and Academic Achievement.” American
    Sociological Review 71:515–41.
Cage, Mary Crystal. 1993. The "Need Blind" Admission Dilemma. The Chronicle of Higher
     Education, 10/27/1993. Accessed as http://proxy.library.upenn.edu:2092/article/The-Need-
     Blind-Admission/90579/
Cadr, David, Alexandre Mas, and Jesse Rothstein. 2008. Tipping and the Dynamics of
     Segregation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 177-218.
Castleman, Benjamin L. and Bridget Terry Long. 2013. Looking Beyond Enrollment: The
     Causal Effect of Need-Based Grants on College Access, Persistence, and Graduation.
     NBER Working Paper 19306.
Charness, G., Frechette, G. R., & Kagel, J. H. 2004. How robust is laboratory gift
     exchange? Experimental Economics, 7(2), 189-205.


                                                                                              33
Chen, Rong and Edward P. St. John. 2011. State Financial Policies and College Student
     Persistence: A National Study. Journal of Higher Education. 82(5): 5, 629-660.
Clotfelter, Charles T. 1991. Financial Aid and Public Policy in Charles T. Clotfelter, Ronald G.
     Ehrenberg, Malcolm Getz, and John J. Siegfried (eds). Economic Challenges in Higher
     Education. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.89-123.
Cohodes, Sarah, and Joshua Goodman. 2014. Merit Aid, College Quality and College
    Completion: Massachusetts’ Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy, American
    Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6, no. 4: 251-285.
Darolia, R. (2014). Working (and studying) day and night: Heterogeneous effects of working on
     the academic performance of full‐ time and part‐ time students. Economics of Education
     Review, 38, 38‐ 50.
Delaney, Liam, Colm Harmon, Martin Ryan. 2013. The role of noncognitive traits in
     undergraduate study behaviours. Economics of Education Review, 32(1): 181-195
Deming, David and Susan Dynarski. 2009. Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to Increase the
    Postsecondary Attainment of the Poor. NBER Working Paper No. 15387
DesJardins, Stephen L., Dennis A. Ahlburg, and Brian P. McCall. 2002. Simulating the
     Longitudinal Effects of Changes in Financial Aid on Student Departure from
     College. Journal of Human Resources. 37(3): 653-679.
Downey, Douglas B. 1995. “When Bigger Is Not Better: Family Size, Parental Resources, and
    Children’s Educational Performance.” American Sociological Review 60:746–61.
Dresch, Stephen P. 1975. A Critique of Planning Models for Postsecondary Education: Current
     Feasibility, Political Relevance, and a Prospectus for Future Research. Journal of Higher
     Education 46: 246-286.
Dynarski, S. 2002. . Does aid matter? Measuring the effect of student aid on college attendance
    and completion. American Economic Review. 93(1):279–88
Falk, A. 2007. Gift exchange in the field. Econometrica. 75(5), 1501-1511.
Fehr, E., Goette, L., & Zehnder, C. 2009. A behavioral account of the labor market: The role of
      fairness concerns. Annu. Rev. Econ. 1(1), 355-384.
Fehr, E., Kirchler, E., Weichbold, A., & Gächter, S. 1998. When social norms overpower
      competition: Gift exchange in experimental labor markets. Journal of Labor
      economics, 16(2), 324-351.
Fehr, E., Kirchsteiger, G., & Riedl, A. 1993. Does fairness prevent market clearing? An
      experimental investigation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,108(2), 437-459.
Festinger, Leon. 1957. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University
      Press.
                                                                                               34
Fuchs, Galia, Natan Uriely, Arie Reichel, and Darya Maoz. 2013. Vacationing in a Terror-
     Stricken Destination: Tourists’ Risk Perceptions and Rationalizations. Journal of Travel
     Research. 52(2): 182-191.
Gneezy, U., & List, J. A. 2006. Putting behavioral economics to work: Testing for gift exchange
    in labor markets using field experiments. Econometrica, 74(5), 1365-1384.
Gourville, John T. and Dilip Soman. 1998. Payment Depreciation: The Behavioral Effects of
    Temporarally Separating Payments from Consumption. Journal of Consumer Research
    25:160-
Greene, William. 2006. A General Approach to Incorporating Selectivity in a Model. Stern
     School of Business, New York University working paper.
Hamilton, L. T. 2013. More is more or more is less? Parental financial investments during
    college. American Sociological Review, 78(1), 70-95.
Hannan, R. L., Kagel, J. H., & Moser, D. V. 2002. Partial Gift Exchange in an Experimental
    Labor Market: Impact of Subject Population Differences, Productivity Differences, and
    Effort Requests on Behavior. Journal of Labor Economics, 20(4), 923-951.
Hastings, Justine and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2012. Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice:
     Evidence from Commodity Price Shocks. Boston: NBER Working Paper 18248.
Hauptman, Arthur M. 1990. Navigating the maze of new college financing options. Brookings
    Review. 8(2): 32-39.
Hirschman, Elizabeth. 1979. Differences in consumer purchase behavior by credit card payment
     system. Journal of Consumer Research (6):58-66.
Hoxby, Caroline M. (ed) 2004. In College choices: The economics of where to go, when to go
    and how to pay for it, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jackson, Toby. 2010. How Scholarships Morphed into Financial Aid. Academic
     Questions. 23(3): 298-310.
Kantrowitz, Mark. 2009. Analysis of Why Some Students Do Not Apply for Financial Aid.
     FinAid.Org.
     http://www.finaid.org/educators/20090427CharacteristicsOfNonApplicants.pdf
Kay, Aaron C. Maria C. Jimenez, and John T. Jost. 2002. Sour grapes, sweet lemons, and the
     anticipatory rationalization of the status quo. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin:
     1300-1312.
Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics: A
Review. Journal of Economic Literature. 48: 281-355.



                                                                                                35
Lee, D., & Rupp, N. G. 2007. Retracting a gift: How does employee effort respond to wage
     reductions? Journal of Labor Economics, 25(4), 725-761.
Masten, Scott E. 1995. Old school ties: Financial aid coordination and the governance of higher
     education. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization. 28(1): 23-48.
Matlock, Thao P. 1994. The Overlap Group: A Study of Nonprofit Competition. Journal of Law
     and Education 23: 523.
Maximiano, S., Sloof, R., & Sonnemans, J. 2007. Gift Exchange in a Multi‐ Worker Firm*. The
    Economic Journal, 117(522), 1025-1050.
McCall, Leslie. 2000. Gender and the New inequality: Explaining the College/Non-College
    Wage Gap. American Sociological Review, 65(2): 234-255.
Meer, Jonathan and Harvey S. Rosen. 2012. Does Generosity Beget Generosity? Alumni Giving
     and Undergraduate Financial Aid. Economics of Education Review. 31(6): 890-907.

NCES. 2005. 1993/03 Baccalaureate and Beyond Longitudinal Study: Methodology Report.
   Washington, DC: US Department of Education, Institute of Educational Sciences.
NCES. 2008. Ten Years After College: Comparing the Employment Experiences of 1992–93
   Bachelor’s Degree Recipients With Academic and Career-Oriented Majors. Washington:
   National Center for Educational Statistics, Institute of Educational Sciences. 2008.
   Descriptive data.
Nielsen, H. S.; Sørensen, T.; Taber, C. R. (2010). "Estimating the Effect of Student Aid on
     College Enrollment: Evidence from a Government Grant Policy Reform". American
     Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (2): 185–215.
Nurnberg , Peter, Morton Schapiro, David Zimmerman. 2012. Students choosing colleges:
    Understanding the matriculation decision at a highly selective private institution.
    Economics of Education Review, 31(1): 1-8.
Parscarella, Ernest T. and Patrick T. Terenzini. 2005. How College Affects Students. San
     Francisco: Jossey-Bass, Volume 2.
Porter, Jack and Ping Yu. 2015. Regression Discontinuity Designs with Unknown Discontinuity
     Points: Testing and Estimation. Journal of Econometrics. 189: 132-147.
Prelec, Drazen and George Loewenstein. 1998. The Red and the Black: Mental Accounting of
     Savings and Debt. Marketing Science 17(1):4-28.
Schmitt, Neil, Frederick L. Oswald, Brian H. Kim, Anna Imus, Stephanie Merritt, Alyssa Friede,
    and Smriti Shivpuri. 2007. The Use of Background and Ability Profiles to Predict College
    Student Outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology. 92(1): 165–179.
J. Scott-Clayton 2011. The causal effect of federal work-study participation: Quasi-experimental
      evidence from West Virginia. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33 (4): 506–527
                                                                                              36
Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2011. On Money and Motivation.Journal of Human Resources. 46(3): 614-
      646.

Judith Scott-Clayton and Veronica Minaya. 2014. Should Student Employment be Subsidized?
      Conditional Counterfactuals and the Outcomes of Work-Study Participation. NBER
      working paper 20329.

Soman, Dilip and Lam, Vivian M. W. 2002. The Effects of Prior Spending on Future Spending
    Decisions: The Role of Acquisition Liabilities and Payments. Marketing Letters. Nov2002,
    Vol. 13 Issue 4, p359-372.
Soman, Dilip. 2001. "Effects of Payment Mechanism on Spending Behavior: The Role of
    Rehearsal and Immediacy of Payments," Journal of Consumer Research, 27(4), 460-474.
Sque, M., and S. A. Payne. 1994. “Gift Exchange Theory: a critique in relation to organ
     transplantation,” Journal of Advanced Nursing, 19(1), 45–51.
Steelman, Lala Carr and Brian Powell. 1989. Acquiring Capital for College: The Constraints of
     Family Configuration. American Sociological Review 54:844–55.
Stinebrickner, R., and T. R. Stinebrickner. 2003. Working during school and academic
     performance. Journal of Labor Economics 21(2):473–91.
Thaler, Richard H. 1980. Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice. Journal of Economic
     Behavior and Organization 1:39-60.
Thaler, Richard. 1985. "Mental accounting and consumer choice." Marketing science 4: 199-214.

Thistlethwaite, Donald L., and Donald T. Campbell. 1960. “Regression-Discontinuity Analysis:
An Alternative to the Ex Post Facto Experiment.” Journal of Educational Psychology, 51(6):
309–17.

Tritch, Teresa. 1990. Borrowing to Bridge the Gap Where to turn when financial aid or
      savings don't cover your college costs. Money. September 10th 1990, p52.

Triventi, Moris. 2014. Does working during higher education affect students’ academic
     progression? Economics of Education Review, 41(4): 1-13.

van der Klaauw, Wilbert. 2002. “Estimating the Effect of Financial Aid Offers on College
     Enrollment: A Regression-Discontinuity Approach. International Economic Review,
     43(4): 1249–87.




                                                                                            37
                               Table 1a. Descriptive Statistics: Correlations

                                (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)    (10)    (11)    (12)
(1)   Received any grant        1
(2)   Received any loan        0.48     1
(3)   Received any workstudy   0.29    0.31     1
(4)   Grant amount             0.61    0.65    0.46     1
(5)   Loan amount              0.39     0.8    0.27    0.73     1
(6)   Workstudy amount         0.23    0.22    0.77     0.4     0.2     1
(7)   GPA                      0.14    0.01    0.04    0.09    0.02    0.04     1
(8)   Willingness to enroll    0.02    0.02    -0.01   0.01     0      -0.01   -0.02    1
(9)   Satisfaction in 2003     -0.02   -0.07   -0.04   -0.07   -0.08   -0.03   0.07     0       1
(10
      Voluntary work           0.04    0.02    0.02    0.04    0.02    0.02    0.07    0.02    0.01     1
 )
(11
      Female                   0.03    0.03    0.02    -0.01    0      0.01    0.16    0.01    0.01    0.06     1
 )
(12
      Age                      0.04     0      -0.09   -0.04   0.02    -0.06   0.16    0.03    0.02    0.11    0.06     1
 )
(13
      Black                    0.08    0.07    0.05    0.08    0.06    0.02    -0.15   0.07    -0.01   0.05    0.05    0.03
 )
(14
      Hispanic                 0.05    0.01    0.02    0.02     0      0.01    -0.06   0.05    -0.01   -0.02   0.02    0.02
 )
(15
      Asian                    -0.01   -0.04    0       0      -0.03   0.02    -0.02   0.01    -0.01   -0.02   -0.04   -0.04
 )
(16
      Marital status           0.01    -0.04   -0.07   -0.07   -0.02   -0.05   0.17    -0.02   0.04    0.09    0.06    0.45
 )
(17
      SAT/ACT score            0.01    -0.03   0.07    0.12    0.01     0.1    0.29     0      -0.03   0.06    -0.15   -0.1
 )
(18
      Log(Household income)    -0.3    -0.27   -0.09   -0.23   -0.23   -0.06   0.08    0.01    0.04    0.01    0.03    -0.14
 )
(19
      Mother's education       -0.11   -0.1     0      -0.05   -0.07    0      0.02    -0.03    0      0.02    -0.04   -0.25
 )
(20
      Father's education       -0.13   -0.12   -0.01   -0.06   -0.08    0      0.01    -0.03   0.01     0      -0.06   -0.27
 )
(21
      Private institution       0.2    0.17     0.2    0.35    0.21    0.15    0.13    0.03    -0.11   0.05    0.01     0
 )
(22
      Selectivity              0.07    0.03    -0.03   -0.06    0      -0.05   -0.01    0       0      -0.01   0.08     0.2
 )
(23
      Institution cost         0.19    0.23    0.19    0.43    0.31    0.16    0.13    0.03    -0.08   0.05    0.01    -0.11
 )
(24   Number of family
                               -0.01    0      0.05    0.02    -0.01   0.03    -0.05    0      -0.01   -0.01   -0.02   -0.36
 )    members
(25
      Applied for aid          0.31    0.31    0.17    0.33    0.28    0.12    0.11    -0.05   -0.04   0.01    -0.01   -0.06
 )
                               (13)    (14)    (15)    (16)    (17)    (18)    (19)    (20)    (21)    (22)    (23)    (24)
(14
      Hispanic                 -0.06    1
 )
(15
      Asian                    -0.05   -0.05    1
 )
(16
      Marital status           -0.05   0.01    -0.05    1
 )
(17
      SAT/ACT score            -0.18   -0.07   0.08    -0.07    1
 )
(18
      Log(Household income)    -0.09   -0.1    -0.03   -0.01   0.18     1
 )
(19
      Mother's education       -0.04   -0.11   0.01    -0.17   0.27    0.19     1
 )
(20
      Father's education       -0.09   -0.09   0.04    -0.17   0.29    0.22    0.57     1
 )


                                                                                                                        38
(21
      Private institution         0.03    0.01    -0.01   -0.02   0.19    0.08      0.06    0.06      1
 )
(22
      Selectivity                 0.06    0.01    -0.12   0.15    -0.45   -0.16     -0.22   -0.22     0        1
 )
(23
      Institution cost            -0.01   -0.04   0.03    -0.05   0.28    0.14      0.15    0.14     0.5      -0.23    1
 )
(24   Number of family
                                  -0.03   0.04    0.08    -0.2    0.04    0.11      0.12    0.17     0.03     -0.09   0.04    1
 )    members
(25
      Applied for aid             0.02    0.01     0      -0.07   0.14    -0.13      0        0      0.08     -0.07   0.12   0.01
 )
                      Table 1b. Descriptive Statistics: Means and Standard Deviations

                    Variable                                                       Mean             Std. Dev.
                    Key independent variables
                    Received any grant                                                0.539              0.498
                    Received any loan                                                 0.323              0.468
                    Received any work-study                                           0.102              0.303
                    Amount of grant (per year)                                    $3082.195           4414.274
                    Amount of loan                                                $1211.311           2136.443
                    Amount of work-study                                           $140.437            537.225
                    Dependent variables
                    GPA (on a 400 point scale)                                      306.440                 50.147
                    GPA in math (on a 4 point scale)                                  2.600                  0.990
                    GPA in humanities                                                 3.049                  0.619
                    Willingness to enroll in graduate studies (0/1)                   0.701                  0.458
                    Satisfaction in college education (0/1)                           0.897                  0.304
                    Participated in voluntary work (0/1)                              0.354                  0.478
                    Control variables
                    Sociodemographics
                      Female                                                          0.566                  0.496
                      Age                                                            25.017                  6.621
                      Black                                                           0.061                  0.239
                      Hispanic                                                        0.052                  0.223
                      Asian                                                           0.043                  0.203
                      Marital status in 1993                                          0.191                  0.393
                      Financially independent                                         0.387                  0.487
                    Academic ability
                      SAT/ACT score                                                1056.441           118.0621
                    Parental SES and family structure
                      Log of household income                                        10.216                  1.186
                      Mother's education (base: Less than high
                    school)
                        High school graduate                                          0.385                  0.487
                        Some PSE                                                      0.107                  0.309
                        2 years or more of PSE                                        0.097                  0.295
                        Bachelor's degree                                             0.214                  0.410
                                                                                                                              39
             Advanced degree                                           0.127            0.332
           Father's education (base: Less than high
         school)
             High school graduate                                      0.310            0.463
             Some PSE                                                  0.089            0.285
             2 years or more of PSE                                    0.069            0.253
             Bachelor's degree                                         0.227            0.419
             Advanced degree                                           0.218            0.413
           Number of members in college                                3.620            1.387
         Institution Characteristics
           Private institution                                       0.350             0.477
           Institution selectivity                                   4.847             1.599
           Institution cost (per year)                          $11720.480          7217.823
         Instrumental variable
         Applied for financial aid                                     0.534            0.499




              Table 2. Descriptive statistics for the financial aid variables

             % of                                                              % of total education
                                        Dollar amount
           students                                                                   costs
          Receiving        Mean              Std     Min             Max        Mean          Std
Grant     0.5435132        3082.195         4414.274  70             37793      25.87%       31.77%
Workstudy 0.1063259        140.4369         537.2247 100             10000      13.10%       24.05%
Loan      0.3482845        1211.311         2136.443 100             23500       2.51%       12.63%




           Table 3. Difference in Means between grantees and non-grantees

           Difference in                      Willingness       Satisfaction     Voluntary
                               GPA
           means                               to enroll          in 2003          work
           Grant             20.300**            0.015           0.028**          0.061**
           Work study         -5.451+           -0.018             0.013           0.002
           Loan             -14.903**             0.010          -0.057**         -0.029+
                                      ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1




                                                                                                      40
Table 4. Effect of financial aid on academic and non-academic outcomes
                                                       OLS                                            Institution fixed effect
                              (1)            (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)              (7)          (8)
                                         Willingness     Satisfaction    Voluntary                 Willingness    Satisfaction    Voluntary
                             GPA                                                        GPA
                                          to enroll        in 2003         work                     to enroll       in 2003         work

 Received any grant        12.09***        0.0051             0.0235      0.0512*     12.19***       0.0051           0.024        0.0512*
                            [2.851]       [0.0327]           [0.0213]     [0.0296]     [2.817]      [0.0327]        [0.0213]       [0.0296]
 Received any loan         -6.892**         0.018             -0.0195    -0.0747**    -6.616**        0.018          -0.0206      -0.0747**
                            [3.060]       [0.0347]           [0.0231]     [0.0319]     [3.024]      [0.0347]        [0.0231]       [0.0319]
 Received any work-
 study                        0.402        0.0351          -0.0264          0.0526      -0.898       0.0351          -0.0194         0.0526
                             [3.483]      [0.0379]        [0.0259]         [0.0361]     [3.481]     [0.0379]        [0.0261]        [0.0361]
 SAT/ACT score             0.0761***      8.43E-05        1.01E-06      0.000169***   0.0766***     8.43E-05       -6.54E-06     0.000169***
                           [0.00598]     [6.77e-05]      [4.46e-05]      [6.19e-05]   [0.00602]    [6.77e-05]      [4.52e-05]     [6.19e-05]
 Female                     21.31***       0.0117          -0.0132       0.0726***     20.40***      0.0117          -0.0129      0.0726***
                             [1.902]      [0.0218]        [0.0142]         [0.0198]     [1.877]     [0.0218]        [0.0142]        [0.0198]
 Age                          0.421      -9.23E-07         0.00286      0.00804***       0.316     -9.23E-07         0.00273     0.00804***
                             [0.299]     [0.00341]       [0.00217]        [0.00310]     [0.296]    [0.00341]       [0.00218]       [0.00310]
 Black                     -31.36***       0.121**         0.00226         0.0891*    -32.80***      0.121**        -0.00917        0.0891*
                             [4.614]      [0.0485]        [0.0350]         [0.0481]     [4.651]     [0.0485]        [0.0354]        [0.0481]
 Hisp                      -12.59***       0.129**        -0.00356         -0.0727     -11.40**      0.129**         -0.0055        -0.0727
                             [4.437]      [0.0500]        [0.0335]         [0.0459]     [4.488]     [0.0500]        [0.0340]        [0.0459]
 Asian                       -6.023       -0.00943        -0.00988         -0.0303      -6.246      -0.00943         -0.0194        -0.0303
                             [3.854]      [0.0436]        [0.0303]         [0.0405]     [3.895]     [0.0436]        [0.0308]        [0.0405]
 Marital status in 1993     18.84***        -0.036         0.0211         0.0861**     19.57***       -0.036          0.0183       0.0861**
                             [3.716]      [0.0434]        [0.0275]         [0.0389]     [3.671]     [0.0434]        [0.0275]        [0.0389]

 Log of household
 income                      1.232         0.00286         0.0126*        -0.00283     1.568*       0.00286         0.0129*        -0.00283
                            [0.918]        [0.0104]       [0.00693]      [0.00965]     [0.906]      [0.0104]       [0.00694]      [0.00965]
 Selectivity                -0.295          -0.0063       -0.00222        -0.0119*       -0.3        -0.0063       -3.27E-05       -0.0119*
                            [0.591]       [0.00667]       [0.00440]      [0.00615]     [0.758]     [0.00667]       [0.00513]      [0.00615]
 Institution cost (per
 year)                     0.000186       2.07E-06       -2.34e-06*       1.20E-06     0.000177     2.07E-06       -1.96E-06       1.20E-06
                          [0.000169]     [1.94e-06]      [1.26e-06]      [1.75e-06]   [0.000171]   [1.94e-06]      [1.29e-06]     [1.75e-06]

 Number of family
 members in college         -0.306        -0.00517        0.00144           0.011      -0.324      -0.00517         0.00142          0.011
                            [0.784]       [0.00887]      [0.00587]       [0.00816]     [0.771]     [0.00887]       [0.00587]      [0.00816]
 Private institution         3.658          -0.0223      -0.103***        -0.00774      3.053        -0.0223       -0.105***       -0.00774
                            [2.524]        [0.0291]       [0.0190]        [0.0263]     [2.919]      [0.0291]        [0.0207]       [0.0263]
 Constant                  190.5***       0.625***        0.749***         -0.0203    190.1***     0.625***         0.741***        -0.0203
                            [15.95]         [0.179]        [0.118]         [0.166]     [16.06]       [0.179]         [0.120]        [0.166]

 Observations                  2,285         1,836          2,024          2,327        2,285        1,836            2,024         2,327
 R-squared                     0.187         0.017          0.049          0.031
 Number of institutions                                                                  395          371              387           406
Standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
The models also control for mother’s and father’s education levels.




                                                                                                                                               41
Table 5. Effect of financial aid by type of colleges
                                            Private colleges                                        Public colleges
                             (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)
                                       Willingness   Satisfaction   Voluntary                 Willingness   Satisfaction   Voluntary
                            GPA                                                    GPA
                                        to enroll      in 2003        work                     to enroll      in 2003        work


Received any grant         8.537*         0.0429        0.0317       0.0658       15.05***     -0.00749        0.0206        0.0437
                           [4.770]       [0.0566]      [0.0466]     [0.0522]       [3.577]     [0.0408]       [0.0214]      [0.0366]
Received any loan           0.578         0.0281       -0.0406      -0.105**     -12.56***     -0.00855       -0.0164       -0.0595
                           [4.667]       [0.0550]      [0.0467]     [0.0515]       [4.065]     [0.0456]       [0.0244]      [0.0416]
Received any work-
study                      -3.331         0.0386       -0.00332        0.0696       -1.693     -0.00899        -0.0527         0.0434
                           [4.480]       [0.0494]      [0.0441]       [0.0491]     [5.633]     [0.0628]       [0.0338]       [0.0580]
SAT/ACT score            0.0810***      7.34E-05      -1.38E-05      0.000175    0.0741***     0.000102       2.97E-05     0.000174**
                          [0.0101]     [0.000111]     [9.80e-05]    [0.000108]   [0.00755]    [8.66e-05]     [4.48e-05]     [7.67e-05]
Female                   18.62***       -0.00921      -0.0608**      0.0742**     22.10***       0.027          0.0179     0.0705***
                           [3.013]       [0.0345]      [0.0297]       [0.0330]     [2.452]     [0.0283]       [0.0146]       [0.0251]
Age                       0.944**        0.00293       0.0107**      0.00797*       -0.037      -0.0035       -0.00256       0.0101**
                           [0.426]      [0.00502]     [0.00419]      [0.00479]     [0.416]    [0.00473]      [0.00238]      [0.00416]
Black                    -25.63***        0.103          0.0087        0.123     -35.23***      0.149**        -0.0121         0.0658
                           [7.254]       [0.0725]      [0.0669]       [0.0760]     [6.151]     [0.0658]       [0.0384]       [0.0631]
Hisp                        -11.2         0.128*         0.0168      -0.163**     -11.87**      0.145**        -0.0227        -0.0171
                           [7.116]       [0.0719]      [0.0652]       [0.0722]     [5.902]     [0.0711]       [0.0363]       [0.0605]
Asian                      -3.494        -0.0523        -0.0862        0.0286      -8.231*       0.0128       0.00578         -0.0516
                           [6.846]       [0.0775]      [0.0740]       [0.0762]     [4.670]     [0.0534]       [0.0295]       [0.0482]
Marital status in 1993   30.20***        -0.0648       -0.00413        0.0059     15.28***      -0.0152         0.0253       0.0992**
                           [7.166]       [0.0858]      [0.0692]       [0.0782]     [4.460]     [0.0517]       [0.0263]       [0.0456]
Log of household           -1.013         0.0161        0.00747      -0.0284*      2.364**      -0.0111       0.0143**         0.0134
income                     [1.440]       [0.0161]      [0.0142]       [0.0159]     [1.193]     [0.0137]      [0.00717]       [0.0123]
Selectivity
                           -0.545        -0.0116        -0.002      -0.00837      -0.0815       0.00071      -0.00321      -0.0171**
                           [1.226]       [0.0105]     [0.00904]     [0.0102]      [0.776]      [0.00887]     [0.00533]     [0.00794]

Institution cost (per
year)
                          0.000371       5.28E-07     -2.69E-06     -6.54E-07     0.000194     2.90E-06      -1.51E-07      3.70E-06
                         [0.000235]     [2.70e-06]    [2.23e-06]    [2.50e-06]   [0.000254]   [2.94e-06]     [1.55e-06]    [2.60e-06]
Number of family           -1.293         -0.0175       0.0122       0.00832       0.0503      0.00136        -0.00596       0.0133
members in college         [1.206]       [0.0140]      [0.0122]      [0.0134]      [1.019]     [0.0116]      [0.00603]      [0.0104]
Constant                  184.2***         0.476*       0.452*         0.258      199.1***     0.778***       0.858***       -0.234
                           [26.03]        [0.287]       [0.251]       [0.280]      [20.89]      [0.237]        [0.123]       [0.211]

Observations                817            698           740           858         1,468        1,138          1,284         1,469
Number of institutions      198            184           197           207          197          187            190           199
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
The models also control for mother’s and father’s
education levels.




                                                                                                                                       42
Table 6. Effect of financial aid with sample restrictions on overall GPA

                                    (1)              (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)        (10)
                                                                                                      (1) minus    (2) minus    (3) minus    (4) minus    (5) -mid
                               Middle 35%       Middle 30%    Middle 25%    Middle 20%   Middle 10%
                                                                                                      middle 5%    middle 5%    middle 5%    middle 5%      5%
Received any grant               13.87***         14.13***      17.91***      23.18***       15.23     15.30***      16.36***    21.38***     29.12***       20.54
                                  [4.946]          [5.255]       [5.736]       [6.325]     [9.714]       [5.368]      [5.768]      [6.428]      [7.264]     [14.91]
Received any loan                 -8.269            -7.457       -10.30*     -17.62***      -10.83        -6.52       -5.709       -8.898     -16.86**       5.107
                                  [5.184]          [5.530]       [6.135]       [6.714]     [10.45]       [5.666]      [6.114]      [6.962]      [7.805]     [16.53]
Received any work-study           -1.707            -0.734         1.026        -7.394      -4.489        -0.51        0.225        3.59        -7.409      -21.98
                                  [6.101]          [6.465]       [7.358]       [8.346]     [13.99]       [6.672]      [7.165]      [8.439]      [9.998]     [28.56]
SAT/ACT score                  0.0769***        0.0758***      0.0622***    0.0574***     0.0495**    0.0911***    0.0925***    0.0829***    0.0874***     0.123***
                                 [0.0106]         [0.0115]      [0.0130]      [0.0142]    [0.0221]      [0.0115]     [0.0127]     [0.0148]     [0.0166]    [0.0362]
Female                           22.45***         20.98***      18.75***      15.13***       8.921     23.92***      22.22***    20.43***     17.58***       15.89
                                  [3.294]          [3.536]       [3.914]       [4.353]     [6.708]       [3.550]      [3.839]      [4.352]      [5.047]     [9.987]
Age                               0.808*              0.7         0.952*        1.029*       1.276        0.721        0.531        0.822        0.816       2.721
                                  [0.476]          [0.504]       [0.535]       [0.579]     [1.464]       [0.491]      [0.523]      [0.560]      [0.606]     [2.107]
Black                           -22.78***         -22.79**      -20.99**      -23.65**     -34.70*     -20.66**      -21.31**     -19.16*       -18.57       10.09
                                  [8.617]          [8.917]       [9.953]       [11.68]     [17.86]       [9.582]      [9.965]      [11.49]      [14.67]     [42.62]
Hisp                            -22.32***        -23.79***      -22.74**        -17.12     -27.63*     -22.93**     -25.43***    -26.22**       -17.55      -40.37
                                  [8.389]          [8.790]       [9.495]       [10.47]     [16.62]       [9.010]      [9.535]      [10.48]      [11.64]     [24.77]
Asian                             -1.459            -4.417        -1.276         2.489       7.623       -3.465       -7.509       -4.481        -0.41       7.221
                                  [7.169]          [7.772]       [8.499]       [8.844]     [12.80]       [7.943]      [8.768]      [9.820]      [10.37]     [19.69]
Marital status in 1993           15.58***          15.67**       16.44**         7.874       1.226     16.92***      17.83***    20.49***        11.94       13.74
                                  [5.898]          [6.322]       [7.080]       [8.511]     [13.21]       [6.273]      [6.803]      [7.792]      [9.709]     [20.15]
                                 -8.644**         -11.44**        -10.63       -15.72*       8.701      -8.459*      -11.29**     -11.10*      -16.68*       4.662
Log of household income
                                  [4.408]          [5.211]       [6.470]       [8.712]     [24.07]       [4.552]      [5.396]      [6.724]      [9.101]     [28.44]
Selectivity                       -0.335            -0.899        -0.971        -1.355      -3.557        0.382       -0.103       0.0758       -0.103      -1.792
                                  [1.080]          [1.097]       [1.199]       [1.436]     [2.196]       [1.180]      [1.251]      [1.407]      [1.587]     [3.302]
Institution cost (per year)    0.000627**       0.000705**    0.000949***   0.000868**    0.000515    0.000624**   0.000696**   0.00102***   0.000856**   -0.000346
                               [0.000288]       [0.000306]     [0.000346]   [0.000373]   [0.000620]   [0.000307]   [0.000331]   [0.000382]   [0.000421]   [0.00101]
Number of family                   1.92              1.71          1.315         1.639      6.254*        1.216        0.826        0.498       -0.253       2.061
members in college                [1.418]          [1.531]       [1.809]       [2.115]     [3.563]       [1.494]      [1.623]      [1.973]      [2.411]     [5.482]
Private institution              15.31**           20.76**         18.11        26.86*      -6.523       13.12*      18.11**        14.76        25.27       1.025
                                  [7.600]          [8.950]       [11.04]       [15.33]     [42.89]       [7.739]      [9.155]      [11.30]      [15.76]     [51.65]
Constant                         256.6***         300.2***      297.3***      348.8***       110.7     245.9***      292.4***    288.4***     341.4***       93.98
                                  [48.81]          [55.71]       [67.23]       [86.96]     [232.2]       [50.87]      [58.23]      [70.58]      [91.68]     [281.4]
Observations                        779              689            580           446         225          670          580          471          337         116
Number of institutions              273              255            235           201         129          263          243          223          179         84
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
The models also control for mother’s and father’s education
levels.
                                                                                                                                                                43
Table 7. The effect of receiving grant on academic and non-academic outcomes: Using
instrumental variable

                                     GPA              Willingness to enroll      Satisfaction in 2003           Voluntary work
                          1st stge     2nd stage    1st stage    2nd stage     1st stage     2nd stage     1st stage     2nd stage
                         Received                   Received     Willingness   Received     Satisfaction   Received      Voluntary
Dependent variable       any grant         GPA      any grant     to enroll    any grant      in 2003      any grant       work


Received any grant                     22.28***                     0.0318                    0.0343                     0.0645**
                                        [2.919]                    [0.0328]                  [0.0216]                    [0.0301]
Applied for financial
aid                      0.696***                    0.701***                   0.694***                    0.696***
                         [0.0121]                    [0.0137]                   [0.0130]                    [0.0121]
SAT/ACT score           -2.62E-05      0.0740***    -8.94E-06      8.23E-05    -9.41E-06    -3.55E-06      -2.61E-05    0.000169***
                        [3.60e-05]     [0.00602]    [4.00e-05]    [6.71e-05]   [3.85e-05]   [4.43e-05]     [3.57e-05]    [6.18e-05]
Female                    0.0219*       20.81***    0.0334***        0.0112      0.0228*      -0.0138        0.0204*     0.0700***
                         [0.0114]        [1.912]     [0.0129]      [0.0216]     [0.0123]     [0.0141]       [0.0114]       [0.0197]
Age                      -0.00181         0.412       -0.0018     -0.000133     -0.00181     0.00291         -0.0024     0.00778**
                        [0.00179]        [0.300]    [0.00201]     [0.00338]    [0.00187]    [0.00215]      [0.00178]      [0.00308]
Black                     0.0406       -33.54***       0.0457      0.124***      0.0487      -0.00529         0.0432       0.0836*
                         [0.0276]        [4.634]     [0.0286]      [0.0482]     [0.0301]     [0.0348]       [0.0276]       [0.0479]
Hisp                       -0.018      -13.74***      -0.0032      0.126**      -0.00784     -0.00701        -0.0188       -0.0688
                         [0.0266]        [4.451]     [0.0296]      [0.0497]     [0.0289]     [0.0333]       [0.0264]       [0.0457]
Asian                    -0.00485        -6.466*       0.0118       -0.0118      0.0101      -0.00944       -0.00565       -0.0291
                         [0.0232]        [3.872]     [0.0258]      [0.0432]     [0.0261]     [0.0301]       [0.0233]       [0.0404]
Marital status in
1993                    0.0626***      17.87***      0.0492*        -0.038     0.0597**       0.0205       0.0612***     0.0860**
                         [0.0223]       [3.734]      [0.0256]      [0.0431]     [0.0236]     [0.0272]       [0.0223]     [0.0387]
                             -                            -                         -                           -
Log of household        0.0644***      3.519***     0.0638***      0.00371     0.0675***     0.0177**      0.0652***      0.00607
income
                        [0.00543]       [0.971]     [0.00604]      [0.0109]    [0.00586]    [0.00726]      [0.00546]      [0.0101]
Selectivity             0.0101***       -0.319      0.0107***     -0.00688     0.0104***     -0.00189      0.0115***     -0.0122**
                        [0.00354]       [0.593]     [0.00392]     [0.00659]    [0.00378]    [0.00436]      [0.00353]     [0.00612]
Institution cost (per     2.90e-                       2.74e-                                 -2.65e-        2.66e-
year)                     06***         6.08E-05       06**        2.21E-06    1.94e-06*       06**          06***        5.93E-07
                        [1.00e-06]     [0.000169]   [1.14e-06]    [1.92e-06]   [1.08e-06]   [1.25e-06]     [9.98e-07]    [1.74e-06]
Number of family         0.00687         -0.586      0.00793       -0.00509     0.00668      0.000642       0.00624        0.0103
members in college      [0.00471]        [0.789]    [0.00525]     [0.00882]    [0.00506]    [0.00584]      [0.00469]     [0.00815]
Private institution     0.0706***         0.756     0.0541***       -0.0209    0.0810***    -0.111***      0.0728***       -0.0163
                         [0.0151]        [2.560]     [0.0172]      [0.0290]     [0.0163]     [0.0191]       [0.0151]      [0.0265]
Constant                 0.707***       167.5***     0.680***      0.620***     0.708***     0.698***       0.729***        -0.106
                         [0.0950]        [16.32]      [0.105]       [0.182]      [0.101]      [0.120]       [0.0944]       [0.168]

Observations               2,285           2,285      1,836         1,836        2,024         2,024         2,327        2,327
R-squared                  0.681           0.169      0.685         0.017        0.678         0.049         0.678        0.026
IV F-stat                                  3285                     2621                       2847                        3316
Durbin pval                                  0                      0.659                      0.368                      0.0018
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
The models also control for mother’s and father’s
education levels.




                                                                                                                                      44
                                   APPENDIX A: MERIT AID

Merit-based financial aid includes athletic scholarships, assistance from the military such as
Reserve Officer Training Corps, and aid based on academic abilities, which is the concern here.
The first substantial discussion of merit-based financial aid based on academic ability that
appears in the EBSCO publications database was in 1990 (Hauptman 1990). The largest such
program operating in the period we examine was the New York State Regents Scholarship
program, which limited aid to those without financial need to $300 per year in the period we
examine and was only applicable to New York State residents who also attended a college in
New York State. This program accounted for more than one-third of all the aid that was not
need-based in the US during the period we examine. For background on the Regent’s program,
see
http://www.hesc.ny.gov/content.nsf/CA/Appendix_E_New_Yorks_Tuition_Assistance_Program
_A_History. The National Association of State Scholarship and Grant Programs 20th Annual
Survey Report 1998-1989 finds that $57 million was spent on merit-based aid and $18 million of
that was the Regents program. The National Merit Scholarship program, which was the only
national-level merit aid program, was miniscule compared to the base of college students then
and remains that way today: there were roughly 10,000 awards in 2012 against approximately 20
million students in colleges and universities. A review of aid options in 1990 described merit
awards as virtually all honorific, good for one’s ego but not much more (Tritch 1990). The
Georgia Hope Scholarships, now the largest merit-based aid program, did not begin until 1993,
after the students we examined graduated.

The data does include a variable measuring of “merit-based” aid, which includes all forms of aid
based on attributes of the student: honorary award received in high school, athletic scholarships,
and support from the US military, all of which may be correlated with ability or other attributes
that may affect the outcomes we study. 5.4 percent of the students reported receiving an athletic
scholarship of some kind, and 2.8 percent report receiving some sort of aid that they believe was
based on other forms of merit. Some amount of that latter figure may well reflect an upward
social desirability bias in student reporting.



                                                                                                 45
