                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CAN MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION EXPLAIN THE EQUITY PREMIUM PUZZLE?
EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENT WITH PROFESSIONAL TRADERS

                                      Francis Larson
                                       John A. List
                                     Robert D. Metcalfe

                                     Working Paper 22605
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22605


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




We thank Clark Halliday and Joseph Seidel for excellent research assistance and Uri Gneezy,
Judd Kessler, and Richard Thaler for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
For correspondence: metcalfe@uchicago.edu

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Francis Larson, John A. List, and Robert D. Metcalfe. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Myopic Loss Aversion Explain the Equity Premium Puzzle? Evidence from a Natural
Field Experiment with Professional Traders
Francis Larson, John A. List, and Robert D. Metcalfe
NBER Working Paper No. 22605
September 2016
JEL No. C9,C93,G02,G11

                                          ABSTRACT

Behavioral economists have recently put forth a theoretical explanation for the equity premium
puzzle based on combining myopia and loss aversion. Complementing the behavioral theory is
evidence from laboratory experiments, which provide strong empirical support consistent with
myopic loss aversion (MLA). Yet, whether, and to what extent, such preferences underlie
behaviors of traders in their natural domain remains unknown. Indeed, a necessary condition for
the MLA theory to explain the equity premium puzzle is for marginal traders in markets to
exhibit such preferences. Using minute-by-minute trading observations from over 864,000 price
realizations in a natural field experiment, we find data patterns consonant with MLA: in their
normal course of business, professional traders who receive infrequent price information invest
33% more in risky assets, yielding profits that are 53% higher, compared to traders who receive
frequent price information. Beyond testing theory, these results have important implications for
efficient resource allocation as well as characterizing the optimal structure of social and economic
policies.


Francis Larson                                     Robert D. Metcalfe
Normann                                            University of Chicago
145-157 St John Street                             Saieh Hall for Economics
London, EC1V 4PW                                   5757 S. University Avenue
United Kingdom                                     Chicago IL, 60637
f.larson@normann.io                                rdmetc@gmail.com

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu
1. Introduction
        Explaining means and variances of asset returns has occupied scientists and
practitioners for decades. One particularly active area of recent research revolves around
the equity premium puzzle: the average annual real return on U.S. equities over the past
century has been roughly 8 percent whereas the real return on relatively riskless securities
has been approximately 1 percent (see, e.g., Mehra and Prescott, 1985). Indeed, Siegel’s
(1998) work extends the U.S. asset return data to the early 19th century and reveals a
similar, but somewhat smaller, premium over the past 200 years. Similar differences
have been documented for asset returns in France, Germany, and Japan. All told, across
roughly 85 percent of capitalized global equity value, data patterns reveal an equity
premium puzzle.
        Mehra and Prescott (1985) argued that such behavioral patterns represented a
puzzle when their general equilibrium framework with additively separable utility
functions required an implausibly large coefficient of relative risk aversion to explain the
underlying data. Ever since, there has been considerable effort across economics and
finance to explain the puzzle. In fact, it is difficult to find a puzzle that has attracted as
much widespread attention across the fields of microeconomics, macroeconomics, and
finance. To date, however, standard intertemporal economic models have not fully
rationalized the observed data patterns. 1
        More recently, Benartzi and Thaler (1995) have augmented the standard model by
leveraging two general features of human cognition—myopia and loss aversion—to
provide an intriguing explanation for the equity premium puzzle. Myopic loss aversion
(MLA) is a situation characterized by investors – who are loss averse (see Kahneman and
Tversky, 1979) – taking a short-term view on an investment. Under MLA, investors pay
too much attention to the short-term volatility of their asset portfolios, reacting negatively
to short-term downside changes. In this way, frequent feedback on asset returns is
detrimental, in that investors are overly averse to assets with such volatility. 2
        Complementing the theory is a number of laboratory experiments (with both
students and professional traders) that have found evidence consistent with the MLA
conjecture (Thaler et al., 1997; Gneezy and Potters, 1997; Gneezy et al., 2003; Haigh and
List, 2005). The structure of the experiments revolves around varying the frequency of
the feedback to subjects and examining if the information provision affects investment
patterns. The underlying hypothesis tests if subjects with infrequent information invest
more in a risky asset than subjects who receive more frequent feedback. The literature
generally reports that those individuals receiving infrequent feedback invest between

1
  Kocherlakota (1996) and Mehra and Prescott (2003) discuss the various frameworks and explanations, and conclude
that there is no single model that can explain the underlying data patterns. Azeredo (2014) presents evidence that
suggests for a subclass of general equilibrium models in Mehra and Prescott (1985), the equity premium puzzle is even
larger than the literature presumes.
2
  Barberis et al. (2001) estimate that models based on myopic loss aversion can generate sizeable equity premia.
Moreover, Benartzi and Thaler (1999) demonstrate that workers are more likely to invest their retirement savings in
stocks when they are given a longer-term horizon of returns data (rather than one year).


                                                         1
30%-80% more in the risky asset than those receiving more frequent information, a
pattern consistent with MLA.
        While the investment patterns observed in laboratory experiments are consistent
with MLA, there exists no evidence on whether professional traders in their natural
environments behave in line with the MLA theory. 3 Since marginal traders are the price
setters in markets, this gap in the literature represents an important shortcoming in our
understanding of whether the MLA theory can explain the observed asset return patterns.
In fact, a necessary condition for MLA to explain the equity premium puzzle is for
marginal traders to exhibit such behavioural tendencies in their chosen trading markets.
        While in theory this next step is perspicuous, in practice it is nearly impossible to
observe traders in their natural environments while maintaining the integrity of a causal
field experiment. This fact explains why the literature has focused exclusively on data
drawn from laboratory experiments to test the MLA theory. We were presented with an
opportunity to depart from the traditional research approach when Normann, a
technology firm that beta tests trading platforms, partnered with us to explore features of
their new trading program. Within their beta test, we conduct a natural field experiment
with professional FX traders around the world, who are not aware that they are part of a
scientific experiment when they make their investment choices. Within this natural
setting, we follow the spirit of the literature by randomizing information feedback to
permit a clean test of whether MLA is evident in trader behavior.
        In this manner, we use randomization as our form of identification and couple that
instrument with the realism afforded by the field. To maintain a close parallel to the
natural environment, we use stakes that are in the relevant range of trader earnings—our
subjects could earn more than $1,400 over our two-week beta test. This amount of
money is roughly equivalent to 35% of their weekly salary (average annual salary of
$103,000). In addition, this setting and trading environment is completely natural for the
traders. For example, traders were allowed to trade our real mutual fund-like instrument
that tracked the relative value of the US Dollar.
        In total, between March and April 2016, hundreds of traders signed up for our
beta test. Using over 864,000 minute-by-minute price realizations, we find trading
patterns consonant with MLA: traders who receive infrequent price information invest
33% more of their portfolio in risky assets, yielding profits that are 53% higher,

3
  There is an active area of research exploring whether behaviors in the lab extend to the field. Levitt and List (2007)
discuss six factors that might frustrate such generalizability. For our purposes, reasons why there might be differences
between the lab and the field include behavioral, sample selection and sorting, and trader experience (see List, 2003;
2004). In terms of the latter, experience might be important to MLA, in that over time traders might get better at
learning how to overcome MLA or they learn their true type and that only ‘good’ traders are left in the job over time
(Seru et al., 2010). Thinking like a trader in the lab seems to make people ‘feel’ losses less (Sokol-Hessner et al.,
2009), although the artefactual field experiments in this area suggest that traders succumb to MLA in similar ways as
students (Haigh and List, 2005; Abdellaoui et al., 2013). Related to this line of inquiry, subjects acting in teams might
behave differently (Sutter, 2007), and the general public might invest differently in mutual funds based on information
(Beshears et al., 2015; Shaton, 2015). A non-experimental study that explores trade restrictions and investment
patterns is due to Klinger and Levit (2009).


                                                           2
compared to those traders who receive frequent price information. This evidence is
consistent with the hypothesis that professional traders in our natural field experiment
exhibit MLA, and this behavioural tendency leads to significantly lower profits. In this
way, a puzzle arises: traders in the field constantly seek more frequent return
information, yet more might actually mean less in terms of profits. Furthermore, even
amongst those with many years of trading experience, the MLA effect is alive and well,
consonant with the laboratory results of Haigh and List (2005).
         As a whole, our empirical insights provide evidence that MLA is a viable
explanation for at least part of the equity premium puzzle observed in the literature.
Given that the equity premium puzzle has far-reaching implications—from the costs of
macroeconomic variability due to recessions, to estimates of the cost of capital, to the
current debate on social security and pensions, to investing in public services—
understanding its sources represents a key challenge for advancing efficient public
policies. Beyond the equity premium puzzle, our data can also lend insights into other
puzzles, such as data patterns describing asset volatility, dividend payouts, and
discounting.
         Two further insights can be gleaned from this note. First, methodologically,
much, if not all, of behavioral finance is devoid of any causal evidence from natural field
experiments. Given that natural field experiments estimate important policy and
theoretical parameters (see, Al-Ubaydli and List, 2012), we hope that our study catalyzes
future field work testing behavioural theories in finance. Second, in a practical sense, if
one considers the wealth-building potential of the equity premium in the long-run, it is
clear why it is of central importance in portfolio allocation. The behaviour of our
professional traders combined with the empirical insights from students in the received
literature, suggest important changes in investor information can yield significant gains in
investment portfolios. One such example is outlined in Gneezy et al. (2003, p. 821), who
discuss Israel’s largest mutual fund manager, Bank Hapoalim, changing its information
release about fund performance from every month to every 3 months, noting that
“investors should not be scared by the occasional drop in prices.”
         The next section of our note discusses the experimental design. Section 3
describes the empirical analysis and results. Section 4 concludes.

2. Experimental Design
        As a quick summary, our natural field experiment started when we invited FX
traders to take part in a beta test of a new trading platform. Once they signed up for the
platform, we randomized them into a frequent information group (second-by-second
price information) or an infrequent information group (price information every four
hours). Both groups could trade over any of the ten weekdays of our two-week
experiment. This experimental setting allowed us to directly test MLA in a natural field
experimental setting with a high degree of control to measure causal estimates. We



                                             3
consider this a natural field experiment (see Harrison and List, 2004) because traders do
not know that they are part of a scientific experiment, and have traded assets in their
everyday jobs that have both instantaneous and infrequent price quote profiles.

2.1 Design of the natural field experiment
         We built the trading platform and framed (truthfully) the trading platform to
potential traders as a beta test of a new trading platform. Beta testing trading platforms in
exchange for early access and credit is a common practice in the industry. We contacted
professional traders through email and LinkedIn (i.e. an online professional network).
The email list was composed of traders who have applied for, or worked as professional
traders in the past. We acquired this list from a proprietary trading firm in London. The
LinkedIn messages were sent to those with professional trading experience on their
online LinkedIn profiles. We sent nearly 8,000 messages, and each message included a
brief invitation to the beta test of the platform followed by a document of the instructions
(see Appendix A). Beyond the emails to begin and end the test period, no further
communication was completed with the vast majority of traders.
         We informed traders that for their two weeks of participation they would earn a
portion of their profits as credit on a related options platform. As is common in such
tests, although subjects could not immediately withdraw the credit, profits from options
contracts purchased with the credit could be withdrawn immediately. In the end, over the
ten trading days, the average trader earned GBP £1010 (USD $1454), which amounted to
roughly 35% of their weekly salary.
         To sign up as platform users, the traders needed to log in with their LinkedIn
profile (allowing us to verify their company and current role), accept that they understood
the instructions and payment procedure, and fill out a survey about their trading
experience, income and asset levels, age, gender, and education level. Traders were
largely working in hedge funds, investment banks, and proprietary trading firms,
although some were working independently. Most of the traders were based in London,
but the experiment was global, as traders came from the Unites States, Europe, Australia,
India, Singapore, and Hong Kong, among other countries.
         After the registration process was complete, we displayed a message to subjects
that we would contact them within 30 days to begin trading. In total, 342 individuals
completed the registration between March and April 2016. We randomized and started
traders in weekly batches of approximately 85 over that time period. All traders in a
group had the same start and end dates. For the randomization, we created a matched
pairs design, where we blocked on several variables (i.e., age of trader, trading
experience, professional experience, financial service sector, industry experience,
income, and education). See Tables A1 and A2 for the balance tables of the overall
randomization and of the eventual matched pairs, respectively.




                                             4
       To inform subjects to begin the beta test of the platform, we emailed informing
them that they had 14 days from the date of the email to trade on the platform. We found
that 35% of traders never logged in—this is typical for such exercises. 4 Moreover, as we
desired to focus on professional traders, we only included professional traders in the
analysis, and we also only included traders who logged into the platform at least once,
and who made at least one trade. Since traders could not sell the asset without first
owning it, and there was no payment without profits, a subject who failed to make a trade
clearly did not understand the instructions. Consistent with other natural field
experiments, we did not reveal any University affiliations and subjects did not know the
request for the beta test was for an academic study. When each group finished we sent
out an email informing subjects of their performance and their award. The platform also
displayed this final information.

2.2 Design of the risky asset
        The experimental platform was a simplified version of what a trader would find at
an online broker (see Appendix B). Traders could trade a mutual fund-like instrument
(“Fund A”) that tracked the relative value of the US Dollar. Traders had a starting cash
balance of GBP £1,000,000 and for every pound they earned on the platform trading
Fund A, they would receive GBP £1/500 on the related options platform. Subjects could
make trades by buying units at the ask price of the fund or selling units at the bid price.
They could not post limit orders and could not have a net negative position. The bid/ask
spread of the fund was large (fixed at GBP £2), averaging just above 2% of the price –
since we had no other transaction costs, the spread was immaterial for our purposes.
Each trader could view their transaction history, a list of the most recent five prices, and
average prices paid for their units. Traders could trade over a two-week period during
normal over-the-counter foreign exchange market hours, which run 24 hours a day except
weekends (so, in total, traders had ten trading days).
        We designed Fund A to have a positive expected return regardless of the
underlying market movement. The initial mid-price was set at 100 and the underlying
asset was the USD/EUR. The initial underlying price was the USD/EUR price at the
subject’s respective start time. For every price tick up of the underlying asset, Fund A
would go up slightly more than it would for price ticks down. Specifically, for every
negative change in mid-price of the USD/EUR, Fund A would go down by the change
amount x 300. For every positive change in mid-price, Fund A would go up by the
change amount x 1.025 x 300. USD/EUR price ticks arrive 1-3 times a second. Testing
this formula with historical pricing data of the prior year indicated that for any two-week
period the fund would return 17% on average with a 9% standard deviation and 96% of

4
  We can think of several reasons for the high attrition. First, we only sent one email to subjects informing them to start
trading. Several subjects reported never seeing the email. Of those who did see it, the email was sent on the same day
that their 14-day trading period began, making it difficult if not impossible for them to plan for time to trade on the
platform. Several subjects asked to postpone due to scheduling conflicts but we did not accommodate them.


                                                            5
the two-week periods were positive. While our formula was arbitrary, we found it
necessary to base our fund price off a live price of a real asset to maintain naturalness.
        We described Fund A to traders as a “Leveraged USD Index fund” which was a
“contract designed to replicate the performance of being long on the US Dollar against
other major currencies.” Since the USD/EUR correlates very strongly with other major
currencies versus the USD, our claim was vague enough to be accurate and not deceptive.
We did not inform participants of the exact formula or the exact underlying instrument.
Given the description of the underlying mechanisms and the beta test nature of the
trading period, we were satisfied that subjects were not deceived by experiencing an
instrument that would only increase in value. In the end, Fund A returned an average of
236% for each period due to one week having extra high return. We were not concerned
with the high returns of the single period but it warrants caution with our results. 5
        To test directly the MLA hypothesis, we randomized subjects into two groups.
The “Frequent” group could view price changes every second whereas our “Infrequent”
group could view price changes only every four hours. Our platform included a line chart
of all prices up until the most recent price available. Traders in the Frequent group saw a
chart of prices up to the latest second, while traders in the Infrequent group only saw
prices up to the most recent four-hour block. The trader’s portfolio value and position
value would also change in relation to the viewed prices. The Frequent trader group
therefore saw see their portfolios fluctuating every second, whereas the Infrequent trader
group would see only changes every four hours, which aggregated the price movements
from the previous four hours. By design, this meant that while the two groups observed
the same price realizations, traders in the Frequent group saw more negative draws than
traders in the Infrequent group. This represents the crux of the experimental test of
MLA. To ensure participants were aware of the feedback frequency, we inserted a small
message that noted the frequency of updates for both groups.
        Before moving to the results, we should note that some authors have criticized
previous MLA experiments for varying both subjects’ ability to make decisions and their
information feedback simultaneously (Bellemare et al., 2005). Our approach allows us to
identify feedback alone as the driver of MLA. Further, unlike in some previous
experiments, and in line with how trading actually occurs in the field, our traders do not
need to make an active decision to hold units of the risky asset. If they own units, they
can continue to hold units by doing nothing, similar to normal stock investment.

3. Natural Field Experimental Results
        We follow the previous literature as closely as possible in our data analysis. First,
the lab experiments of Gneezy and Potters (1997) and Haigh and List (2005) have nine

5
  Most of the traders were derivatives traders of various types, so they are used to large swings in profit and loss when
trading large notional amounts. Traders could not use leverage on our platform. While traders could always view
prices outside of our platform, our pricing formula made our fund’s price movement markedly different enough from
any related instrument that we were extremely confident price signals came primarily from our platform.


                                                           6
rounds (blocks of three for the Infrequent group) and they measure the average amount
placed in the risky asset in three-round blocks in the nine rounds plus an average of all
rounds. Thaler et al. (1997) have 200 rounds (blocks of 40, 25, 5 for the Infrequent
groups), but they only examine the average amount bet for the last 40 periods (the last
five years or the last 20% of rounds), and one “final decision” (we do not have such a
final decision and therefore do not include here). The Frequent group’s average is the
average of the last 40 bets, the yearly is last five bets, and the 5-yearly is the last bet. The
simple reason that Thaler et al. (1997) wait until the end of the experiment to measure
performance is that the subjects do not know the expected return of the assets at the start
of the experiment. 6
         Our experiment is slightly different from Gneezy and Potters (1997), Haigh and
List (2005), and Thaler et al. (1997) because our traders can place investments in the
risky asset at any time. It does not necessarily make sense to constrain the traders of the
Infrequent group to only bet once in a four hour-period. We do, however, use the same
size of the time period to compare the groups. We choose the minute for reporting, but
there is no reason we could not choose another interval (our results are virtually the same
when we do). Thaler et al. (1997) note that their groups start with the same allocation
and it trends to what they eventually report, which is a large treatment difference. In fact,
it is difficult for their treatment subjects, or ours, to have meaningfully different
allocations from the control group early in the experiment since subjects do not know the
expected return—they must learn it over time. 7
         Whether we follow Thaler et al. (1997) or a different approach, we can measure
traders’ risk allocation by how many units of Fund A they hold over time – this can be
inferred from the trades made – or their overall portfolio invested in the risky asset. 8 If
we follow Thaler et al. (1997), each trader’s risk is the percentage of her assets held in
6
  Beshears et al. (2015) argue that subjects in Gneezy and Potters (1997), Gneezy et al. (2003), Bellemare et al. (2005),
and Haigh and List (2005) did not need to first experience disaggregated ongoing return disclosure before reducing
their portfolio risk. Instead, they reduced their demand for risky assets starting in the very first period of the
experiments, indicating that they prospectively anticipated the disutility from disaggregated ongoing return disclosure.
Thaler et al. (1997) do not tell the subjects the return distributions of the experimental assets; subjects need to play
numerous rounds in order to estimate these distributions themselves. The Thaler et al. (1997) experiment is by far most
like our experiment. Moreover, Thaler et al.’s (1997) subjects performed an investment activity similar to ours. Given
the similarities, we follow the reporting precedent set in Thaler et al. (1997).
7
  It may be worth noting that the Infrequent group saw roughly 14 prices on average, whereas the Frequent group saw
roughly 1555 prices on average. They could have seen a maximum of 864,000 prices.
8
  There are two primary ways for us to measure risk-taking: mean units of the risky asset held and mean percentage of
the portfolio allocated to the risky asset. Measuring units held is straightforward and does not change if a trader does
nothing. Percentage allocation changes as the asset price changes. When trader A owns 3000 units of Fund A at price
£105 and £600,000 in cash, the percentage of her portfolio devoted to risky assets (34.4%) is different than when she
owns the same number of units at price £115 (36.5%). Such is how the real world works—asset prices change and the
way investors rebalance determines the amount of risk they are in fact taking. Given the naturalness of reporting risk
this way, we follow Thaler et al. (1997) and report percent allocation. Specifically, we determine percent allocation to
the risky asset at time t by dividing the value of the risky asset held at t (units at t x the prevailing bid price at t) by the
total value of the portfolio at t (value of the risky asset + cash held). Reporting units held (as opposed to percent
allocation) does have value nonetheless. Since the Infrequent group in fact risked more units, we can be more confident
that they did not simply lose interest and forget to rebalance. We also have data on overall profit for the trader. That is
measured by subtracting the initial cash amount (£1 million) from the final portfolio value (final units held x the final
bid price + cash).


                                                               7
Fund A for the last 20% of the experimental time period. Such data are non-normally
distributed, as confirmed by a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. This is similar to Gneezy and
Potters (1997) and Haigh and List (2005), so we include results from Mann-Whitney non-
parametric tests, which have less power than parametric alternatives.

Experimental Results
        Our key comparative static result is an examination of the difference in the
allocations in the risky asset across the traders randomly placed in the frequent and
infrequent groups. Since MLA theory predicts that the average amount placed in the
risky asset in the Frequent Treatment should be less than the average amount placed in
the Infrequent Treatment, we begin by presenting the temporal nature of the investment
patterns. In Figure 1, we average the amount allocated at the individual level in each day
for the Frequent Treatment (n=73 traders, daily) and compare these data to observations
in the Infrequent Treatment (n=78 traders, daily).
        Interestingly, as the data in Figure 1 reveal, the MLA effect takes time to arise
since it requires traders to learn the expected value of the risky asset. This result is
consistent with some previous studies (especially Thaler et al., 1997). Table 1
complements Figure 1 by providing tests of differences across each of the ten days of the
experiment for the two groups, and statistically demonstrates that the differences come
about toward the last three days of the experimental period. Indeed, at the end of the
experimental time period, traders who receive infrequent information invest significantly
more in the risky asset than traders in the frequent information treatment—at a rate
roughly 40% higher. This difference is significant at the p < .05 level using a Mann–
Whitney test.
        As a robustness check, we examine data from matched pairs of traders (at
randomization we matched pairs to provide a second empirical test). In Table 2, we find
treatment effects that are slightly larger than those reported in Table 1. That is, if we
constrain ourselves to the matched pairs sample, for the last 20% of the experiment, we
find that the Mann-Whitney test rejects homogeneity at the p < .02 level, with the risky
asset investment being 105% higher in the infrequent group. From this matched pairs
group, we see significant differences in allocation into the risky asset by day 5.
        Another way to summarize the unconditional data is to aggregate investment
patterns over the last 20% of the experiment, as in Thaler et al. (1997). We provide this
summary in Figure 2, which shows the average investment behavior by group. Again, we
find evidence consistent with MLA: while traders invest on average 36.4% of their
portfolio in the risky asset in the Infrequent information treatment (n=73), they invest
only 27.4% of their portfolio into the risky asset in the Frequent information treatment
(n=78). Using a nonparametric Mann–Whitney statistical test, we find that the
allocations in the last 20% of the experiment are significantly different at conventional
levels.



                                            8
        To explore whether these trading patterns lead to differential rates of profits, we
also measure profits accrued across the two groups. At the end of the experiment, the
average trader in the Infrequent group accrued 615,715 units of profit, and the average
trader in the Frequent group accrued 401,634 units of profit—a difference of more than
50%. Using a non-parametric Mann–Whitney statistical test, we find that these profits
are significantly different at the p < 0.05 level. Interestingly, the treatment effect is
observed across the entire distribution of profits. For example, the 90th percentile earner
in the infrequent information group earns over 472,000 units, whereas the 90th percentile
earner in the frequent group earns less than 262,000 units. Comparable figures for the
lower end of the distribution are similar. For example, whereas the 25th percentile earner
in the frequent information group loses money, the similarly situated trader from the
infrequent information group turns a profit. If we restrict attention to matched pairs, we
find that the average trader in the Infrequent group accrues 883,160 units of profit and the
average trader in the Frequent groups accrues 488,663 units of profit, an 81% difference
that is significant at conventional levels. In sum, even though traders prefer more
frequent feedback, they are certainly worse off when they receive such information.
        Although the raw data provides evidence to support the MLA theory, we also
examine the interaction with professional trading experience in Tobit regression models.
Given our unique data on the trading experience of each of our traders, we can determine
how professional experience, as measured by years of market experience, affects the
MLA result. In Table 3, we regress the individual investment allocation in the last 10%
and 20% of the experimental interval treatment and interact treatment with trading
experience to explore if experience affects MLA.
        Specifications 1-4 in Table 3 are simple regression models of the percent of the
overall portfolio invested in the risky asset on treatment. These models deliver similar
results to what we observed in the raw data: empirical evidence is consistent with MLA,
whether we consider the entire sample (columns 1 and 2) or the matched pairs sample
(columns 3 and 4). Specifications 5-8 augment those simple models with a variable
measuring years of market experience and a term that interacted years of market
experience and treatment. Each of these specifications suggests two insights: i) those
traders with more years of market experience tend to invest less in the risky asset, though
the results are too noisy to reject the null hypothesis, and ii) years of professional
experience have little influence on the treatment effect. For example, empirical results
from specification 5 suggest that those traders with a greater number of years of
experience actually show slightly more evidence of MLA in treatment, consistent with
the results from Haigh and List’s (2005) lab experiment with Chicago Board Traders, but
this result is not significant at conventional levels.
        We also perform a similar empirical exercise using profits as the regressand.
Again, the results are similar to the raw data presented above on how treatment affects
profits. Furthermore, in terms of overall profits, years of market experience is not



                                             9
statistically significant at conventional levels. We do find, however, that experienced
traders’ profits are not as penalized by the frequent feedback as those inexperienced
traders, but this result is not significant at conventional levels. 9

4. Conclusion
         Whether, and to what extent, behavioural anomalies manifest themselves in
markets outside the lab remains of great import for social scientists. Recently, myopic
loss aversion has been advanced as a theoretical explanation for the equity premium
puzzle (Benartzi and Thaler, 1995). Coupled with the theory, several key laboratory
experiments find that both student and trader subjects in the lab behave according to the
theory (see, e.g., Thaler et al., 1997; Gneezy and Potters, 1997; Gneezy et al., 2003,
Haigh and List, 2005). In this study, we take the next step in the scientific discovery
process by using a natural field experiment to explore if behaviour of professional traders
in their natural environment conforms to theoretical predictions.
         Making use of professional FX traders who are test bedding a new trading
platform, we find that professional traders exhibit MLA in their natural domains.
Importantly, we can rule out that the lack of investment flexibility is a reason for the
MLA. In our experiment, traders freely trade at any point during the 10-day trading
window. At a fundamental level, since our traders are vital components of the price
discovery process, their investment patterns reveal that marginal traders behave in a
manner that is consistent with MLA. As a result, a necessary condition is satisfied—
MLA is evident amongst professional traders in asset markets.
         A few normative and positive implications naturally follow. First, our findings
suggest that expected utility theory may not be descriptive of professional traders'
strategies, and highlight that behavioral finance models are a useful alternative to
describing market equilibria. In this way, such models can help to explain other
prevalent puzzles in the literature, including excess volatility of asset prices, dividend
payout puzzles, and the apparent irrational discounting observed amongst investors. In a
positive sense, these findings have direct implications on the communication strategies
for the financial market, whereby revealing information on a less frequent basis likely
means that investors will be better able to meet their savings goals for retirement. In this
way, MLA presents a conundrum: individuals, investors, and traders all want timely
information and flexibility in making decisions, but in doing so harm themselves and
impact the workings of the financial sector.




9
    These results are available upon request.


                                                10
                                        References

Abdellaoui, Mohammad, Han Bleichrodt, Hilda Kammoun (2013). Do financial professionals
behave according to prospect theory? An experimental study. Theory and Decision, 74, 3, 411-
429.

Al-Ubaydli, Omar, John A. List (2012). On the generalizability of experimental results in
economics. In Frechette, G. and A. Schotter (eds) The Methods of Modern Experiments, Oxford
University Press.

Azeredo, Francisco (2014). The equity premium: a deeper puzzle. Annals of Finance, 10, 3,
347-373.

Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, Tano Santos (2001). Prospect Theory and Asset Prices.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1, 1–53.

Bellemare, C., Krause, M., Kröger, S., & Zhang, C. (2005). Myopic loss aversion: Information
feedback vs. investment flexibility. Economics Letters, 87, 3, 319-324.

Benartzi, Shlomo, Richard Thaler (1995). Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium
puzzle. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 73–92.

Benartzi, Shlomo, Richard Thaler (1999). Risk Aversion or Myopia? Choices in Repeatef
Gambles and Retirement Investments. Management Science, 45, 364-381.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian (2015). Does Aggregated
Returns Disclosure Increase Portfolio Risk-Taking? Yale University Working Paper.

Gneezy, Uri, Arie Kapteyn, Jan Potters (2003). Evaluation periods and asset prices in a market
experiment. Journal of Finance, 58, 821–838.

Gneezy, Uri, Jan Potters (1997). An experiment on risk taking and evaluation periods.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 631–645.

Haigh, Michael S., John A. List (2005). Do Professional Traders Exhibit Myopic Loss
Aversion? An Experimental Analysis. Journal of Finance, 60, 1, 523-534.

Harrison, Glenn W., John A. List. (2004). Field Experiments. Journal of Economic Literature,
42, 4, 1009 –55.

Kahneman, Daniel, Amos Tversky (1979). Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
Risk. Econometrica, XLVII, 263–91.




                                             11
Klinger, Doron, Boris Levit (2009). Evaluation periods and asset prices: Myopic loss aversion
at the financial marketplace. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 71, 361-371.

Kocherlakota, Narayana R. (1996). The Equity Premium: It’s Still a Puzzle. Journal of
Economic Literature, 34, 1, 42–71.

Levitt, Steven D., John A. List (2007). What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social
Preferences Reveal About the Real World? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 2, 153-174.

List, John A. (2003). Does market experience eliminate market anomalies? Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118, 41–71.

List, John A. (2004). Neoclassical theory versus prospect theory: Evidence from the
marketplace. Econometrica. 72, 615–625.

Mehra, Rajnish, Edward Prescott (1985). The equity premium: A puzzle. Journal of Monetary
Economics, 15, 145–161.

Mehra, Rajnish, Edward Prescott (2003). The Equity Premium Puzzle in Retrospect. In
Handbook of the Economics of Finance, ed. by G.M Constantinides, M. Harris and R. Stulz,
North Holland, Amsterdam, 2003.

Seru, Amit, Tyler Shumway, Noah Stoffman (2010).               Learning by Trading. Review of
Financial Studies, 23, 2, 705-739.

Shaton, Maya O. (2015). The Display of Information and Household Investment Behavior.
Working Paper.

Siegel, Jeremy (1998). Stocks for the Long Run. 2nd ed. New York: Irwin.

Sokol-Hessner, Peter, Ming Hsu, Nina G. Curley, Mauricio R. Delgado, Colin F. Camerer,
Elizabeth A. Phelps (2009). Thinking like a trader selectively reduces individuals' loss aversion.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106, 13, 5035-
5040.

Sutter, Matthias (2007). Are teams prone to myopic loss aversion? An experimental study on
individual versus team investment behavior. Economics Letters, 97, 128-132.

Thaler, Richard, Amos Tversky, Daniel Kahneman, Alan Schwartz (1997). The Effect of
Myopia and Loss Aversion on Risk Taking: An Experimental Test. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112, 2, 647-661.




                                               12
Figure 1: Mean risky asset investment over the duration of the experiment




Figure 2: Mean risky asset allocation in the last 20% of the experiment




                                         13
Table 1: Tests of difference between the two groups over time




Table 2: Tests of difference between the two groups over time – matched pairs only




                                        14
Table 3: Tobit Regression Results




                                    15
Appendix A: Instructions

Beta Overview

The Beta Test allows us to work out final details before taking our new fund platform to the
public. It takes several minutes a day for two weeks to complete, costs nothing to participate, and
we compensate you for your involvement (see below).

General Instructions

The beta platform allows you to buy and sell our index fund: the Normann Leveraged USD
Index. The contract is designed to replicate the performance of being long the US Dollar against
other major currencies. You can buy and sell units in the fund with a cash portfolio we provide.

Compensation

For each pound you earn on the platform, 0.002 pound will be added to your Normann Parlay
platform account. For example, if your final invested profit (final balance - starting balance) is
GBP 300,000, you will receive GBP 600 (300,000/500) in your Normann Parlay Platform
account or alternatively in your account at one of our partners. If you cannot accept the credit
due to compliance restrictions or any other reason, you may "gift" the credit to whomever you
wish (contact us for details).

To Begin

Navigate to the beta site. Create an account (only an email and password are required) and
connect your LinkedIn Account. After agreeing that you have read the instructions, we require
that you complete a short questionnaire. Once submitted, we will notify you within 30 days when
you can begin trading on the platform.




                                                16
Appendix B: Platform

Panel A: Infrequent treatment group




                                      17
Panel B: Frequent treatment group




                                    18
