                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              WOMEN WORKING LONGER:
                            FACTS AND SOME EXPLANATIONS

                                         Claudia Goldin
                                        Lawrence F. Katz

                                      Working Paper 22607
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22607


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




Presented at the NBER Women Working Longer Conference, May 21-22, 2016, Royal Sonesta
Hotel, Cambridge MA. We thank the University of Michigan, David Wise and the staff at the
NBER, especially Mohan Ramanujan, for enabling use of the restricted access version of the
HRS. We thank our research assistants who labored over the CPS, HRS and the Social Security
earnings files: Amira Abulafi, Natalia Emanuel, Celena (Yuezhou) Huo and Jonathan Roth. We
thank our discussant Katharine Abraham and others at the conference for providing valuable
comments and Maria Fitzpatrick for providing code for the “ever a teacher” variable. We
gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation’s Working
Longer program under grant no. 2013-6-16, “Women Working Longer.” The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Women Working Longer: Facts and Some Explanations
Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 22607
September 2016
JEL No. J21,J22,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

American women are working more, through their sixties and even into their seventies. Their
increased participation at older ages started in the late 1980s before the turnaround in older men’s
labor force participation and the economic downturns of the 2000s. The higher labor force
participation of older women consists disproportionately of those working at full-time jobs.
Increased labor force participation of women in their older ages is part of the general increase in
cohort labor force participation. Cohort effects, in turn, are mainly a function of educational
advances and greater prior work experience. But labor force participation rates of the most recent
cohorts in their forties are less than those for previous cohorts. It would appear that employment
at older ages could stagnate or even decrease. But several other factors will be operating in an
opposing direction leading us to conclude that women are likely to continue to work even longer.


Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu

Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu
       Women have been working longer for a long time in U.S. history. Their labor market
participation increased decade after decade during the twentieth century, as more women
were drawn into the labor force. But that is an old story. The new story is that a large
fraction of women are working a lot longer into their sixties and even their seventies. Their
increased participation at older ages started in the late 1980s before the turnaround in
older men’s labor force participation and before the economic downturns of the 2000s. 1

       Women’s increased participation beyond their fifties is a change of real
consequence. Rather than being an increase in marginal part-time workers, the higher
labor force participation of older women consists disproportionately of those working at
full-time jobs. Women are remaining on their jobs as they age rather than scaling down or
leaving for positions with shorter hours and fewer days. 2

       Why have women as a group increased their participation at older ages? Increased
labor force participation of women in their older ages, we will emphasize, is part of the
general increase in cohort labor force participation rates. Successive cohorts, for various
reasons, increased their participation at all ages, resulting in an upward shift of
participation by birth cohort. As more women graduated from college, held jobs with
greater advancement potential, enjoyed their jobs more, were not currently married or
were married to men who also extended employment into their senior years, more
remained active in the labor force into their sixties and beyond.

       Rising cohort effects in labor force participation across successive birth cohorts of
U.S. women are clearly visible in the raw data from the Current Population Survey (CPS)
and the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS). But these cohort effects are considerably
dampened when education is considered. Higher participation at all ages has been due to
greater levels of education, particularly college graduation. The increase in cohort effects

1 According to OECD data, most nations have had increased labor force participation for women in
their sixties. Among those 65-69 years old, the U.S and Japan lead in participation with Canada, the
U.K. and Sweden at lower levels and Germany and France at much lower levels. See OECD.STAT,
LFS by Sex and Age – Indicators, http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=LFS_SEXAGE_I_R#
2 Maestas (2010) discusses the emergence of nontraditional retirement paths including the

increasing role for planned transitions out of retirement and the greater fraction of those who state
they are retired but who have positive and often substantial hours of work.
                                             8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -1-
in labor force participation for women in their late fifties and early sixties is also lessened
by including work experience at younger ages and by adding information on the main prior
occupation. We find some (negative) impact on the labor force participation at older ages
of college graduate from having been a teacher and discuss why that is the case. Most
important is that we find that those who “enjoyed” their job earlier in life remained
employed for much longer later in life independent of their earnings on that job.

       Since many of the cohorts we consider were those that experienced greater divorce,
current marital status is also related to employment at older ages. Since couples often
coordinate their work and leisure, current employment of the spouse is an additional
correlate of whether a woman is working longer.

       Most of the factors just mentioned, particularly educational attainment and earlier
employment continuity, were determined prior to the employment decision under
question. The addition of these factors almost nullifies the cohort effects, except in one
important case. For the most recent cohorts of college graduate women we can study to
their sixties (those born from 1949 to 1955), the predetermined, observable factors do not
eliminate the cohort effect. Something else is keeping them in the labor force at older ages.

       Labor force participation rates of women in their early sixties can be observed today
for cohorts born up to the mid-1950s. Participation rates of forty- and fifty-year old
women born in the late 1950s and early 1960s have not increased relative to those of prior
cohorts and have even decreased for some. Lifecycle cohort labor force functions are no
longer the inverted U-shaped or humped functions they once were. They have become flat
lines, similar to those of men. These flat lines, moreover, have intersected (sort of pierced)
the humped functions of prior cohorts, signaling a decrease in participation at mid-age for
recent cohorts. What does this mean for the future employment of older women? 3




3Hurd and Rohwedder (2014) use questions in the HRS on subjective probabilities of employment
to predict future labor force participation rates. See also Maestas and Zissimopoulos (2010) for
participation forecasts at older ages to 2030 and for an excellent summary of the issues.
                                           8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -2-
       Labor force participation rates of the most recent cohorts in their middle age are
less than they have been for previous cohorts. In that sense, it would appear that
employment at older ages could stagnate or even decrease if employment of women at
older ages is a function of their employment histories in mid-age. But several other factors
will operate in an opposing direction. One of the reasons for the dip in women’s
participation in their late thirties and early forties is that women in these cohorts have had
their children later. Therefore, the dip was also accompanied by an increase in their
participation in their twenties relative to previous cohorts.

       We find in our exploration of the correlates of participation that college graduate
women currently in their early sixties have positive cohort effects that remain substantial
even after controlling for their earlier lifecycle participation rates. Today’s younger women
will likely retire later than one would have predicted based on their educational attainment
and lifecycle participation rates. The finding is particularly noteworthy since female
college graduation rates are continuing to increase by birth cohort. 4



A.     Labor Force Participation Rates
       1.      By Age, Sex and Education Level

       The central facts concerning the labor force participation of women by age are
shown in Figure 1, which uses the March CPS samples and gives contemporaneous labor
force participation rates during the survey reference week for women by five-year age
groups since 1962. Throughout almost the entire period shown, participation rates have
increased for women in the 35 to 54 year group. But these rates were fairly flat for women
55 years and older until the 1980s, when an almost continuous increase ensued, even for
the 70 to 74 year old group.

       Schooling attainment will be of importance in understanding the labor force trends,
and therefore the data are also given, in Figure 2, for college graduate women. The series is

4 The college graduation rate (the share with a bachelor’s degree) for women aged 25 to 29 years
increased from 30 percent in 2000 (for the 1971 to 1975 birth cohorts) to 39 percent in 2015 (for
the 1986 to 1990 birth cohorts). See U.S. Department of Education (2015), table 104.20.
                                           8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -3-
restricted to the currently married because a large fraction of the earlier cohorts of college
graduate women—those born from the 1890s to the 1910s—never married or married
late, and a large fraction who married never had children (Goldin 1997). These women, in
consequence, had higher labor force participation rates relative to others in their cohort.
Considering only the group who were currently married dampens the selection problem
but does not eliminate it because many who eventually married had no children.
Participation rates for college graduate women, therefore, decline somewhat over time as
their marriage and child bearing rates become more similar to their cohort’s.

       If one ignores cohorts born before around 1920, the series for all women and that
for college graduate women 55 or older are first relatively constant and then increase over
time, particularly after the mid- to late-1980s. 5 The percentage point increase during the
past 25 years, shown in Table 1, is not much different between the aggregate group of
women and the college graduates. But because college graduate women have had
considerably higher participation rates than lesser-educated women, the shift toward
college has increased participation rates for older women and the growth of women’s
employment at older ages.

       Also clear in Table 1 is that the increased participation of older women exceeds that
of older men from 1988 to 2013, both absolutely and relative to the base levels. Among 60
to 64 year old women, for example, participation increased by 17 percentage points on a
base of 34 percent but for males the increase is just 6 percentage points on a base of 55
percent. The percentage point increase for 65 to 69 year olds males and females is similar
in absolute magnitude, but the initial base for women is far lower (15 versus 26 percent).

       The relative increase for older women has meant that the gender gap in
participation at older ages has greatly decreased, as can be seen in Figure 3. The gender
gap in participation has, of course, decreased more generally. But the absolute percentage
point difference at some of the older ages is now smaller than for the younger age groups.
For 60 to 64 year olds, for example, the difference in participation rates between men and

5For the 60 to 64 year old group, participation rates after around 1980 refer to individuals born
after about 1920.
                                            8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -4-
women was about 50 percentage points in 1962. In 2013 the difference was just 9
percentage points, when that for males and females in their thirties to mid-forties was
around 16 percentage points.

       Men and women are doing more of the same things throughout their lives and this is
even truer at older ages. But is that also true within couples? The answer is that, for
women 59 to 63 years old and presently married, far more of these couples are both
currently working rather than both being retired. 6 In addition, in 2014 about as many of
these couples had a wife who was working and a husband who was not than vice versa.
More women are working into their sixties and more are coupled with men who are also
working. But there are also substantial numbers of women who are working into their
sixties even though their husbands are retired. We return to the issue of joint employment
and leisure below.


       2.     Full-time versus Part-time Employment of Women at Older Ages

       Not only has the labor force participation rate for older women increased the
fraction of those in the labor force working full-time and full-year has also greatly
expanded. The expansion of full-time employment among participants has been especially
evident for the 65 years and older group.

       As seen in Figure 4, the fraction of 65 to 69 year old women in the labor force who
worked full-time and full-year increased from around 30 to almost 50 percent, with much
of the increase occurring after 2000. 7 The fraction of the 70 to 74 year old labor force
participants working full-time and full-year increased from 20 to almost 40 percent.
Although the timing could indicate the impact of changes in the Social Security earnings
test, the increase began before 2000 for both younger and older age groups of women. 8



6 This statement is true for HRS couples in which the wife is between 59 and 63 years old. For
couples in which the woman is 62 or 63 years, the statement holds beginning in 2008.
7 The pre-1970 data also show somewhat high fractions working full time among participants and it

is not clear why there was a subsequent decrease.
8 The retirement earnings test was changed in 2000 to apply only to individuals below normal

retirement age (NRA). The NRA had been 65 but has been gradually increased to 67 years for those
                                           8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -5-
       3.      Cohort Trends

       Increased employment among older women would appear to be related to their
increased participation earlier in their lives. The conclusion can be deduced from the fact
that all cohorts in Figure 5.A that have had increased participation in their sixties, relative
to earlier cohorts, also had increased participation relative to the same cohorts when they
were younger. That is, the cohorts that have begun to “work longer” have had higher
participation rates throughout their lifecycles than did previous cohorts.

       Figure 5 begins with the cohort born in 1929, but the pattern just mentioned is
evident as well for some of the earlier birth cohorts not shown. However cohorts born in
the early 1920s show no discernible increase in participation among women in their sixties
despite modest increases earlier in their lives. 9 The data for college graduates given in
Figure 5.B reveal similar findings but participation levels are higher.

       As will be emphasized later, regressions of the labor force rate at older ages on birth
cohort dummies indicate that cohort effects are greatly muted by the addition of various
predetermined factors such as education, earlier employment continuity, and women’s past
occupations. That is, cohort differences in labor force participation later in life are largely,
but not entirely, a function of earlier changes in human capital accumulation. These human
capital advances occurred to a great extent because women perceived that their
investments would pay off in the labor market and that their employment would be higher
and more continuous than it was for previous cohorts.

       We noted before that the typical inverted U-shaped function tracing out a cohort’s
lifecycle labor force participation became more of a flat line after the mid-1950s birth
cohorts. Participation rates around age 25 to the early 30s greatly increased from the




born after 1959. Earnings taxed above the exempt amounts are repaid after NRA. From 1975 to
1982 the upper age was 71 and it was decreased to 69 until 2000. See Gelber, Jones and Sacks
(2016) for further details about the retirement earnings test, its history, and its impact.
9 These general trends are also apparent in Figure 1. For example, the participation line for those

65 to 69 years begins to increase around 1987, therefore for women born in the early 1920s.
                                             8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -6-
1930s to the 1950s birth cohorts because women with infants had much higher labor force
participation and also because the birth rate decreased.

       We also noted that the new flatter cohort lifecycle functions have begun to cross
each other. This crossing creates an interest “twist” in participation for the most recent
cohorts in Figures 5.A and more so for college graduate women in 5.B. The “twist” is the
cohort analog of the oft-mentioned decrease in the participation of women in their thirties
and forties, the idea that women are somehow “opting out” of the labor force. 10

       Participation rates for women in their thirties and forties have in recent years
leveled off and have even decreased relative to slightly older cohorts. One clear way to see
the change is to observe that slicing the cohort graphs at around ages 30 and 50 yields the
usual cohort progression. Younger cohorts have higher participation rates than older
cohorts. But slicing the cohort graphs between those ages, say at age 40, does not yield
higher rates for the younger recent cohorts, such as those born from 1959 to 1973. These
lines appear to have twisted.

       Does this mean that participation rates for these women in their fifties, sixties and
beyond will also be lower? Their increased education and labor force participation in their
younger years would argue the opposite. Why they have decreased participation is still an
on-going research question, although some of the answers concern the delay of births, on
the one hand, and an absence of mandated leave policy of more than 12 weeks, on the
other. The decrease in participation is not large, but the disruption of the increasing trend
is clear and could argue for a break in the increase of women’s working longer. 11




10 See Goldin and Mitchell (forthcoming) for a detailed discussion of the “new lifecycle of women’s
employment.”
11 Hurd and Rohwedder (2014) note that subjective probabilities of future work at ages 62 and 65

are reliable predictors of actual employment and that current HRS respondents in their early fifties
have subjective probabilities of future work that exceed the actual participation rates of individuals
in their sixties. Lusardi and Mitchell (2016) also find using the HRS that the share of women in
their early 50s who anticipate working at age 65 continues to rise in recent cohorts even as
women’s labor force participation rates in their early 50s has flattened across cohorts. These
findings indicate a further increase in the participation rates of older women.
                                             8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -7-
       The bottom line for cohort change is that increased participation at older ages has
occurred for cohorts that increased their attachment to the labor force throughout their
lives. The upshot is that the more one has been attached to the labor force, the longer one
works. We now turn to using longitudinal information from the HRS matched to Social
Security earnings records to understand the role of cohort effects.

       Because we rely on the CPS for the general trends and the HRS for analysis, we have
also provided information showing how well the HRS tracks the general trends in the CPS
for these cohorts and age groups. Appendix tables and figures show a general similarity in
participation rates (Figure A1), marital status (Table A2), education (Table A3) and
number of children (Figure A2) between the two data sets using the HRS person weights.
Labor force participation rates in the HRS and in the CPS are almost identical for women in
their fifties and sixties but the HRS has higher participation rates than the CPS for women
in their seventies. 12 Another difference is that the HRS has fewer women who state they
never had a birth.



B.     Exploring the Role of Cohort Effects Using the HRS
       Cohorts born later have higher labor force participation rates at older ages than do
those born earlier. We explore whether these cohort effects are primarily due to changes
in factors determined largely prior to the retirement option. These variables can include
educational attainment, number and ages of children and earlier lifecycle labor force
participation. We will also consider the degree to which the individual had relatively high
earnings when employed, which we term the “career” condition. These largely
predetermined characteristics will be measured in our empirical work prior to around age
55 whereas the retirement option is considered from ages 59 to 63.

       The retirement decision may instead be primarily determined by factors that are
contemporaneous, such as a set of shocks or transitory factors. These factors may have
served to increase participation at older years in the post-1980s period and may include

12The reason for these differences is not yet clear since each survey is supposed to cover those in
nursing homes and similar care units.
                                             8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -8-
marital status change, fluctuations in the value real estate or financial assets, pension
losses, reductions in the value of Social Security payments, and deteriorating health status.

       The evidence points to a large impact of changes in the predetermined factors.
Educational differences across cohorts reduce cohort differences in labor force
participation from ages 59 to 63 by about a half. Lifecycle labor force participation prior to
age 54 produces an overshooting of the cohort effects, meaning that the cohort effects are
over explained. Our measure of serious career earnings does not perform better than the
simpler measure of life cycle participation, and generally performs worse.

       Once these variables are considered, adding information on the number and birth
years of children has no impact. Children serve to reduce participation in the 25 to 44 year
range but have no separate effect in later life. 13 The many contemporaneous factors
mentioned are related to the variance within cohorts but do not do much to explain
changes across cohorts.

       The one interesting anomaly concerns the most recent of the cohorts of college
graduate women that can be followed to their sixties. Those born from 1949 to 1951 have
higher participation at ages 59 to 63 even given measures of their lifecycle participation
prior to age 54 and their educational attainment. That is, the cohort effect for the 1949 to
1951 group remains significant even including the various predetermined factors, in
particular lifecycle participation.

       The finding that later cohorts have higher participation given their earlier lifecycle
participation may be useful in forecasting what more recent cohorts will be doing when
they reach their sixties. Recall that labor force participation rates across the lifecycle have
become fairly flat from ages 25 to 45 and that the most recent cohorts of women do not
always have higher participation relative to previous cohorts by age. In fact, the most
recent data indicate a backtracking of younger cohorts of women in their forties. That is,


13Lumsdaine and Vermeer (2015) find that a grandchild’s arrival increases the hazard of a woman’s
retirement independent of her opportunity cost. It is not clear that the partial or total grandchild
effect has decreased with time, thus that it can help to explain the working longer phenomenon.
                                            8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -9-
for the college graduate group, as well as for others, participation rates have not increased
relative to prior cohorts and have even decreased at various ages.

       The finding about those born between 1949 and 1951 may indicate that
participation rates for even younger cohorts may be higher still in their sixties and
seventies than prior generations at least for college educated women.

       To explore the role of cohort and predetermined variables, data from the Health and
Retirement Study (HRS) are used together with information on the earnings history of the
respondents from Social Security earnings data and W-2 forms (after 1980). 14 Each of the
respondents to the HRS, beginning with the first cohorts in 1992, was asked whether her
Social Security earnings history could be linked. If the individual agreed to the linkage,
then all past records were linked. 15 If the individual did not, then the individual was asked
again in the next biennial survey. Therefore, the older cohorts had more chances to agree
to a linkage than the younger cohorts and the linkage rates are higher in consequence.

       Across all cohorts about 80 percent of respondents agreed to the linkage with Social
Security (and W-2) records. For birth cohorts from 1931 to 1945 the response rate ranges
from 85 to 90 percent; the range is 71 to 79 percent for birth cohorts from 1946 to 1951.
(Linkage rates are given in Appendix Table A1 by birth cohort.) When we use information
on lifecycle labor force participation, we must restrict the sample to individuals who gave
permission to have their Social Security earnings (and W-2 forms) linked. Otherwise the
full HRS sample is used, given age and other restrictions that may apply.

       We mainly explore labor force participation rates of women 59 to 63 years old and
always include three-year birth cohort dummies. We begin in Table 2, cols. (1) to (5) by

14 The W-2 data are also provided for 1977-79 but are incomplete in the HRS-SSA linked data. We
begin the W-2 data with 1980.
15 A curious aspect of the HRS is that until 2006 individuals were asked every year if they would

continue the linkage to the Social Security earnings data. If at any point they decided not to, the
prior data were allowed but the contemporaneous and future data were not. For most HRS
respondents, the break in the linkage will not matter since the HRS itself collected information on
labor supply and earnings. But the break will matter for a spouse who entered the HRS at a
younger age and who was folded when the individual’s birth cohort relevant HRS cohort was added.
See Appendix, especially the section Social Security Earnings Record Linkage in the HRS, for details.
                                           8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -10-
including characteristics largely determined prior to age 55, such as educational
attainment and lifecycle participation during various intervals. 16 We add in col. (6) current
marital status and a summary measure of current health status.

        Table 3 divides the group into two education levels, college graduates and those
who did not graduate college. 17 Cols. (1) to (4) of Table 3 include the predetermined
characteristics and cols. (5) and (6) add current marital status and health status. Table 4
includes only college graduate women. In addition to the previous variables, we add
information on whether the individual was ever a teacher. A large fraction of college
graduate women in the earlier cohorts were teachers for much of their working lifetimes
and teachers often had defined benefit pensions.

        The use of the HRS linked to the Social Security earnings records (called the “linked”
sample) reduces the number of observations, less so for the earlier than for the more
recent cohorts as previously mentioned. When we use the data with Social Security
earnings we adjust the HRS person weights for selection into the linked sample. The
adjustment multiplied the person weight by the inverse of the predicted linkage rate, based
on individual predetermined characteristics at the time of their birth cohort’s entry into the
HRS. 18 In Tables 2 and 4 we explore the sensitivity of the results to using the full HRS
sample and the linked sample. Because the HRS is a longitudinal data set, many of the
respondents are in the sample more than once between the ages of 59 and 63 and we
cluster the standard errors at the individual level. We also include dummy variables for the
single-year ages.

        In Table 2, col. (1) the baseline regression is provided for the full sample and col. (2)
gives the baseline for the smaller linked sample. The variables of interest are those



16 The addition of variables for children ever born adds no explanatory power for older women’s
labor force participation after including controls for earlier life cycle participation. Thus, we do not
report specifications adding controls for children.
17 Similar regressions to those in Table 3 for women 56 to 58 years old are in Appendix Table A5.
18 Linkage rates are predicted using a logit model for whether the woman allowed the linkage on

HRS cohort wave dummies and HRS measures of employment history, race, marital status,
education and financial wealth at HRS cohort entry.
                                             8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -11-
showing the effect of birth cohort in three-year bins from 1931 to 1951 (where 1931-33 is
the omitted cohort group). 19

          The impacts of birth cohort on labor force participation from ages 59 to 63 are
highly similar between the two samples and both demonstrate the increase in participation
at older ages for birth cohorts after 1943 and especially after 1949. The most recent cohort
that can be analyzed for the 59 to 63 year old group, born from 1949-51, has a participation
rate that is around 10 percentage points higher for the full sample and 9 percentage points
higher for the linked sample than that for cohorts born in the 1930s. The only additional
covariates included in the first two columns are single year of age and race dummies.

          Educational attainment is added in col. (3) and lifecycle participation between ages
35 and 44 in included in col. (4). The lifecycle labor force variables give the fraction of
years in the interval that the woman was in the labor force. These have been computed
mainly from the restricted-access Social Security earnings data (since 1951) and W-2 forms
(when available). Additional information is used from the HRS to add labor force data for
individuals exempt from Social Security taxes, in particular because they were government
employees such as teachers. The HRS provides information concerning two periods prior
to the start of the HRS interviews in which the respondent was a government employee.
When HRS survey responses are available regarding participation, they are used in place of
Social Security earnings and W-2 data. (For more details, see Appendix: Construction of
Variables.) Various life cycle employment variables were created for each of the three
decades from age 25 to 54 and for the entire period.

          The addition of educational attainment eliminates the economic and statistical
significance of the cohort coefficients for all but the most recent of the birth cohorts.
Although only the linked sample coefficients are given, those for the full sample change in
the same manner. The addition of the lifecycle participation variable in col. (4) further
reduces the coefficient for the most recent of the birth cohorts to a slightly negative value.




19   The last year of the HRS available is 2012. The 1952-54 cohort is incomplete and thus is omitted.
                                             8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -12-
It also produces some modest reduction of the impact of educational attainment since the
more educated have greater continuity in employment.

       Instead of a variable that measures lifecycle participation, one that measures the
degree to which a woman reaches some career level may be even more important in
determining future participation. Since women with greater prior employment when first
beginning their careers have greater attachment to the labor force later in the lives, those
with higher earnings during their employment periods should have even greater
attachment.

       To test whether employment per se or years of better earning performance matter
we create a variable giving the fraction of an age interval that a “career condition” was met.
The condition used here is achieving an earnings level that is some fraction (50 percent in
this case) of the median earnings of a full-time, year-round male worker for the ten-year
age group considered during the relevant period. 20 That is, the career condition for a
woman when she was in an age group is judged relative to the earnings of the median male
in the same age group during the identical time period. Women who were never in the
labor force in the age interval get zero, as do those who never earned more than the
condition but were in the labor force. We find that the variable giving the career condition,
in col. (5), is related to later employment but it is less strongly related than the simpler
variable giving the fraction of the interval a woman was employed.

       Col. (6) augments the col. (4) specification by adding two contemporaneous
variables: current marital status and current health status. The birth cohort coefficients
were already extinguished with controls for education and earlier lifecycle participation,
and the added contemporaneous variables have little further impact on the cohort effects.
The addition of health status reduces the impact of education and, in most instances,


20Earnings of the median male, in the same age group and year, are used. These data are available
in published documents (U.S. Census Bureau P-60 Reports) prior to the micro-data for the CPS,
which begins in 1962. The calculation of all the career conditions considered requires data from
1956 (1931 + 25 years). A fraction of the male median is used because the median is too high a bar
for employed women during much of the period considered. Women in the exempt occupations are
assumed to exceed the bar. See Appendix: Health and Retirement Survey: Construction of Variables.
                                          8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -13-
almost halves the schooling level coefficients in col. (4). The more highly educated are also
the healthiest or, at least, they consider themselves to be so. The coefficient on earlier
lifecycle participation remains substantial and is only slightly reduced.

       It is useful to explore the impact of current marital status even if it does little to
change the birth cohort coefficients. Being currently married decreases participation for
older women but the effect is reduced if the woman’s spouse is employed and the total
impact is about equal to that of the omitted group (never married) and to widowed
women. 21 Divorced women have participation rates about 8 percentage points higher than
the base group of never married women. 22

       Disaggregating by education, as in Table 3, reveals substantial differences between
the higher (college graduate) and lower (below a college graduate) educated groups in the
correlates of their later employment. Note that within the college graduate group, dummy
variables are added for degrees above the bachelors (MA and the various graduate and
professional degrees) and, within the non-college group, dummy variables are added for
high school diploma and having some college.

       The regressions in cols. (1) and (2) of Table 3 include only cohort effects (plus age,
race and education dummies). Cohort effects for college graduates (relative to the 1931-33
cohorts) are modest but the most recent of the cohorts has a participation rate about 12.6
percentage points higher. For the group that did not graduate from college, cohort effects
are fairly flat. Because there was upgrading within the group, as more attended some
college, participation rates for the entire group did increase, even though within each of the
below college groups there was no birth cohort trend.

       In cols. (3) and (4) we add lifecycle participation variables including whether the
woman was never in the labor force during the interval. The addition of the lifecycle
measures has little impact on the cohort effect for the college graduate women born most


21We discuss, below, changes in the joint employment and retirement of couples.
22Note that the mean labor force participation rate for a woman age 59, who is other race and in the
1931-33 birth cohort is given by the constant term in col. (2).
                                           8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -14-
recently. Earlier labor force participation matters more for the less educated group than
for the college educated. For college graduates what matters most is whether the women
did not work at all in the interval, even though that group is fairly small. The much higher
labor force participation for the 1949-51 cohort of college graduate women remains
unexplained even with controls for current marital and health status, as seen in col. (6).

       Lastly, Table 4 looks in more depth at college graduates in part because their
participation rates are the highest at all ages, particularly among those in their sixties. In
addition, the fraction of older women who are college graduates has greatly expanded and
will continue to do so given the increase of college graduates at younger ages. Both the
increase of college graduation for future cohorts and their higher participation at older
ages would imply an increase in the future employment of older women.

       Table 4 includes the predetermined (lifecycle participation and education) and
contemporaneous (marital and health status) variables. In addition, we include whether
the woman was ever employed as a teacher.

       Similar to the findings for college graduate women in Table 3, cohort effects are
large for the latest of those shown. The coefficient remains large and statistically
significant despite the inclusion of current marital status and lifecycle participation
variables. Only in col. (5), with the inclusion of the fraction of years from 25 to 54 that the
woman was in the labor force does the coefficient greatly decline.

       Teaching was the single most important occupation for college graduate women
among many of HRS cohorts. Around 45 percent of college graduate women in the cohorts
born from 1931 to 1941 were teachers at some point in their working lives, as seen in
Figure 6. A much smaller fraction of women (around 30 percent) for the later cohorts
considered here, 1945 to 1951, were teachers. And an even smaller fraction (around 20
percent) were teachers in the late 1950s birth cohort, a group still too young to be
observed in their sixties.

       Those who were ever a teacher had participation rates when they were 59 to 63


                                         8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -15-
years old that were about 5 percentage points lower than other college graduate women.
The impact of ever being a teacher increases when controlling for lifecycle participation,
implying that teachers work more than others earlier in their lives but are less likely to
work than others later in their lives. Their earlier work would have made one think they
would be more likely to work later but they are, in fact, less likely. Part of the reason why
teachers have lower employment as the age is due to their defined benefit pensions, and
thus their long-term plans to retire after a fixed period, but other possibilities include
“burnout” on the job and the lack of advancement. 23

       The Table 4 analysis reinforces the findings from Table 3 that the cohort effect for
the most recent birth group is not extinguished by the other covariates even when the
lifecycle participation rate variable is included, as in cols. (3), (4) and (5). The coefficient
for the 1949-51 birth cohort is around 10 to 12 percentage points, a bit smaller than
without the “ever a teacher” variable but still large and significant.

       Another important finding for forecasting women’s future participation at older
ages is that employment in the 45 to 54 year old range is the best predictor of whether an
individual will remain employed into her early sixties. Therefore, even though
participation rates have “twisted,” as noted in the discussion of Figure 5, the fact that
participation is still higher for the most recent cohorts when they have reached their fifties
suggests that the cohorts of college graduate women of today will remain in the labor force
to a greater extent through their sixties and seventies than their predecessors. The same
does not appear true for the non-college graduate group.

       We have also run the same regressions as in Tables 2, 3, and 4 where the outcome is
working full-time, rather than just being in the labor force. The results (given in Appendix
Table A4 for the Table 3 comparison) for full-time work, for both college graduates and
those below college graduation level, reveal similar cohort trends. 24 Thus, the cross-cohort


23 Fitzpatrick (2016) explores reasons for the decrease in employment at older ages among those

who were ever a teacher.
24 We also run the same labor force regressions as in Tables 2, 3, and 4 for women 56 to 58 years

old and give the Table 3 results in Appendix Table A5. Using women 56 to 58 years old allows us to
                                          8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -16-
increases in labor force participation for older women are substantially driven by increases
in full-time work. These findings are consistent with those from the CPS, given in Figure 4,
showing an increase in the fraction of female labor force participants employed full time
among those 55 to 74 years old.

       What about the role of job enjoyment? The HRS allows us to explore that question
for women 59 to 63 year old for whom information exists on their attitude towards their
job six years previously. Because of the restriction on having a job six years ago, we have to
omit the earlier birth cohorts and include those born from 1937 to 1951. We ask how a
woman’s attitude to her job six years earlier impacts her contemporaneous employment.
The attitude variable inquired in all years except 1992 whether an employed person
enjoyed her job a lot or not at all in four gradations of strength.

       We present the analysis in several ways. In Table 5 cols. (1) to (5) we include all
who were employed six years before and in col. (6) we add those not employed six years
previously and give them a separate dummy for the job attitude response. Cols. (1), (2), (4)
and (6) contain the basic variables and cols. (3) and (5) add the lifecycle labor force
variable, marital status, spousal work and health status.

       Col. (1) provides baseline results excluding the attitude variable but using the same
sample limited to those employed six years ago. Cols. (4) and (5) explore the
characteristics of the job held six years prior by adding information on the hours and
earnings from that job.

       Those who expressed greater enjoyment on their jobs six years before have a
considerably higher probability of being in the labor force from 59 to 63 years old. 25 These
results hold no matter what the specification. The differences, moreover, are large. Even
between those who agree and disagree with the statement, the difference is 10 percentage


include another birth cohort, 1952-54. Similar to the Table 3 results, college graduate women in
cohorts born after 1948 show larger cohort effects than for earlier cohorts. Including the full set of
pre-existing characteristics lowers the cohort effect estimates for the more recent cohorts at age 56
to 58 somewhat more than for the older group of women in Table 3.
25 We have also done the same regressions for work eight years previously with similar results.


                                            8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -17-
points (on a base of around 70). The difference between those who strongly disagree and
those who agree or strongly agree is around 20 to 22 percentage points. The difference
between those who agree and those who strongly agree is around 2 percentage points. 26

       The addition of the job attitude question results in few changes in the other
coefficients. Most important is that the impact of education is about the same, as can be
seen by comparing the coefficients for education in cols. (1) and (2). Therefore, the impact
of job enjoyment adds to the influence on working longer of the type of jobs that more
highly educated have. Self-reported job enjoyment is not the mediating factor for why
education matters in women’s working longer.

       The results also do not materially change with the addition of various covariates
including current health and marital status, and the fraction of years the woman worked
from age 35 to 44. Also of great interest is that the additions of the hours and earnings in
the job six year prior have little impact on the attitudinal coefficients. Those who worked
longer hours in the past are more likely to work now and that is in addition to their
enjoyment on that job.

       The summary finding is that older women have had substantial increases in labor
force participation. The inclusion of covariates, such as education and lifecycle
participation, reduces the pattern of rising cohort effects. But for the college graduate
group, the labor force increase for the most recent cohorts now in their sixties is not
reduced by the inclusion of the additional covariates. The most recent cohorts with less
than college completion, however, have had smaller increases and these do get
extinguished with the expanded set of predetermined group of covariates (detailed
education attainment and earlier labor force participation), although the increase in
education within the non-college graduate group served to increase participation rates.

       Another finding of note is that the enjoyment women get from their job six years

26 The fraction agreeing with the statement about enjoying a current job is large, around 60 percent.

An additional 25 to 30 percent greatly agreed with the statement. Only about 10 to 15 percent did
not agree with the statement and college graduate women had a somewhat larger fraction who
greatly agreed with the statement.
                                           8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -18-
earlier has a strong influence on their later employment. As jobs become more enjoyable
and less onerous and as various positions become part of one’s identity, women work
longer.



C.        Lifecycle Labor Force Participation
          Given the importance of lifecycle labor force participation for later work, we now
explore how lifetime employment changed across cohorts born from 1931 to 1954. 27 We
divide lifetime employment into five quintiles—from 0 to 20 percent of the years under
consideration to 80 to 100 percent. Figure 7, part A, shows the percentage in the labor
force in the five quintiles covering age from 25 to 54 years for all women. Part B gives
these figures for the group in the youngest ten-year grouping, 25 to 34 years old. Figure 8
provides the same data for the earliest of the birth cohorts shown (born 1931 to 1938) and
for the most recent of the birth cohorts (born 1948 to 1954).

          The fraction of women in the labor force 80 to 100 percent of the time when they
were 25 to 54 years old expanded from 20 percent to more than 50 percent across these
cohorts (see Figure 7, part A). The flip side is the sharp decrease of those in the labor force
fewer than 20 percent of the 30 year period shown. The middle three groups change little.

          More extreme changes occurred for women in the 25 to 34 year old group (see
Figure 7, part B) than for the other ten-year age groups. Once again, the middle three
quintiles show little change and all of the change comes about because an increase in the
top, and a decrease in the lowest, quintile.

          A clearer picture of cohort change can be gleaned from Figure 8. Cohorts born from
1931 to 1938 had lifecycle participation rates that were rather uniformly distributed
across the quintiles. But by the 1947 to 1954 cohorts almost 50 percent were in the labor
force for almost the entire 30 years (more than 80 percent) and very few were in the labor
force for less than 20 percent of the interval.

27For a more detailed discussion of life cycle labor force participation see Goldin and Mitchell
(forthcoming).
                                            8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -19-
       To make sense of these lifecycle trajectories, the concepts of heterogeneity and
homogeneity will be useful. 28 When participation rates for a birth cohort increase with age,
all women in the cohort could be working more weeks per year or more women could be
entering the labor force. That is, change could be at the intensive or extensive margins (or
a combination). The group that exhibits more of the former is termed “homogeneous,”
since all women are increasing their work level, and the group that exhibits more of the
latter is termed “heterogeneous,” because only some women increase their participation.

       The difference is far more than semantic. 29 The distinction helps us understand
why the lifecycle labor force distributions in Figure 8 appear as they do given the cohort
trajectories from Figure 5. A uniform distribution, as is the case for the 1930s cohort in
Figure 8 part A, is fully consistent with heterogeneous participation when labor force
participation rates trace out a clear hump or inverted U-shape. And a more skewed
distribution, as in Figure 8 part B, for the late-1940s to 1950s cohorts is also fully
consistent with heterogeneous participation when cohort rates are humped, but begin at a
higher level and are flatter.

       The distinction will be critical in making projections about whether more recent
cohorts will attain higher participation than their older peers when they are in their sixties
and beyond. Looking back at the synthetic cohort lines in Figure 5, the most recent cohorts
display flat and even somewhat decreasing participation rates over their brief lifecycles.
That is, participation rates are actually higher at the lower ages than at the middle.

       But if most working women persist in the labor force, then the finding that early
participation matters significantly implies that the reduction in participation, or the
absence of an increase, for the most recent cohorts in their midyears will not matter much
for their employment later in life. The key point is that for earlier cohorts, women who
entered (or reentered) the labor force in mid-life were probably the least persistent.


28 See Goldin (1989) and Heckman and Willis (1977) on the concepts of heterogeneity and

homogeneity applied to labor force participation over the lifecycle.
29 Olivetti (2006) models an underlying reason for greater persistence in the returns to experience

and demonstrates the increased returns from the 1970s to the 1990s.
                                           8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -20-
D.     Working Women, Working Couples

       The regression results showed a commonly known relationship. Couples generally
work together and enjoy leisure and consumption together. Currently married women are
far more likely to be in the labor force in their older years if their husbands are also
working. In the Table 2, col. (6) regression, married women with a spouse in the labor
force are almost 20 percentage points more likely to be in the labor force than are other
married women.

       Figure 9 demonstrates two additional points beyond that in the regressions, which
did not interact marital status with birth cohort. The data use three categories of women
59 to 63 years old: those currently married with a husband working, those currently
married with a non-working husband and those not currently married. The first is that
participation rates of all currently married women rose relative to the third group and the
second is that the rates of currently married women with a working spouse increased most.

       A greater fraction of couples are now working together rather than being retired
together whereas 20 years ago a greater fraction of couples were retired together. 30 Even
though husbands and wives generally have complementary leisure, the timing of the recent
increase in participation differs between older men and women. Whereas the increase for
women began around the late 1980s, that for men is not discernable until around 1998 or
even later. There is a decade difference between the increase for men and that for women
and none of them corresponds with the dating of the Great Recession. The increase for
women precedes some of the more important recent changes in Social Security rules,
whereas that for men may be related to a change in the Social Security earnings test. 31



30 These findings are consistent with the complementarity of the leisure time of older husbands and
wives. See Schirle (2008) for a summary of the literature on complementarity and Blau (1998) in
particular. The Schirle (2008) article demonstrates, for three countries, that the increase in
women’s labor force participation at older ages has led to increased men’s participation.
31 The impact of recent Social Security changes on retirement trends is discussed in Gustman and

Steinmeier (2009) and Mastrobuoni (2009), among others. Gelber, Isen, and Song (2016) provide
evidence that a slowdown in the rate of growth of the generosity of Social Security benefits starting
in the mid-1980s played a role in the increase in older women’s labor supply.
                                           8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -21-
E.     Concluding Remarks

       We have explored the increase in the labor force participation of older women that
began around the late 1980s. Using CPS data, we observed that the increase in
participation was disproportionately in full-time, year-round jobs, rather than part-time
positions.

       We have investigated why labor force participation increased by using the HRS and
related Social Security earnings records to analyze the participation of women 59 to 63
years old across cohorts born from 1931 to 1951. We first analyze the effect of
characteristics largely determined prior to labor market entry and then those determined
before a woman is in her late fifties. For the aggregate sample, participation rates increase
most for cohorts born after around 1943 and the increase in participation is greater for the
more highly educated. Most important is that the cohort effects noticed in the aggregate
data are greatly reduced when education is included in the regression.

        Although the rising cohort effects for all women in the HRS are virtually
extinguished by the inclusion of education, the college graduate group displays an
interesting and potentially important phenomenon. The cohort effect for the most recent
birth cohort that can be explored, that from 1949 to 1951, remains large and statistically
significant even after controlling for earlier labor force participation (from ages 35 to 44 or
from ages 45 to 54).

       Whereas the increased participation rates of older women with birth cohorts in the
early 1940s seem explicable due to their higher levels of education, that for the most recent
cohort that can be explored appears to be due to other factors. Our current challenge is to
understand what these factors are and how they are likely to impact the labor force
participation at older ages of future cohorts.




                                         8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -22-
Figure 1: Female Labor Force Participation by Five-Year Age Groups, 1962 to 2014

 0.9


 0.8


 0.7


 0.6


 0.5


 0.4


 0.3


 0.2


 0.1


 0.0
    1960   1965    1970      1975     1980    1985    1990   1995    2000   2005    2010   2015

           35-39     40-44          45-49     50-54     55-59       60-64   65-69      70-74


Source: CPS March.




                                             8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -23-
Figure 2: Female Labor Force Participation by Five-Year Age Groups for Currently Married
College Graduates, 1965 to 2013 (three-year centered moving averages)

 0.9


 0.8


 0.7


 0.6


 0.5


 0.4


 0.3


 0.2


 0.1


 0.0
    1960   1965     1970   1975    1980   1985    1990     1995   2000   2005   2010   2015

            45-49          50-54          55-59          60-64       65-69        70-74


Source: CPS March.




                                          8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -24-
Figure 3: Gender Gap in Labor Force Participation at Older Ages, 1962 to 2013: CPS

 1.0

 0.9

 0.8                                                                                      Male, 55-59

 0.7
                                                                                          Female, 55-59

 0.6
                                                                  Male, 60-64
 0.5
                                                                                   Female, 60-64
 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0.0
    1960   1965   1970    1975   1980   1985   1990     1995     2000   2005       2010   2015

                     55-59, F       55-59, M          60-64, F          60-64, M


Source: CPS March.




                                        8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -25-
Figure 4: Women Employed Full-Time, Full-Year among Labor Force Participants during
the Year, 1963 to 2013: CPS

 0.8


 0.7


 0.6


 0.5


 0.4


 0.3


 0.2


 0.1


 0.0
    1960   1965   1970   1975    1980   1985    1990     1995   2000   2005   2010   2015

                         55-59          60-64          65-69       70-74




Source: CPS March.

Notes: Both numerator and denominator refer to the calendar year. By a “labor force
participant during the year” is meant anyone who worked during the year. Three-year
centered moving averages are shown. Full-time, full-year workers are those who worked
40 or more weeks and 35 or more hours per week.




                                        8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -26-
Figure 5: Labor Force Participation Rates for Women by Five-Year Birth Cohorts (1929-33
to 1969-73) and Five-Year Age Groups (25-29 to 74-79 years): CPS

A. All Education Groups

 1.0

 0.9

 0.8

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0.0
       25   30    35      40    45      50     55     60     65     70     75     80

             1929-1933     1934-1938     1939-1943     1944-1948     1949-1953
             1954-1958     1959-1963     1964-1968     1969-1973




                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -27-
B. College Graduates

 0.9

 0.8

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0.0
       25   30       35      40       45        50      55     60      65     70      75     80

                 1929-1933        1934-1938       1939-1943     1944-1948     1949-1953
                 1954-1958        1959-1963       1964-1968     1969-1973




Source: CPS March.

Notes: Every data point in each graph contains 25 birth years and ages.




                                              8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -28-
Figure 6: Fraction of College Graduate Women Ever Employed in Teaching, for 1931 to
1959 Birth Cohorts: HRS


 0.6



 0.5



 0.4



 0.3



 0.2



 0.1

                                                                Birth Year
  0
   1930       1935       1940          1945      1950       1955       1960



Source: HRS, Restricted Access Data.

Notes: “Ever employed in teaching” is calculated with code provided by Maria Fitzpatrick,
which uses detailed occupations of respondents prior to their first HRS interview. The
dashed line is the three-year centered moving average.




                                         8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -29-
Figure 7: Lifecycle Labor Force Participation in the HRS and Social Security Earnings Data

       A. All Women, 25 to 54 Years

 60


 50


 40


 30


 20


 10


  0
          0-20          >20-40         >40-60          >60-80         >80-100


       B. All Women, 25 to 34 Years

 60


 50


 40


 30


 20


 10


  0
          0-20          >20-40         >40-60          >60-80         >80-100

              1931-32   1933-34   1935-36   1937-38   1939-40   1941-42
              1943-44   1945-46   1947-48   1949-50   1951-52   1953-54




                                        8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -30-
Source and Notes: Figures give the distribution of years spent in the labor force by women
in various cohorts and by age group. Labor force participation is defined as having at least
one of the following: (a) having SS earnings above (10 hours × 52 weeks × minimum wage
in that year) in the years prior to the HRS survey of the respondent; (b) Responding in the
HRS that the person was “in the labor force” when the person has a positive HRS weight; (c)
Having W-2 earnings above minimum yearly wage in that year; (d) Working for the state,
federal or municipal government in years prior to the HRS survey. HRS person weights are
used adjusted for sample selection into the linked sample.




                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -31-
Figure 8: Lifecycle Labor Force Participation by Birth Cohorts, 25 to 54 Years Old: HRS

       A. Birth Cohorts from 1931 to 1938

 60


 50


 40
                                                                   1931-32
 30                                                                1933-34
                                                                   1935-36
 20                                                                1937-38


 10


  0
         0-20      >20-40      >40-60       >60-80   >80-100


       B. Birth Cohorts from 1947 to 1954

 60


 50


 40
                                                                   1947-48
 30                                                                1949-50
                                                                   1951-52
 20                                                                1953-54


 10


  0
         0-20      >20-40      >40-60       >60-80    >80-100


Sources and Notes: See Figure 7.




                                        8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -32-
Figure 9: Labor Force Participation by Year of Birth, Current Marital Status and Husband’s
Employment for 59 to 63 Year Old Women

 0.8


 0.7


 0.6


 0.5


 0.4


 0.3


 0.2


 0.1
                                                                               Birth Year
  0
   1930              1935              1940               1945                 1950

              Spouse Working         Spouse Not Working          Not Currently Married


Source: HRS

Notes: All women 59 to 63 years old are included; HRS person weights applied.




                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -33-
Table 1: Labor Force Participation Rates for Males and Females, 55 to 74 Years: CPS

Age Group    Educational Group      Labor Force Participation    Percentage Point Change
                                            Rate in                  c.1988 to c.2013
                                     1987-89       2012-14
Women
55-59        All                      0.522          0.673                 15.1
             College graduates        0.685          0.779                  9.4
             Non-college grad.        0.499          0.627                 12.8

60-64        All                      0.341          0.514                 17.3
             College graduates        0.454          0.612                 15.8
             Non-college grad.        0.330          0.472                 14.3

65-69        All                      0.153          0.276                 12.3
             College graduates        0.240          0.367                 12.7
             Non-college grad.        0.145          0.244                 9.9

70-74        All                      0.072          0.157                 8.6
             College graduates        0.130          0.214                 8.3
             Non-college grad.        0.066          0.142                 7.5

Men
55-59        All                      0.796          0.779                 -1.8
             College graduates        0.886          0.896                 1.0
             Non-college grad.        0.773          0.728                 -4.6

60-64        All                      0.548          0.607                 5.9
             College graduates        0.682          0.727                 4.5
             Non-college grad.        0.516          0.543                 2.8

65-69        All                      0.258          0.380                 12.2
             College graduates        0.402          0.491                 8.9
             Non-college grad.        0.231          0.321                 9.0

70-74        All                      0.155          0.232                 7.7
             College graduates        0.254          0.324                 7.0
             Non-college grad.        0.141          0.191                 5.0


Sources: CPS March 1987, 1988, 1989, 2012, 2013, and 2014.




                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -34-
Table 2: Female Labor Force Participation at Age 59-63 Years, All Education Groups: HRS

                                  Labor Force Participation at Ages 59 to 63 Years
                        Full
                       Sample                             Linked Sample
                         (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
Year of birth
  1934-36             -0.00810     -0.0110     -0.0139       -0.0158      -0.0128     -0.0143
                      (0.0192)    (0.0207)    (0.0203)      (0.0197)     (0.0201)    (0.0186)
   1937-39             0.0141     0.00448     0.000715       -0.0146     -0.00357    -0.00521
                      (0.0191)    (0.0206)    (0.0202)      (0.0199)     (0.0202)    (0.0186)
   1940-42             0.0163      0.0137     -0.00832       -0.0354      -0.0178     -0.0312
                      (0.0203)    (0.0218)    (0.0211)      (0.0206)     (0.0210)    (0.0195)
   1943-45             0.0464*     0.0320     -0.00461       -0.0402      -0.0184     -0.0321
                      (0.0229)    (0.0247)    (0.0239)      (0.0235)     (0.0237)    (0.0223)
   1946-48            0.0635**     0.0529*     0.00327       -0.0389      -0.0141     -0.0257
                      (0.0217)    (0.0240)    (0.0238)      (0.0235)     (0.0238)    (0.0220)
   1949-51            0.0973***   0.0888***    0.0300        -0.0110      0.0120     0.000839
                      (0.0217)    (0.0259)    (0.0250)      (0.0246)     (0.0249)    (0.0234)
High school grad.                             0.161***      0.121***     0.141***    0.0583***
                                              (0.0180)      (0.0176)     (0.0180)    (0.0171)
Some college                                  0.251***      0.199***     0.217***     0.106***
                                              (0.0205)      (0.0202)     (0.0207)    (0.0195)
College graduate                              0.295***      0.237***     0.251***     0.115***
                                              (0.0252)      (0.0252)     (0.0260)    (0.0250)
MA                                            0.348***      0.280***     0.292***     0.159***
                                              (0.0288)      (0.0286)     (0.0298)    (0.0276)
PhD, MD, JD, etc.                             0.468***      0.364***     0.400***     0.227***
                                              (0.0458)      (0.0453)     (0.0458)    (0.0451)
Lifecycle LFP 35-44                                         0.233***                  0.216***
                                                            (0.0174)                 (0.0165)
Career cond. 35-44                                                       0.128***
                                                                         (0.0195)
Currently married                                                                    -0.157***
                                                                                     (0.0309)
Divorced                                                                              0.0806*
                                                                                     (0.0321)
Widow                                                                                  0.0113
                                                                                     (0.0324)
Spouse in LF                                                                          0.186***
                                                                                     (0.0146)
Health status           no          no           no           no            no           yes
Age dummies             Yes         yes          yes          yes           yes          yes

                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -35-
Race dummies             yes         yes         yes         yes          yes        yes
Constant              0.456***    0.430***     0.326***    0.261***    0.323***    0.165***
                      (0.0331)    (0.0394)     (0.0365)    (0.0367)    (0.0366)    (0.0426)

N                      18,383      15,431      15,431       15,431      15,431     15,431
R-squared              0.028        0.029      0.073        0.104       0.082      0.183

Sources: Health and Retirement Study (HRS) 1992 to 2012, RAND version with added
variables from original HRS files. Social Security Administration earnings (and W-2) data
are used to calculate life cycle labor force participation (Lifecycle LFP <ages>) and the
career condition (Career cond. <ages>).

Notes: The dependent variable is 1 if the woman is in the labor force and 0 otherwise. The
HRS asks respondents their labor force status and a woman is in the labor force if she
reported being employed or unemployed and searching for work.
Health status is self-reported and is coded as 1 if “good” or better and 0 otherwise.
Marital status variables refer to current status.
“Lifecycle LFP <ages>” is the fraction of the interval the woman was in the labor force as
determined by a combination of the data sources described in the Appendix.
The “linked sample” indicates that the individual gave permission for Social Security
earnings data to be linked.
Omitted base group variables are: 1931-33 birth cohort; below high school graduate
(overall or for the less than college graduate group); BA only for the college graduate
group; never married; other race and age 59. Omitted from the table are dummy variables
for missing variables regarding spouse in labor force, career condition 35-44, and health
status.
The regressions are weighted by HRS person weights; the weights are adjusted for sample
selection into the linked sample in cols. (2) to (6).

Standard errors in parentheses have been clustered at the individual level.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -36-
Table 3: Female Labor Force Participation at Ages 59 to 63, by Education: HRS

                                  Labor Force Participation at Ages 59 to 63 Years
                        Not                      Not                         Not
                       College     College      College       College      College    College
                      Graduate    Graduate     Graduate      Graduate     Graduate   Graduate
                         (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)        (6)
Year of birth
  1934-36              -0.0234     0.0308       -0.0263      0.0346       -0.0246     0.0390
                      (0.0219)    (0.0522)     (0.0212)     (0.0506)     (0.0200)    (0.0472)
   1937-39            -0.00195     0.0182       -0.0218      0.0234       -0.0102     0.0182
                      (0.0217)    (0.0543)     (0.0212)     (0.0545)     (0.0197)    (0.0521)
   1940-42             -0.0133     0.0357      -0.0441*      0.0188       -0.0388     0.0160
                      (0.0231)    (0.0515)     (0.0223)     (0.0506)     (0.0212)    (0.0475)
   1943-45             -0.0101     0.0509       -0.0468      0.0219       -0.0370     0.0212
                      (0.0266)    (0.0537)     (0.0260)     (0.0542)     (0.0245)    (0.0526)
   1946-48            -0.00304     0.0589       -0.0470      0.0235       -0.0345     0.0377
                      (0.0268)    (0.0522)     (0.0262)     (0.0527)     (0.0247)    (0.0489)
   1949-51             0.00557     0.126*       -0.0389      0.103*       -0.0210    0.0980*
                      (0.0291)    (0.0498)     (0.0287)     (0.0504)     (0.0272)    (0.0486)
High school grad.     0.158***                 0.115***                  0.0520**
                      (0.0180)                 (0.0176)                  (0.0172)
Some college          0.249***                 0.193***                  0.101***
                      (0.0205)                 (0.0202)                  (0.0197)
MA                                 0.0502                    0.0420                    0.0370
                                  (0.0316)                  (0.0313)                 (0.0295)
PhD, MD, JD, etc.                 0.167***                   0.136**                   0.111*
                                  (0.0483)                  (0.0492)                 (0.0489)
Lifecycle LFP 35-44                            0.208***      0.0739      0.192***      0.0709
                                               (0.0273)     (0.0573)     (0.0254)    (0.0589)
Never in LF 35-44                              -0.0548*      -0.153*     -0.0522*     -0.150*
                                               (0.0254)     (0.0730)     (0.0238)    (0.0716)
Currently married                                                        -0.147***   -0.243***
                                                                         (0.0350)    (0.0649)
Divorced                                                                  0.0613       0.119
                                                                         (0.0368)    (0.0638)
Widow                                                                    0.00458     -0.00416
                                                                         (0.0364)    (0.0712)
Spouse in LF                                                             0.177***     0.225***
                                                                         (0.0160)    (0.0357)
Health status           no          no            no           no           yes          yes
Age dummies             yes         yes           yes          yes          yes          yes
Race dummies            yes         yes           yes          yes          yes          yes

                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -37-
Constant              0.285***     0.859***    0.258***     0.841***     0.167**    0.638***
                      (0.0385)     (0.0629)    (0.0434)     (0.0751)    (0.0508)    (0.0999)

N                      12,789       2,642       12,789       2,642       12,789       2,642
R-squared              0.060        0.041       0.097        0.059       0.179        0.140

Sources: Health and Retirement Study (HRS) 1992 to 2012, RAND version with added
variables from original HRS files. Social Security Administration earnings (and W-2) data
are used to calculate life cycle labor force participation (Lifecycle LFP <ages>).

Notes: The dependent variable is 1 if the woman is in the labor force and 0 otherwise. The
HRS asks respondents their labor force status and a woman is in the labor force if she
reported being employed or unemployed and searching for work.
Health status is self-reported and is coded as 1 if “good” or better and 0 otherwise.
Marital status variables refer to current status.
“Lifecycle LFP <ages>” is the fraction of the interval the woman was in the labor force as
determined by a combination of the data sources described in the Appendix. “Never in LF”
is 1 if the individual was recorded as having no years in the labor force during those years.
All columns use the “linked sample.”
Omitted base group variables are: 1931-33 birth cohort; below high school graduate
(overall or for the less than college graduate group); BA only for the college graduate
group; never married; other race and age 59. Omitted from the table are dummy variables
for missing variables regarding spouse in labor force and health status.
Regressions are estimated separately for college graduates and those who did not graduate
from college. For the college graduates degrees beyond a bachelors are added (MA, PhD,
etc.), where MA includes all masters and PhD, MD, JD, etc. includes all graduate and
professional degrees. For non-college graduates dummy variables are added for those with
a high school diploma and some college.
The regressions are weighted by HRS person weights adjusted for sample selection into the
linked sample.

Standard errors in parentheses have been clustered at the individual level.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                        8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -38-
Table 4: Labor Force Participation among College Graduate Women at Ages 59 to 63: HRS

                                  Labor Force Participation at Ages 59 to 63 Years
                      Full Sample                           Linked Sample
                           (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)
Year of birth
  1934-36              0.00774         0.0272          0.0308          0.0458         0.0294
                       (0.0497)       (0.0524)        (0.0507)        (0.0470)       (0.0508)
   1937-39             0.00217         0.0169          0.0221          0.0212        0.00996
                       (0.0503)       (0.0543)        (0.0544)        (0.0508)       (0.0538)
   1940-42              0.0389         0.0327          0.0154          0.0193        0.00204
                       (0.0484)       (0.0518)        (0.0508)        (0.0473)       (0.0509)
   1943-45              0.0370         0.0402         0.00983          0.0179         -0.0172
                       (0.0503)       (0.0541)        (0.0543)        (0.0526)       (0.0550)
   1946-48              0.0465         0.0482          0.0114          0.0110         -0.0256
                       (0.0475)       (0.0525)        (0.0528)        (0.0503)       (0.0544)
   1949-51             0.0957*          0.117*         0.0931          0.105*         0.0524
                       (0.0452)       (0.0500)        (0.0505)        (0.0460)       (0.0510)
Ever a teacher          -0.0477        -0.0483         -0.0545       -0.0892**        -0.0591
                       (0.0288)       (0.0315)        (0.0309)        (0.0294)       (0.0305)
MA                      0.0538         0.0578          0.0504          0.0381         0.0405
                       (0.0296)       (0.0326)        (0.0322)        (0.0306)       (0.0319)
PhD, MD, JD, etc.      0.160***       0.164***         0.133**         0.107**         0.111*
                       (0.0447)       (0.0470)        (0.0479)        (0.0411)       (0.0461)
Lifecycle LFP 35-44                                    0.0673
                                                      (0.0573)
Never in LF 35-44                                      -0.164*
                                                      (0.0731)
Lifecycle LFP 45-54                                                  0.379***
                                                                     (0.0710)
Never in LF 45-54                                                     -0.178
                                                                     (0.0973)
Lifecycle LFP 25-54                                                                  0.355***
                                                                                     (0.0655)
Health status             no             no             no              no              no
Age dummies               yes            yes            yes             yes             yes
Race dummies              yes            yes            yes             yes             yes
Marital status
dummies                   yes            yes            yes             yes            yes
Job status of
husband                   yes            yes             yes            yes             yes
Constant               0.855***       0.876***        0.866***       0.580***        0.675***
                       (0.0591)       (0.0629)        (0.0755)       (0.0857)        (0.0708)

                                        8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -39-
N                        3,137          2,642          2,642          2,642          2,642
R-squared                0.040          0.044          0.062          0.141          0.080


Sources: Health and Retirement Study (HRS) 1992 to 2012, RAND version with added
variables from original HRS files. Social Security Administration earnings (and W-2) data
are used to calculate life cycle labor force participation (Lifecycle LFP <ages>) and the
career condition (Career cond. <ages>).

Notes: The dependent variable is 1 if the woman is in the labor force and 0 otherwise. The
HRS asks respondents their labor force status and a woman is in the labor force if she
reported being employed or unemployed and searching for work.
*Health status is self-reported and is coded as 1 if “good” or better and 0 otherwise.
Marital status variables refer to current status.
“Lifecycle LFP <ages>” is the fraction of the interval the woman was in the labor force as
determined by a combination of the data sources described in the Appendix. “Never in LF”
is 1 if the individual was recorded as having no years in the labor force during those years.
The “linked sample” indicates that the individual gave permission for Social Security
earnings data to be linked.
Omitted base group variables are: 1931-33 birth cohort; BA only for the college graduate
group; never married; and other race and age 59. Omitted from the table are dummy
variables for missing variables regarding spouse in labor force and health status.
The regressions are weighted by the HRS person weights; the weights are adjusted for
sample selection into the linked sample in cols. (2) to (5).

Standard errors in parentheses have been clustered at the individual level.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                        8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -40-
Table 5: Role of Past Work Attitude for Employment of Women 59 to 63 Years: HRS

                                   Labor Force Participation at Ages 59 to 63 Years
                                        Worked 6 Years Ago                                All
                         (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)        (6)
Enjoy job 6 yrs ago
  Strongly agree                   0.223**      0.203**       0.235**       0.212**     0.229**
                                  (0.0720)     (0.0694)      (0.0723)      (0.0693)    (0.0718)
   Agree                           0.198**      0.189**       0.209**       0.198**     0.202**
                                  (0.0709)     (0.0680)      (0.0713)      (0.0680)    (0.0708)
   Disagree                         0.101       0.0932         0.105        0.0983       0.103
                                  (0.0710)     (0.0686)      (0.0715)      (0.0686)    (0.0709)
   No job 6 yrs ago                                                                    -0.322***
                                                                                       (0.0708)
Year of birth
  1940-42              0.00466    -0.00237      -0.0113    -0.0000308       -0.00691   -0.00659
                       (0.0253)   (0.0255)     (0.0243)     (0.0255)        (0.0243)   (0.0182)
   1943-45            -0.000282   -0.00518     -0.00894     0.000100      -0.0000508   -0.00147
                       (0.0281)   (0.0281)     (0.0271)     (0.0280)        (0.0270)   (0.0210)
   1946-48             0.00712    0.00303       0.00475      0.00565         0.0116    0.000706
                       (0.0285)   (0.0285)     (0.0270)     (0.0286)        (0.0271)   (0.0213)
   1949-51              0.0153    0.00815       0.0102        0.0157         0.0210     0.00376
                       (0.0290)   (0.0291)     (0.0282)     (0.0289)        (0.0280)   (0.0224)
High school grad.      0.0859**   0.0865**      0.0342       0.0799*         0.0304    0.0549**
                       (0.0326)   (0.0325)     (0.0329)     (0.0325)        (0.0329)   (0.0199)
Some college           0.145***   0.138***      0.0682*      0.130***        0.0632    0.0972***
                       (0.0335)   (0.0335)     (0.0340)     (0.0339)        (0.0341)   (0.0217)
BA                     0.164***   0.153***      0.0594       0.143***        0.0550     0.119***
                       (0.0377)   (0.0378)     (0.0385)     (0.0384)        (0.0389)   (0.0273)
MA                     0.218***   0.210***      0.118**      0.198***        0.112**    0.171***
                       (0.0384)   (0.0381)     (0.0390)     (0.0392)        (0.0397)   (0.0296)
PhD, MD, JD, etc.      0.294***   0.283***      0.177**      0.257***        0.165**    0.238***
                       (0.0505)   (0.0516)     (0.0550)     (0.0539)        (0.0569)   (0.0445)
Lifecycle LFP 35-44                             0.0456                       0.0165
                                               (0.0265)                     (0.0271)
(ln) Hours                                                  0.0864***      0.0775***
                                                             (0.0208)       (0.0194)
(ln) Earnings                                                -0.00252       -0.00558
                                                            (0.00966)      (0.00932)
Health status            no         no            yes            no            yes       no
Age dummies              yes        yes           yes           yes            yes       yes
Race dummies             yes        yes           yes           yes            yes       yes
Marital status           no         no            yes            no            yes       no

                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -41-
dummies
Job status of
husband                 no           no           yes          no           yes          no
Constant             0.560***     0.385***      0.293**     0.0942        0.0785      0.450***
                     (0.0652)     (0.0936)     (0.0991)     (0.136)       (0.136)     (0.0794)

N                      5050         5050        5050         5050             5050     7736
R-squared              0.032        0.041       0.104        0.051            0.112    0.288

Sources: Health and Retirement Study (HRS) 1992 to 2012, RAND version with added
variables from original HRS files. Social Security Administration earnings (and W-2) data
are used to calculate life cycle labor force participation (Lifecycle LFP <ages>).

Notes: The dependent variable is 1 if the woman is in the labor force and 0 otherwise. In
cols. (1) through (5) only those with positive person weights and working six years ago (or
who had a missing job attitude question) are included; col. (6) includes those not working.
For variables that are identical to those in Tables 2 to 4, see notes to those tables.
All columns use the “linked sample.”
Omitted base group variables are: “enjoy job 6 yrs ago” strongly disagree; 1937-39 birth
cohort; below high school graduate; other race and age 59. Omitted from the table are the
coefficients on dummy variables for various missing variables. These include missing (or
zero) hours six years ago and missing earnings six years ago. In addition, the dummy
variable for the “other” job attitude category (together with the small fraction of missing
observations for that variable) is omitted in the table.
“Enjoy job 6 yrs. ago” is from a question asked of respondents with a current job who are
asked to express a level of agreement with the question “I really enjoy going to work.”
Cols. (4) and (5) add (ln) hours (hours worked per week in main job) and (ln) annual
earnings (sum of wage or salary income plus added pay and earnings from a second job as
well as those from professional practice or trade income. Earnings are deflated to 1992
using the CPI.
The regressions are weighted by HRS person weights adjusted for sample selection into the
linked sample.

Standard errors in parentheses have been clustered at the individual level.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -42-
                                       References

Blau, David M. 1998. “Labor Force Dynamics of Older Married Couples,” Journal of Labor
    Economics 16(3): 595–629.

Chien, Sandy, Nancy Campbell, Orla Hayden, Michael Hurd, Regan Main, Josh Mallett, Craig
    Martin, Erik Meijer, Angela Mui, Michael Moldoff, Susann Rohwedder, and Patricia St.
    Clair. 2013. HRS Data Documentation, Version M. (August). RAND, Labor and
    Population Program. Santa Monica, CA.

Fitzpatrick, Maria. 2016. “Teaching, Teachers Pensions, and Retirement across Recent
    Cohorts of College Graduate Women,” Cornell University, working paper.

Gelber, Alexander M., Adam Isen, and Jae Song. 2016. “The Role of Social Security Benefits
    in the Increase of Older Women’s Employment Rate: Evidence from the Notch Cohorts,”
    May, http://users.nber.org/~agelber/papers/gelberisensong051016.pdf.

Gelber, Alexander M., Damon Jones and Daniel W. Sacks. 2016 “Earnings Adjustment
    Frictions: Evidence from the Social Security Earnings Test,” August.
    https://dansacks.files.wordpress.com/2015/08/adjustment081716.pdf.

Goldin, Claudia. 1989. “Life-Cycle Labor-Force Participation of Married Women: Historical
    Evidence and Implications,” Journal of Labor Economics 7(1) January: 20-47.

Goldin, Claudia. 1997. “Career and Family: College Women Look to the Past.” In F. Blau and
    R. Ehrenberg, eds., Gender and Family Issues in the Workplace. New York: Russell Sage
    Press: 20-58.

Goldin, Claudia and Joshua Mitchell. Forthcoming. “The New Lifecycle of Women’s
    Employment: Disappearing Humps, Sagging Middles, Expanding Tops,” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives.

Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. 2009. “How Changes in Social Security Affect
    Recent Retirement Trends,” Research on Aging (March 2009) 31 (2): 261-90.

Heckman, James J. and Robert J. Willis. 1977. “A Beta-logistic Model for the Analysis of
   Sequential Labor Force Participation by Married Women,” Journal of Political Economy
   85 (February): 27-58.

Hurd, Michael and Susann Rohwedder. 2014. “Predicting Labor Force Participation of the
   Older Population.”

                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -43-
    http://siepr.stanford.edu/system/files/shared/events/wlc2014/Hurd-Rohwedder-
    paper.pdf

Lumsdaine, Robin L. and Stephanie J. C. Vermeer. 2015. “Retirement Timing of Women and
   the Role of Care Responsibilities for Grandchildren,” Demography 52(2) April: 433-54.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2016. “Older Women’s Labor Market Attachment,
    Retirement Planning, and Household Debt,” August, revision of paper presented at
    NBER Conference on Women Working Longer, May 21-22, 2016.

Maestas, Nicole. 2010. “Back to Work: Expectations and Realizations of Work after
   Retirement,” Journal of Human Resources 45(3) Summer: 718-48.

Maestas, Nicole and Julie Zissimopoulos. 2010. “How Longer Working Lives Ease the
   Crunch of Population Aging,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(1) (Winter): 139-60

Mastrobuoni, Giovanni. 2009. “Labor Supply Effects of the Recent Social Security Benefit
   Cuts: Empirical Estimates Using Cohort Discontinuities,” Journal of Public Economics
   93: 1224-33.

Olivetti, Claudia. 2006. “Changes in Women’s Hours of Market Work: The Role of Returns to
    Experience,” Review of Economic Dynamics 9(4) October: 557-87.

Schirle, Tammy. 2008. “Why Have the Labor Force Participation Rates of Older Men
    Increased since the Mid‐1990s?,” Journal of Labor Economics 26(4) (October): 249-94.

U.S. Department of Education. 2015. Digest of Education Statistics.
     https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d15/tables/dt15_104.20.asp




                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Women Working Longer -44-
                                            Appendix 32

Health and Retirement Study: General Comments

       The Health and Retirement Study (known as the HRS and also as the University of
Michigan Health and Retirement Study) is a widely used data set. More information can be
found at: http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/. This brief Appendix will discuss certain details
of importance to this paper.

       The Health and Retirement Study, supported by the National Institute on Aging and
the Social Security Administration, was begun in 1992 with a random sample of households
in which one member was born between 1931 and 1941 and thus between 51 and 61 years
old. This initial sample is known as the HRS cohort, also as the “Intermezzo” cohort. In
households containing a married or partnered couple, the “spouse” and “respondent”
categories were randomly assigned. “Spouses” were not given positive sample weights
until 1998, if born from 1931 to 1941. If they were born from 1942 to 1947, they are not
given positive sample weights until the “War Baby” (WB) cohort was added. The “War
Baby” (WB) cohort was born 1942 to 1947. The “Early Baby Boomer” (EBB) cohort, born
1948 to 1953, was added in 2004. The Mid-Boomer (MBB) cohort, 1954 to 1959 was added
in 2010. The WB, EBB, and MBB cohorts were between 51 and 56 years old.

      The cohorts mentioned have all been surveyed every two years. Additional cohorts
born before 1931 are also part of the HRS, but the HRS, WB and EBB are the primary ones
we have used in our research. At the time of this writing, the HRS data are available to
2012.

Health and Retirement Study: Construction of Variables

       Lifecycle Labor Force Participation

       Lifecycle labor force participation is intended to measure the fraction of a period
during which the individual was in the labor force. The time period we consider is from 25
to 54 years and we subdivide that into three decades. We primarily use the information
from the Social Security earnings records (and the W-2 forms after 1977) to figure out
whether an individual was employed during a year. We can do this only for individuals
who gave permission to the HRS to link their survey to their Social Security earnings
records. On average 80 percent of the sample agree to this linkage.



32Some of the material in this section will be included in an overall appendix for all volume papers
that use the HRS.
                                                          8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -45-
        In general, we define someone as a labor force participant if during a year their
annual earnings were at least equal to the federal minimum wage in that year times 10
hours times 52 weeks. Complications arise because some individuals were exempt from
the Social Security earnings tax. These exempt employees were generally government
workers and for our sample of women, teachers would have been an important exempt
category. During the initial interview the HRS asked whether the individual had been
employed by the government (including municipal, state and federal government
positions) and if that was the case, the person could list two periods of employment. We
count the individual in the labor force if the person did not pay the Social Security earnings
tax in some year but stated that their employment was in the government for that period.
It should be noted that when the W-2 forms become available, there is no problem with
exempt status since the forms include all W-2 income. In addition, some HRS respondents
were surveyed when they were in their early fifties and we use the HRS survey data when
it exists. Thus we determine labor force status on the basis of various pieces of information
including the HRS survey, the Social Security earnings records and the W-2 forms.

       Career Condition Variable

       Similar to the construction of the lifecycle labor force variable, we create a “career
condition” variable that assesses whether individuals who were in the labor force earned
above some amount. The amount is given by some fraction (we have used both 0.5 and
0.75) of the median annual wage of a (full-time, full-year) male worker in the given year.
Because the period we are considering predates the micro-data for the CPS, we use the
published surveys to obtain the male median annual wage. In our empirical work we
define the career condition between ages 35 and 44 years (“Career cond. 35-44”) as the
fraction of years in the age interval the individual exceeded 50 percent of the earnings of
the median male full-time, full-year worker.

        Earnings data for this calculation are obtained primarily from the Social Security
earnings records, the W-2 forms when available, and the HRS earnings data when it exists
for the individual. If the individual was in a tax-exempt employment (and did not have W-2
or HRS earnings data), we assume that the income was sufficient to exceed the given
“career condition.”

Social Security Earnings Record Linkage in the HRS

       The fraction of female HRS respondents who agreed at some point to the linkage of
their HRS study to their Social Security earnings record is fairly high. Just around 11
percent are not linked from the 1931 to 1942 birth cohorts. The fraction increases to 15
percent for 1943 to 1945 and then to 21 percent for 1946 to 1948. The high rate of non-


                                                       8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -46-
linkage for the 1950s cohorts is probably because they have had fewer years to agree to
have their records linked since respondents are asked during each wave. The fraction not
linked will probably fall during the next waves of the HRS as more respondents agree to the
linkage.

       Individuals who did not agree to the linkage do not differ on the basis of educational
attainment and current marital status with those who did agree. The main determinant of
linkage is the number of years the individual has been in the data set and, therefore, how
many times the individual has been asked permission for the linkage.

Comparisons of the HRS and the CPS

       Labor Force Participation Rates

       The HRS closely tracks the labor force participation rates given by the CPS for the
same age groups and birth cohorts. The only major differences occur for those 65 years
and older. The HRS labor force data are always greater than the CPS data in every year
from 1992 to 2010 for these age groups but are not for the younger groupings. The precise
reason is unclear. One possibility is that the CPS does a better job interviewing individuals
in group quarters.

       Marital Status and Education

       Both the HRS marital status and education variables track the CPS well for
individuals 51 to 56 years old. Cohorts born from 1935 to 1952 are given in Appendix
Tables A2 and A3. The HRS samples are fairly small and are subject to considerable
sampling error. It should be noted that the education distributions for 51 to 56 year old
women differ from those for younger women in the same birth cohorts due to a common
phenomenon that individuals gain education, for real or fictitious reasons, as they age.

       The HRS contains a potential complication because some people did not list a degree
and their highest degree was inferred. According to the RAND HRS Codebook (Chien 2013,
pp. 132-33): “The highest degree is assigned by looking at reports from Tracker and all
waves of data. The first non-missing value is used.” When the actual degree is missing, it is
imputed and a bachelor’s degree is given to those with RAEDYRS = 16 or 17. Interestingly,
the HRS and the CPS data for the same age groups and birth cohorts is remarkably similar.

       Children Ever Born

        The information on children ever born in the HRS differs in various ways from that
in the CPS June Fertility Supplements. But the mean number of children for the same

                                                      8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -47-
cohorts in each of the two sources is not much different. It appears that the main
difference is that the fraction of women who report no births in the HRS is lower than
reported in the CPS. For example, for women with a college degree born from 1947 to
1951 the fraction with zero births in the HRS (all of the respondents are older than 44
years) is 19 percent. But in the CPS the fraction with zero births at 40 to 44 years old is
about 25 percent. For women with less than a college degree, the fraction with no births in
the HRS for those born for 1947 to 1951 is 10 percent but is 13 percent in the CPS June
Fertility Supplements.

        Even though HRS respondents report a lower fraction with no birth, the mean
number of children ever born, as given in Appendix Figure A2, is very similar to that given
in the CPS June Fertility Supplements. The HRS number is almost always slightly higher,
especially for cohorts from after 1945.

       One possibility is that women in the HRS are also including adopted and step
children. That possibility has been explored and does not appear to be the source of the
difference.




                                                     8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -48-
Appendix Figure A1: Comparing Labor Force Participation for the HRS and the CPS: Women
50-54 to 70-74 Years

 0.9

 0.8

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0.0
    1992    1994     1996     1998      2000      2002     2004     2006     2008     2010

            Age 50-54       Age 55-59          Age 60-64      Age 65-69       Age 70-74
            HRS 50-54       HRS 55-59          HRS 60-64      HRS 65-69       HRS 70-74



Sources: March CPS; HRS.

Notes: The HRS is a biennial survey. Some age groups are not shown for the HRS because
the group is incomplete and the participation rate would be biased since it would omit
some of the older ages in the group.




                                                      8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -49-
Appendix Figure A2: Children Ever Born for Women 51 to 56 Years Old in HRS and 40 to 44
Years Old in CPS in Birth Cohorts 1936 to 1951

 3.5


  3


 2.5


  2


 1.5


  1


 0.5
                                                                        Birth Year
  0
   1930       1935         1940            1945      1950         1955         1960

                     CPS, 40 to 44 years          HRS, 51 to 56 years


Sources: HRS; CPS June Fertility Supplements, micro-data (1973 to 2014).

Notes: HRS person weights are used; no weights are used for the CPS. Children ever born is
truncated below 10 in both samples. In both data sets, the variable is supposed to give the
number of children ever born to the respondent and not the number of live children or
adopted or step children




                                                             8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -50-
Appendix Table A1: Fraction of Female HRS Respondents Linked to Social Security
Earnings Records by Birth Cohort




                          Birth Years       Fraction Linked
                          1931-33                0.886
                          1934-36                0.888
                          1937-39                0.868
                          1940-42                0.893
                          1943-45                0.852
                          1946-48                0.790
                          1949-51                0.714
                          1952-54                0.682




Sources: HRS, Restricted Access Data.

Notes: Person weights used. Linkage uses HRS to 2012.




                                                  8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -51-
 Appendix Table A2: Comparing Marital Status for the HRS and CPS: Women 51 to 56 Years

           Fraction Currently Married   Fraction Ever Married but    Fraction Never Married
                                          not currently married
Year of   HRS-SS      Full     CPS      HRS-SS    Full      CPS     HRS-SS     Full      CPS
Birth                 HRS                         HRS                          HRS
1931-32       .         .     0.730        .        .      0.230       .         .      0.040
1933-34       .         .     0.731        .        .      0.225       .         .      0.044
1935-36    0.737     0.730    0.716     0.236    0.246     0.237    0.026     0.024     0.047
1937-38    0.741     0.730    0.712     0.230    0.240     0.244    0.029     0.029     0.044
1939-40    0.739     0.734    0.704     0.214    0.222     0.244    0.047     0.043     0.051
1941-42    0.641     0.647    0.684     0.330    0.322     0.262    0.030     0.030     0.054
1943-44    0.552     0.537    0.678     0.378    0.387     0.273    0.070     0.075     0.049
1945-46    0.716     0.731    0.683     0.229    0.221     0.259    0.054     0.047     0.058
1947-48    0.647     0.643    0.669     0.302    0.305     0.269    0.052     0.052     0.063
1949-50    0.628     0.604    0.666     0.314    0.328     0.259    0.058     0.067     0.075
1951-52    0.676     0.684    0.661     0.266    0.266     0.261    0.058     0.049     0.078

 Sources: HRS. Restricted Access Data for HRS-SS columns. CPS.

 Notes: The HRS-SS columns refer to the sample linked to the Social Security Administration
 earnings data. The number of observations for the HRS sample is about 500 for the 1949-
 50 and 1951-52 birth cohorts and 1,000 for the 1937-38 and 1939-40 birth cohorts.
 Missing values (.) indicate lack of coverage using the particular HRS cohorts.




                                                      8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -52-
Appendix Table A3: Comparing Education for the HRS and CPS: Women 51 to 56 Years


             Fraction College Education                                    Fraction High School       Fraction Less than a High
                     and Above               Fraction Some College               Diploma                   School Diploma
Year of                 Full                          Full                         Full                         Full
Birth       HRS-SS      HRS       CPS      HRS-SS     HRS       CPS     HRS-SS     HRS       CPS     HRS-SS     HRS        CPS
1931-32        .          .        0.121     .          .       0.146     .          .       0.450      .         .         0.282
1933-34        .          .        0.127     .          .       0.161     .          .       0.454      .         .         0.258
1935-36       0.150      0.145     0.143    0.183      0.191    0.174    0.453      0.435    0.432    0.214      0.229      0.251
1937-38       0.129      0.125     0.157    0.172      0.176    0.181    0.445      0.454    0.443    0.254      0.245      0.219
1939-40       0.176      0.171     0.172    0.225      0.224    0.206    0.376      0.379    0.431    0.222      0.226      0.191
1941-42       0.186      0.181     0.190    0.275      0.269    0.231    0.345      0.349    0.405    0.194      0.200      0.174
1943-44       0.254      0.251     0.211    0.214      0.217    0.245    0.369      0.378    0.395    0.163      0.155      0.148
1945-46       0.246      0.236     0.240    0.276      0.273    0.245    0.327      0.338    0.379    0.150      0.153      0.137
1947-48       0.197      0.227     0.265    0.334      0.304    0.272    0.360      0.371    0.358    0.109      0.098      0.105
1949-50       0.305      0.298     0.277    0.263      0.280    0.276    0.325      0.317    0.346    0.108      0.105      0.101
1951-52       0.295      0.288     0.296    0.275      0.282    0.288    0.339      0.333    0.315    0.091      0.097      0.102

Sources: HRS. Restricted Access data for HRS-SS columns. CPS.

Notes: The HRS-SS columns refer to the sample linked to the Social Security Administration earnings data.




                                                                                        8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -53-
Appendix Table A4: Full-time Participation for Women at Ages 59 to 63, by Education: HRS

                                   Full-time Employment at Ages 59 to 63 Years
                        Not                     Not                       Not
                       College    College      College     College      College       College
                      Graduate   Graduate     Graduate    Graduate     Graduate      Graduate
                         (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
Year of birth
  1934-36              -0.0340    0.0423     -0.0364*        0.0465     -0.0375*      0.0463
                      (0.0192)   (0.0524)    (0.0183)       (0.0516)    (0.0177)     (0.0481)
   1937-39            0.000660    0.0151      -0.0179        0.0205      -0.0102      0.0111
                      (0.0196)   (0.0524)    (0.0190)       (0.0521)    (0.0184)     (0.0487)
   1940-42            -0.00476    0.0349      -0.0343        0.0120      -0.0313      0.00402
                      (0.0209)   (0.0523)    (0.0202)       (0.0518)    (0.0198)     (0.0481)
   1943-45            -0.00972    0.0168      -0.0448        -0.0238     -0.0364      -0.0265
                      (0.0242)   (0.0532)    (0.0235)       (0.0552)    (0.0232)     (0.0523)
   1946-48             0.00969    0.0360      -0.0329        -0.0128     -0.0246     -0.00276
                      (0.0250)   (0.0501)    (0.0240)       (0.0499)    (0.0233)     (0.0476)
   1949-51             0.00881    0.120*      -0.0347        0.0860      -0.0231      0.0853
                      (0.0285)   (0.0521)    (0.0279)       (0.0506)    (0.0273)     (0.0479)
High school grad.     0.107***               0.0659***                   0.0276
                      (0.0151)               (0.0149)                   (0.0149)
Some college          0.177***                0.124***                  0.0677***
                      (0.0187)               (0.0184)                   (0.0183)
MA                               0.0810*                    0.0706*                    0.0612
                                 (0.0336)                   (0.0332)                 (0.0322)
PhD, MD, JD, etc.                 0.190**                    0.146*                    0.118
                                 (0.0670)                   (0.0677)                 (0.0640)
Lifecycle LFP 35-44                          0.240***        0.139*     0.225***       0.127*
                                             (0.0247)       (0.0584)    (0.0240)     (0.0610)
Never in LF 35-44                            -0.00226        -0.152*    -0.00113      -0.156*
                                             (0.0211)       (0.0660)    (0.0206)     (0.0639)
Currently married                                                        -0.110**    -0.258***
                                                                        (0.0397)     (0.0703)
Divorced                                                                  0.0322       0.0736
                                                                        (0.0414)     (0.0746)
Widow                                                                    -0.0118      -0.0473
                                                                        (0.0406)     (0.0784)
Spouse in LF                                                            0.0688***     0.158***
                                                                        (0.0149)     (0.0357)
Health status           no          no          no             no           yes          yes
Age dummies             yes         yes         yes            yes          yes          yes
Race dummies            yes         yes         yes            yes          yes          yes

                                                      8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -54-
Constant              0.177***     0.653***     0.114**     0.593***     0.0776      0.505***
                      (0.0326)     (0.0849)    (0.0373)     (0.0931)    (0.0477)     (0.120)

N                      12789        2642        12789        2642        12789        2642
R-squared              0.043        0.052       0.084        0.079       0.125        0.134

Sources: Health and Retirement Study (HRS) 1992 to 2012, RAND version with added
variables from original HRS files. Social Security Administration earnings (and W-2) data
are used to calculate life cycle labor force participation (Lifecycle LFP <ages>).

Notes: The dependent variable is 1 if the woman is in the labor force full-time and 0
otherwise. A woman is in the labor force full-time if she reported being employed for 35 or
more hours per week.
Health status is self-reported and is coded as 1 if “good” or better and 0 otherwise.
Marital status variables refer to current status.
“Lifecycle LFP <ages>” is the fraction of the interval the woman was in the labor force as
determined by a combination of the data sources described in the Appendix. “Never in LF”
is 1 if the individual was recorded as having no years in the labor force during those years.
All columns use the “linked sample.”
Omitted base group variables are: 1931-33 birth cohort; below high school graduate
(overall or for the less than college graduate group); BA only for the college graduate
group; never married; other race and age 59. Omitted from the table are dummy variables
for missing variables regarding spouse in labor force and health status.
Regressions are estimated separately for college graduates and those who did not graduate
from college. For the college graduates degrees beyond a bachelors are added (MA, PhD,
etc.), where MA includes all masters and PhD, MD, JD, etc. includes all graduate and
professional degrees. For non-college graduates dummy variables are added for those with
a high school diploma and some college.
The regressions are weighted by HRS person weights adjusted for sample selection into the
linked sample.


Standard errors in parentheses have been clustered at the individual level.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                                     8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -55-
Appendix Table A5: Female Labor Force Participation at Ages 56 to 58, by Education: HRS

                                 Labor Force Participation at Ages 56 to 58 Years
                        Not                     Not                         Not
                       College    College      College       College      College     College
                      Graduate   Graduate     Graduate      Graduate     Graduate    Graduate
                         (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)
Year of birth
  1937-39             0.00933     0.0128       -0.0184       0.0170      -0.0141      0.0120
                      (0.0238)   (0.0552)     (0.0225)      (0.0531)    (0.0214)     (0.0509)
   1940-42            0.0558*     -0.0112      0.0120        -0.0311     0.0257       -0.0248
                      (0.0245)   (0.0519)     (0.0227)      (0.0491)    (0.0221)     (0.0454)
   1943-45             0.0170     0.0504       -0.0419      0.00718      -0.0334     0.00633
                      (0.0296)   (0.0529)     (0.0281)      (0.0516)    (0.0272)     (0.0505)
   1946-48            0.00282     0.0269      -0.0607*       -0.0217     -0.0348      -0.0139
                      (0.0283)   (0.0529)     (0.0267)      (0.0507)    (0.0259)     (0.0483)
   1949-51             0.0357     0.0763       -0.0296       0.0324      0.00586      0.0309
                      (0.0301)   (0.0486)     (0.0289)      (0.0482)    (0.0274)     (0.0460)
   1952-54            0.00537      0.110*      -0.0599       0.0516      -0.0219      0.0484
                      (0.0326)   (0.0510)     (0.0316)      (0.0500)    (0.0286)     (0.0498)
High school grad.     0.212***                0.144***                  0.0719***
                      (0.0223)                (0.0220)                  (0.0216)
Some college          0.266***                0.188***                  0.0999***
                      (0.0247)                (0.0249)                  (0.0239)
MA                                0.0227                     0.0137                    0.0189
                                 (0.0310)                   (0.0305)                 (0.0287)
PhD, MD, JD, etc.                 0.109*                     0.0751                    0.0517
                                 (0.0456)                   (0.0454)                 (0.0446)
Lifecycle LFP 35-44                           0.302***       0.0818      0.280***      0.0430
                                              (0.0315)      (0.0565)     (0.0297)    (0.0674)
Never in LF 35-44                             -0.0711*      -0.258**     -0.0721*    -0.275***
                                              (0.0321)      (0.0802)     (0.0303)    (0.0820)
Currently married                                                         -0.104*    -0.276***
                                                                         (0.0525)    (0.0696)
Divorced                                                                  0.0796       0.0120
                                                                         (0.0531)    (0.0457)
Widow                                                                     0.0313      -0.0132
                                                                         (0.0540)    (0.0592)
Spouse in LF                                                             0.168***     0.200***
                                                                         (0.0207)    (0.0578)
Health status           no          no          no             no           yes          yes
Age dummies             yes         yes         yes            yes          yes          yes
Race dummies            yes         yes         yes            yes          yes          yes

                                                      8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -56-
Constant              0.341***     0.662***    0.302***     0.672***     0.149*      0.612***
                      (0.0449)     (0.123)     (0.0484)     (0.124)     (0.0663)     (0.124)

N                       7354        1649         7354        1649         7354        1649
R-squared               0.049       0.022        0.123       0.060        0.199       0.130

Sources: Health and Retirement Study (HRS) 1992 to 2012, RAND version with added
variables from original HRS files. Social Security Administration earnings (and W-2) data
are used to calculate life cycle labor force participation (Lifecycle LFP <ages>).

Notes: The dependent variable is 1 if the woman is in the labor force and 0 otherwise. The
HRS asks respondents their labor force status and a woman is in the labor force if she
reported being employed or unemployed and searching for work.
Health status is self-reported and is coded as 1 if “good” or better and 0 otherwise.
Marital status variables refer to current status.
“Lifecycle LFP <ages>” is the fraction of the interval the woman was in the labor force as
determined by a combination of the data sources described in the Appendix. “Never in LF”
is 1 if the individual was recorded as having no years in the labor force during those years.
All columns use the “linked sample.”
Omitted base group variables are: 1934-36 birth cohort; below high school graduate
(overall or for the less than college graduate group); BA only for the college graduate
group; never married; other race and age 56. Omitted from the table are dummy variables
for missing variables regarding spouse in labor force and health status.
Regressions are estimated separately for college graduates and those who did not graduate
from college. For the college graduates degrees beyond a bachelors are added (MA, PhD,
etc.), where MA includes all masters and PhD, MD, JD, etc. includes all graduate and
professional degrees. For non-college graduates dummy variables are added for those with
a high school diploma and some college.
The regressions are weighted by the HRS person weights adjusted for sample selection into
the linked sample.

Standard errors in parentheses have been clustered at the individual level.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                                     8/31/2016 Goldin and Katz, Appendix -57-
