                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE WELFARE COST OF RETIREMENT UNCERTAINTY

                                        Frank N. Caliendo
                                         Maria Casanova
                                           Aspen Gorry
                                           Sita Slavov

                                       Working Paper 22609
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22609


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




We thank Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, Carlos Garriga, John Jones, Yuzhe Zhang, and
seminar audiences at the MRRC research workshop, the QSPS summer workshop, the SEA
annual meetings, Keio University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis, and Clemson University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22609.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Frank N. Caliendo, Maria Casanova, Aspen Gorry, and Sita Slavov. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Welfare Cost of Retirement Uncertainty
Frank N. Caliendo, Maria Casanova, Aspen Gorry, and Sita Slavov
NBER Working Paper No. 22609
September 2016, Revised January 2017
JEL No. C61,E21,H55,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

Uncertainty about the timing of retirement is a major financial risk with implications for decision
making and welfare over the life cycle. We estimate that the standard deviation of the difference
between retirement expectations and actual retirement dates ranges from 4.28 to 6.92 years. We
develop a quantitative model to assess the impact of this risk. Individuals would give up
2.6%-5.7% of total lifetime consumption to fully insure this risk and 1.9%-4.0% of lifetime
consumption simply to know their actual retirement date at age 23. While social insurance
programs could be designed to hedge this risk, current programs in the U.S. (OASI and SSDI)
provide very little timing insurance.

Frank N. Caliendo                                        Aspen Gorry
Department of Economics and Finance                      Department of Economics and Finance
Utah State University                                    Utah State University
Logan, UT 84322-3565                                     Logan, UT 84322-3565
frank.caliendo@usu.edu                                   aspen.gorry@gmail.com

Maria Casanova                                           Sita Slavov
California State University, Fullerton                   Schar School of Policy and Government
Mihaylo College of Business and Economics                George Mason University
Department of Economics                                  3351 Fairfax Drive, MS 3B1
mcasanova@fullerton.edu                                  Arlington, VA 22201
                                                         and NBER
                                                         sslavov@gmu.edu
1. Introduction

The date of retirement is one of the most important …nancial events in the life of an individual. It deter-
mines the number of years of wage earnings and the expected length of time over which the individual
must survive on accumulated savings, both of which are crucial for lifetime budgeting decisions. However,
young individuals do not know with certainty when they will ultimately retire because the transition into
retirement is the result of multiple factors that are hard to predict decades in advance. These include
health status, the retirement and health status of a spouse, changes in working conditions, caring for par-
ents, children, or grandchildren, the timing of unemployment spells, and the degree of skill obsolescence,
among others.
    This paper shows that uncertainty about the timing of retirement is a major …nancial risk that a¤ects
consumption and saving decisions and welfare over the life cycle.1 Even though it has received relatively
less attention, our results indicate that the welfare cost of retirement timing uncertainty is at least as
large as that of better known sources of variation in lifetime income such as aggregate business cycle risk
and idiosyncratic wage shocks. Given the magnitude of the welfare cost, a natural question is whether
existing social insurance programs help to mitigate it. We …rst show that current programs in the U.S.
(OASI and SSDI) o¤er little protection against retirement timing uncertainty. Next, we characterize
the …rst-best insurance policy, and we also study more modest, second-best adjustments to the current
programs that would provide a partial hedge against retirement timing uncertainty.
    The paper proceeds in three steps. First, we provide empirical evidence about the degree of retirement
timing uncertainty. Second, using the most conservative estimates of the degree of timing uncertainty
from the previous step, we compute a lower bound on the welfare cost to individuals. Third, we assess how
well existing social insurance programs mitigate retirement uncertainty and we explore policy adjustments
that improve individual welfare.
    To measure the degree to which individuals are uncertain about the date of retirement, we take a
reduced-form approach that compares an individual’s expected retirement date at some baseline period
with the timing of his eventual retirement. The comparison is informative about the extent to which
individuals optimally update their retirement date in response to the arrival of new information between


   1
     Of course, there are other risks such as uncertainty over asset returns (Grochulski and Zhang (2013)) and uncertainty
over longevity and its correlation with medical expenses (De Nardi, French and Jones (2010)), as well as limitations on
…nancial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell (2007), Lusardi and Mitchell (2008), van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2012), Lusardi,
Michaud and Mitchell (2011), Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2003), Campbell (2006)) that all present challenges to the
household’s ability to insure itself and plan for the future. These additional complications are beyond the scope of this
paper.


                                                             2
the baseline period and the time of the retirement transition. We use data from the Health and Retirement
Study (HRS) to measure self-reported retirement expectations of individuals in their early 50s, and then
follow them for up to 20 years to determine their retirement date.2 The degree of retirement uncertainty
is given by the standard deviation of the di¤erence between retirement expectations and realizations.3
We estimate the standard deviation for a number of subsamples and we make conservative assumptions to
obtain a lower bound on the degree of retirement timing uncertainty that individuals face. Our estimates
range from 4.28 to 6.92 years, depending on the sample. To put these estimates into context, note that
an individual who draws a retirement shock at age 60 instead of age 65— approximately one standard
deviation earlier than expected— loses 5 years of prime wage earnings. The loss in lifetime income is
ampli…ed by the need to spread available assets over a longer retirement period.
    Next, we use a quantitative life-cycle model to assess how costly this timing risk is to individuals.
The standard deviation of the di¤erence between actual and expected retirement is used to calibrate a
distribution of retirement dates. Individuals in the model make optimal consumption and saving choices
in the face of this distribution.4
    We consider two measures of the welfare cost of uncertain retirement. The …rst one computes the
fraction of total lifetime consumption an individual would be willing to give up in order to live in a safe
world where he is endowed with the same expected wealth as the risky world but faces no retirement timing
uncertainty. This is the value of full insurance against timing risk, because the benchmark is a world
where decision making is not distorted and wealth is fully insured. The second approach computes the
value of simply knowing the retirement date, which allows the individual to optimize with full information
but does not insure the individual’s wealth across realizations of the retirement date. This timing premium
captures the value of early resolution of uncertainty as in Epstein, Farhi and Strzalecki (2014).


   2
      To be consistent with the theoretical model, we should measure retirement expectations of individuals just entering the
labor force. Unfortunately, we know of no dataset that elicits retirement expectations at such young ages and then follows
individuals over time to establish their retirement date. To the extent that the information set at age 50 includes information
about the retirement date that was not available to the individual when younger, our approach understates the degree of
uncertainty facing young workers, and is consistent with the interpretation of our estimates as a lower bound.
    3
      An alternative approach would be to use the dispersion of retirement ages as a measure of uncertainty. This would, how-
ever, confound uncertainty with heterogeneity, because individuals have private information about their expected retirement
age.
    4
      In this paper we deal only with known probabilities and we therefore use the words risk and uncertainty interchangeably
throughout. Our theory extends the recursive method in Caliendo, Gorry and Slavov (2015) and Stokey (2014), which is
a technique for solving regime switching optimal control problems where the timing and structure of the new regime are
uncertain. Technically speaking, the current paper has the added complication that the timing p.d.f. is truncated, which
renders the Pontryagin …rst-order conditions for optimality insu¢ cient to produce a unique solution. We derive a “stochastic
continuity” condition as the limiting case of an otherwise redundant transversality condition in order to identify the unique
solution. Our method works for any generic control problem with a stochastic stopping time and a free endpoint on the
state variable.


                                                              3
    Our estimate of the value of full insurance in a baseline model with no Social Security is between 2.6%
and 5.7% of total lifetime consumption, depending on the standard deviation of timing risk. The timing
premium for the same model is between 1.9% and 4.0% of total lifetime consumption. The fact that the
welfare costs remain large under the timing premium implies that much of the costs arise from distortions
to the individual’s consumption/savings plan. To put the magnitude of these costs into context, they
are larger than estimates of the cost of business cycle ‡uctuations as in Lucas (2003) and the cost of
idiosyncratic ‡uctuations in wage income as in Vidangos (2009).
    The welfare costs that we report are conservative for a number of reasons. First, because the HRS
samples people above age 50, our estimates likely underestimate the true uncertainty faced by young indi-
viduals. Second, in calculating the standard deviation of timing risk, we make conservative assumptions
each time the interpretation of the data is ambiguous. Third, we do not assume that individuals have a
direct preference for early resolution of uncertainty (as in the case of Epstein-Zin recursive preferences).
Fourth, individuals in the model have full information about the distribution of the timing risk that they
face. And …nally, individuals in the model build up precautionary savings balances to optimally self
insure against timing risk.5
    A key modeling choice that deserves special attention is the treatment of labor supply and, specif-
ically, retirement. The possibility of delaying or accelerating retirement in response to shocks o¤ers a
hedge against retirement uncertainty which, if ignored, can magnify the welfare cost. The standard re-
tirement models such as French (2005) incorporate shocks to health, employment, and wages to generate
endogenous uncertainty about the retirement date. This approach is not suitable in our context because
the timing of many of the shocks that eventually lead individuals to retire is not observable.6 Moreover,
given the numerous factors that contribute to an individual’s retirement decision, the contribution of any
given shock to that decision is unknown. If we do not know when the shock hits, we can therefore neither
observe the endogenous response to that shock— i.e., the fact that those individuals whose consumption


    5
      One way in which our single-earner model could overstate the welfare cost is if dual-earner households are able to
hedge the …nancial impact of uncertain retirement by postponing a spouse’s retirement date in response to the other’s early
retirement shock. But retirement shocks could also be correlated within the household (e.g., the husband gets sick and the
wife leaves her job to take care of him, couples work in the same industry and receive positively correlated wage shocks, or
couples have grandchildren at the same time, etc.), amplifying the welfare cost. We leave the study of dual-earner households
for future work.
    6
      Self-reports of the reasons that lead HRS respondents to retire show that less than 30% do so as a result of poor health
or disability, unexpected changes in wages, or job loss (Casanova (2013)). The majority of retirements are a result of an
increased preference for leisure, which could itself result from the unexpected death or retirement of a spouse, the birth of
a grandchild, the receipt of an inheritance, etc. These types of shocks are di¢ cult to identify in standard datasets. Also,
conditioning on factors such as education, initial health status, perceived life expectancy, occupation, industry, and the ex
post reason for retirement does not dramatically a¤ect the amount of retirement timing uncertainty that individuals face.
Self-employment and a lack of a pension are factors that are correlated with a higher degree of retirement timing uncertainty.


                                                              4
risk is the greatest are more likely to delay retirement in the aftermath of a shock— nor measure its im-
portance relative to other shocks that in‡uence retirement. In the baseline model, we treat the transition
into retirement as exogenous, but calibrate it to a distribution of retirement dates that already accounts
for endogenous labor supply responses.7 So while retirement is exogenous in the model, our calibration
appropriately accounts for the endogenous labor supply response to unobserved shocks measured in the
data.
    While this approach is consistent with our measurement of individual uncertainty about the timing
of retirement, one might still be concerned that realizing the shock at the date of retirement overstates
the welfare cost as it is completely unanticipated by the individual rather than part of an endogenous
retirement plan. To address this concern, we extend the model to allow individuals to learn the date
of their retirement prior to when it actually occurs, giving them some ‡exibility to re-optimize their
consumption plans. Assuming that individuals learn their retirement date at age 50— earlier than we
measure their uncertainty in the HRS data and well in advance of the mean retirement age— the timing
premium is still 1.5%, only a half percentage point lower than the baseline. This result indicates that
most of the welfare cost comes from distortions to the saving pro…le of young individuals, and that there
is only so much that they can do to rectify their choices once they get information about their eventual
retirement date.
    In the last part of the paper, we investigate the extent to which social insurance programs help to
mitigate timing risk. At a very basic level, the objective of Social Security is to prevent poverty in old
age by helping retirees maintain a minimum standard of living. Because bene…ts are paid out as a life
annuity that lasts as long as the individual lives, and because replacement rates are more generous for the
poor than for the rich, Social Security is commonly thought to meet its objectives. However, retirement
timing risk is a major source of uncertainty in lifetime earnings and retirement wellbeing. We …nd that
a Social Security retirement program that is calibrated to match current U.S. policy provides only a
small amount of timing insurance. Social Security can partially insure timing risk as an early retirement
shock leads to a lower total Social Security tax liability and to a higher replacement rate through the
progressive bene…t-earning rule. Moreover, the payment of Social Security bene…ts as a life annuity boosts


    7
      This is best explained with an example. Suppose that, when interviewed at a baseline age, all individuals expect to
retire at age 65. Suppose further that half of them experience a shock that increases their taste for leisure at age 55, while the
other half experience the same shock at 70. Individuals respond to the same shock di¤erently depending on their age: those
who experience it at age 55 face a large drop in consumption if retiring at that age, and hence choose to remain employed
until age 60. Those who experience the shock at 70 retire immediately. When we go to the data, we do not necessarily
observe when the shock hits, just when the individual chooses to retire after his endogenous labor supply response. Our
uncertainty measure will tell us that individuals in this example retire +/-5 years from the expected date.


                                                                5
the individual’s expected wealth, which makes him less sensitive to timing risk. However, to adequately
insure against timing risk, a program would need to provide individuals with a large payment if they
unexpectedly retire early and a small payment if they retire late. Social Security does just the opposite
because of the positive relationship between bene…ts and earnings, making it ine¤ective at providing
timing insurance: individuals who su¤er early retirement shocks have low average earnings and bene…ts
while individuals who retire late have high average earnings and bene…ts.
    In some public pension systems such as Japan, the UK, Spain and other European countries, part of
retirement bene…ts are independent of the individual’s earnings history. In other words, a component of
retirement bene…ts is …xed regardless of when retirement occurs. We show that this feature can mitigate
up to one-third of the welfare costs of retirement timing uncertainty. The largest insurance gain comes
from breaking the link between bene…ts and earnings. However, the bene…t-earning link encourages labor
force participation, and if this is a politically desirable goal then partially basing bene…ts on earnings
can help create this incentive, while having a component that is unrelated to earnings can signi…cantly
increase the amount of timing insurance provided by Social Security.8
    A potential concern with our reduced-form approach to modeling retirement timing uncertainty is
that it might not capture the welfare cost of speci…c shocks such as health or disability. In particular, it
would be problematic if modeling speci…c shocks dramatically alters our welfare calculations. Therefore,
as a robustness check we explicitly model disability. To do this we extend the model so that individuals
face uncertainty both about the timing of retirement and about their disability status upon retirement.
The Social Security system pays retirement bene…ts to all retirees and it pays disability bene…ts to those
who become disabled before the normal retirement age. We …nd that disability insurance almost perfectly
o¤sets the disability risk that the individual faces, but it does not o¤set much of the timing risk. That
is, disability insurance successfully replaces lost post-retirement earnings if the individual is unable to
work, but it does not solve the problem that the individual doesn’t know when such a shock might
strike. While we do not model all potential shocks, modeling a particularly problematic shock for lifetime
earnings (disability) does not alter the magnitude of the welfare cost from our reduced-form approach
that treats all shocks generically.
    In addition, retirement timing uncertainty is a powerful channel that may help to explain precaution-
ary savings balances that otherwise seem large. For instance, Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun (2006)


   8
     The Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program in the U.S. has a ‡avor of a …xed component that is unrelated to
earnings. However, only individuals with little or no income qualify. Insuring against timing uncertainty requires a policy
that has a …xed component above and beyond SSI that is available to all retirees.


                                                            6
estimate that as many as 80% of Americans in the HRS have asset balances that exceed the optimal
amount of savings from the perspective of a life-cycle model. Individuals in our model not only save
for retirement but they also save because they don’t know when retirement will strike. We …nd that a
signi…cant portion of observed savings may be due to uncertainty about the date of retirement. Models
without retirement timing uncertainty will tend to understate the precautionary motive for saving.
    Finally, Blau (2008) and Grochulski and Zhang (2013) also study consumption/saving decisions over
the life cycle with uncertainty about the timing of retirement. Like our setting where timing uncertainty
causes a reduction in consumption at retirement, uncertain retirement leads to precautionary savings
and consumption drops discretely when individuals retire.9 We extend their analysis by providing em-
pirical evidence on retirement timing uncertainty, by computing the welfare cost of this uncertainty, and
by evaluating the role of social insurance programs in mitigating this risk and considering alternative
arrangements that improve insurance coverage. On the technical side, both Blau (2008) and Grochulski
and Zhang (2013) assume stationarity of the timing risk (constant hazard rate of job loss). We solve a
non-stationary problem in which the hazard rate is allowed to depend on age as in the data. We also
consider uncertainty over the individual’s disability status and allow this second risk to be non-stationary
with respect to age. While allowing for non-stationary risk departs from standard dynamic programming,
it allows us to more fully calibrate both retirement timing and disability risks to the available data.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the measurement of retirement
timing uncertainty; Section 3 introduces the quantitative model; Section 4 describes the calibration;
Section 5 discusses the baseline results and policy analysis; Section 6 introduces the model augmented
with disability risk; and Section 7 concludes.


2. Measuring retirement uncertainty

When thinking about retirement uncertainty, the distinction between voluntary and involuntary retire-
ments, which is at the forefront of the literature studying retirement patterns, comes to mind. Involuntary
retirements are the result of employment constraints— due, for example, to the onset of disability or job
loss— while voluntary retirees leave the labor force even though the option to remain employed remains
available, usually to enjoy more leisure or spend more time with their families (Casanova (2013)).
    The distinction between voluntary and involuntary retirement is often interpreted as a distinction be-


   9
    There is a large literature that discusses how consumption changes at retirement. For instance, see Hamermesh (1984),
Mariger (1987), Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg (2001), Hurd and Rohwedder (2006), Hurst (2006), Haider and Stephens
(2007), and Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2007) among others.


                                                           7
tween expected and unexpected retirement. This interpretation owes much to the retirement-consumption
literature, which has focused on the Euler equation for the periods right before and after retirement
takes place. Several papers have found that the consumption drop at retirement is considerably larger
for individuals who retire involuntarily, suggesting that voluntary retirements are anticipated, and al-
low individuals to better smooth consumption around that event (Banks, Blundell and Tanner (1998),
Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg (2001), Hurd and Rohwedder (2008), Smith (2006)).
    While this distinction may be appropriate when considering individuals that are one period away from
retirement, it is no longer helpful from the perspective of a model that focuses on the full life cycle pro…le
of consumption. For a worker just entering the labor force, the degree of uncertainty about the likelihood
of retiring for involuntary reasons is not necessarily larger than that of retiring voluntarily. For example,
a young worker may not be better able to predict the probability of becoming disabled before reaching
retirement age than that of getting married to a spouse who will retire early, and who will lead him to
anticipate his retirement in order to spend time together. The concept of retirement timing uncertainty
we use in this paper is hence not limited to the negative employment shocks that cause the one third of
involuntary retirements observed in the data (Casanova (2013), Szinovacz and Davey (2005)), but rather
covers all life events that may trigger an exit from the labor force which cannot be perfectly foreseen
from a young age, including the retirement of a spouse, the birth of a grandchild, a dislike for the work
environment in the pre-retirement years, etc.
    In order to measure retirement timing uncertainty, we must …rst make an assumption on how individ-
uals form expectations regarding their retirement age. A straightforward approach would be to assume
that the subjective distribution of retirement probabilities coincides with the actual retirement distribu-
tion estimated from the data. In particular, if the expected retirement age is assumed to coincide with the
average retirement age in the population, deviations of actual retirements from that expectation would
be informative about the degree of uncertainty. This assumption of unconditional rational expectations is
likely to yield biased estimates of retirement uncertainty, given that individuals have private information
about, e.g., their health status or taste for work, allowing them to predict whether they will retire earlier
or later than average.
    We follow an alternative approach that makes use of self-reported retirement expectations, and is
consistent in the presence of private information.10 The implicit assumption is that individuals use

  10
     The use of expectation variables, and retirement expectations in particular, has become commonplace in the literature in
recent years. There is a growing number of papers studying the validity of retirement expectations elicited from individuals,
and showing that they are strong predictors of actual retirement dates (Bernheim (1989), Dwyer and Hu (1999), Haider and
Stephens (2007)), consistent with rational expectations (Benítez-Silva and Dwyer (2005), Benítez-Silva et al. (2008)), and


                                                             8
all private information at their disposal when reporting their expected retirement age. The degree of
uncertainty is given by the size of the deviations between expected and eventual retirement ages. In
particular, we estimate the standard deviation of the following variable:


                                                  X = (Eret       Ret);

where Eret is an individual’s expected retirement age, and Ret is the actual age at which retirement
takes place.11


2.1. Data and empirical evidence

The data come from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a nationally representative longitudinal
survey of 7,700 households headed by an individual aged 51 to 61 in the …rst survey wave. Interviews
are conducted every two years, and we use data for individuals who are followed for a maximum of 11
waves, from 1992 to 2012. We use retirement expectations that are measured in wave 1, and then follow
individuals up until the end of the panel in order to establish their retirement age.
    The variable Eret is constructed from questions that ask individuals when they “plan to stop work
altogether” and when they “think [they] will stop work or retire.”12 We include observations for males
who are aged 51 to 61 in wave 1. We exclude those who are not employed or do not report retirement
plans, which results in a sample of 3,251 individuals. To be consistent with the wording of the retirement
expectations questions, retirement is de…ned as the …rst time the individual works zero hours.13 The
variable Ret is constructed combining information on the …rst wave in which a respondent is observed to
be retired, with the month and year in which he left his last job. In cases where the retirement age is
not observed— either because of attrition or the end of the sample period— and for those individuals who
say they will never retire, we make assumptions that allow us to get a conservative value for the variable
X. These assumptions, together with the strategy used to control for measurement error in retirement
expectations, and further details on sample selection and the construction of the variables Eret and Ret,
are described in Appendix A.

updated upon arrival of new information (Benítez-Silva and  p Dwyer (2005), McGarry (2004)).
   11
      In addition to computing the standard deviation of X, E[(X E(X))2 ], we have  p also computed an alternative measure
of the amount of uncertainty about the timing of retirement that individuals face, E(X 2 ). This alternative measure may
be a little more intuitive because it gives the typical gap between Eret and Ret. However, we focus on the …rst measure
because it is mathematically less than (or equal to) the second, making our estimates of timing uncertainty as conservative
as possible. In any case, the di¤erence between the two measures is practically insigni…cant in our samples.
   12
      We combine the variables Rwrplnyr and Rwrplnya from the RAND-HRS dataset.
   13
      Some people do go back to work after retirement, and we estimate post-retirement labor income in the theoretical
analysis later in the paper.


                                                            9
    The major strength of the HRS for our purposes is the fact that it both elicits retirement expectations
and then follows workers over time so that their retirement age can be established. The dataset, however,
is not without drawbacks. The main disadvantage is that it samples older individuals, so we measure
retirement timing uncertainty for a sample of workers who are close to retirement age. Since this likely
understates the degree of retirement timing uncertainty facing young individuals, our welfare estimates
will be conservative.14
    The …rst column of Table 1 displays the distribution of retirement expectations in our sample. Close to
15% of individuals report that they will never retire, and another 10% state that they do not know when
retirement will take place. For individuals who provide a speci…c retirement date, two peaks are apparent
at the Social Security eligibility ages of 62 and 65. The last two columns of the table compare reported
retirement expectations with actual retirement ages. To do so, we restrict the sample to individuals
for whom both the date at which they expect to retire and their eventual retirement date fall within
the sample period. Expected retirement ages for this subsample, shown in column 2, display the same
peaks at ages 62 and 65. Two facts are striking when comparing the distribution of expected retirements
with that of actual retirements, shown in column 3. First, the peaks at the Social Security ages are
considerably less pronounced in the distribution of actual retirements than that of expected retirements.
Second, the distribution of actual retirements displays a larger concentration at the tails, as evidenced
by the large share of individuals who end up retiring earlier than age 55 or later than age 66.15
    Table 2 shows estimates of the standard deviation of X for di¤erent samples. The most conservative
estimate, presented in row 1, equals 4.28. It is obtained from the sample of individuals for whom both
Eret and Ret are observed. Because this subsample excludes individuals likely to face the highest degree
of uncertainty— those whose actual retirement date is censored, who say they will never retire, or who
do not know when they will retire— the resulting estimate yields a lower bound on retirement timing
uncertainty. Subsequent rows use larger samples, adding individuals for whom either Eret or Ret are not
observed, but can be assigned a value by making a conservative assumption, as discussed in Appendix A.


  14
      We also likely overstate the degree of uncertainty facing the oldest workers, although this likely has a small e¤ect
on our welfare estimates. While the degree of retirement timing uncertainty decreases as retirement approaches and more
information becomes available, the evidence indicates that it remains high until very close to retirement age. Haider and
Stephens (2007) estimate that less than 70% of HRS respondents who expect to retire within one year are in fact retired
by the next survey wave. Our own estimates show that we are not missing a sharp drop in uncertainty as retirement nears.
Robustness checks presented in the appendix show that the standard deviation of X decreases by only half a year to one
year when comparing the sample of individuals aged 51 to 55 to those aged 56 to 61.
   15
      A di¤erence between Eret and Ret is not evidence that Eret is irrational. Respondents are asked for a point estimate of
Eret rather than a full distribution. We assume that individuals are rational and have a distribution of potential retirement
dates in mind when making consumption and saving decisions, and we interpret a di¤erence between Eret and Ret as
evidence of such retirement uncertainty.


                                                             10
It is important to point out that the estimate shown in the last row (6.82) is not intended to represent
an upper bound on uncertainty, as it is still obtained using a conservative approach from a sample of
individuals close to retirement age.
    In the baseline simulations of the model, we use a value of 5 for the standard deviation of uncertainty,
implying that an individual who draws a one-standard-deviation shock will stop working 5 years earlier
or later than expected. This value likely understates the true degree of retirement timing uncertainty for
the reasons stated above.16 In fact, we would be justi…ed in using a standard deviation closer to 7 years,
based on our conservative analysis of the data. However, our goal in the remainder of the paper is to
establish a lower bound on the cost of retirement timing uncertainty. A standard deviation of 5 years
is as low as we feel comfortable going, because even at this estimate we exclude large portions of the
available sample.17




   16
       Instead of using self-reported retirement expectations in the construction of retirement timing uncertainty, suppose we
had taken the simple approach of assuming that the subjective distribution of retirement probabilities coincides with the
actual retirement distribution estimated from the data. This simple exercise leads to a standard deviation in retirement
uncertainty that is a little less than 6 years, and so in the end we would calibrate our theoretical model roughly the same
way.
    17
       Although we have consistently interpreted ambiguous data in a conservative way to establish a lower bound on the cost
of retirement timing uncertainty, there are of course some issues that are beyond our control and could a¤ect our conclusions.
In particular, it is di¢ cult to control for psychological considerations such as respondents not taking the survey questions
seriously and interpreting survey questions in di¤erent ways. For example, respondents may just guess Eret rather than
really think about it, or they may base Eret on the last time they intend to stop working rather than the …rst.


                                                             11
Table 1. Distribution of Expected and Actual Retirement Ages


                          All         Both Eret and Ret
                                      during sample period
                         Eret             Eret     Ret
            Age < 55     0.52             0.74    4.59
            Age = 55     1.91             2.69    2.64
            Age = 56     1.23             1.85    2.75
            Age = 57     1.02             1.37    3.43
            Age = 58     1.41             2.22    4.44
            Age = 59     1.29             1.69    5.02
            Age = 60     4.46             6.39    7.98
            Age = 61     2.77             3.70    8.29
            Age = 62     18.33           25.30    16.96
            Age = 63     8.74             12.15    7.40
            Age = 64     1.48             1.85    6.29
            Age = 65     16.98           21.45     8.40
            Age = 66     7.72             9.93    4.23
            Age > 66     8.00             8.66    17.59
              Never      14.61
           Do not know   9.54

               N         3,251           1,893    1,893




                                 12
               Table 2. Standard Deviation of X for Di¤erent Subsamples


                                                                          Standard
                                           Sample                         Deviation         N
                 1   Ret observed                                            4.28      1,903
                 2   1 + Work past Eret, Ret not observed                    5.05      2,147
                 3   2 + Eret after sample period, Ret not observed          5.04      2,152
                 4   3 + Will never retire, Ret observed                     6.54      2,476
                 5   4 + Will never retire, Ret not observed                 6.35      2,627
                 6   5 + DK when they will retire, Ret observed              6.92      2,840
                 7   6 + DK when they will retire, Ret not observed          6.82      2,937




3. A model of retirement uncertainty

In this section we construct a quantitative model of individual consumption and saving decisions over
the life cycle in the face of uncertainty about the timing of retirement and uncertainty about disability
status after retirement. A feature of our approach is to allow for ‡exible distributions over the timing of
the retirement date, to conform to the moments of timing uncertainty observed in the data. Likewise, we
allow for ‡exible distributions of disability risk, to calibrate this second layer of uncertainty to estimates
of the probability of becoming disabled conditional on each retirement age.


3.1. Notation

Age is continuous and is indexed by t. Individuals start work at t = 0 and pass away no later than t = T .
The probability of surviving to age t is     (t). A given individual collects wages at rate (1          )w(t) as
long as retirement has not yet occurred, where      is the Social Security tax rate. The retirement date is
a continuous random variable with continuously di¤erentiable p.d.f.        (t) and c.d.f.       (t), with support
[0; t0 ], where t0 < T so that everyone draws a retirement shock before some speci…ed age. Truncation
prevents us from needing to estimate the w(t) pro…le deep into old age when data are not reliable.
   When retirement strikes at age t, the individual collects a lump sum B(t; d) = SS(tjd) + Y (t)         (1   d)
where SS(tjd) is the present discounted value (as of shock date t) of Social Security retirement and


                                                     13
disability bene…ts, d is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the individual has become disabled and
0 if he is still able to work after retirement, and Y (t) is the present discounted value (as of shock
date t) of post-retirement earnings.18 Let d be a random variable with conditional p.d.f.                   (djt), hence
 (0jt) + (1jt) = 1 for all t. Note that d may be correlated with the retirement shock t, and we assume
that (djt) is continuously di¤erentiable in t.19 Hence, (1jt) should be interpreted as the probability
that the individual will qualify for disability bene…ts if retirement strikes at date t. We abstract from
policy uncertainty about future Social Security reform as studied by Caliendo, Gorry and Slavov (2015).
    Individuals have full information about the risks that they face. As they age, they rationally update
the distribution of timing risk and behave in a dynamically consistent fashion. In our baseline model, we
model the timing of retirement in the same way that random variables are usually modeled— the individual
learns the value of the random variable at the time it is realized, and he engages in precautionary saving
in advance. However, in an extension later in the paper we continue to assume retirement is stochastic
but the individual learns his age of retirement before retirement occurs. In this setting, the individual
still engages in precautionary saving but to a lesser degree, because he knows that he will have some time
to adjust his saving behavior after the information revelation date.
    Consumption spending is c(t) and private savings in a riskless asset is k(t), which earns interest at
rate r. Annuity markets are closed and capital markets are perfect in the sense that the individual can
borrow and lend freely at rate r. The individual starts with no assets, has no bequest motive, and is not
allowed to leave debt behind at t = T . Hence, k(0) = k(T ) = 0.


3.2. Individual problem

Period utility is CRRA over consumption with relative risk aversion , and utils are discounted at the rate
of time preference .20 The individual takes as given factor prices and government taxes and transfers,
while treating the retirement date as a continuous random variable and disability as a binary random
variable. We extend the recursive method in Caliendo, Gorry and Slavov (2015) and Stokey (2014) to
the current setting and we relegate lengthy proofs and derivations to Appendix B.
    As long as retirement has not yet occurred, the individual follows a contingent plan (c1 (t); k1 (t))t2[0;t0 ] ,


  18
      Income from asset holdings is not included in Y (t) because asset holdings are modeled separately.
  19
      We assume continuous di¤erentiability in t for notational convenience. We could easily allow for a …nite number of
discontinuities in the t dimension, but then we would need to break the p.d.f. apart at each discontinuity and allow for a
unique maximum condition for each continuous segment. This would complicate notation without adding much economic
content.
   20
      We abstract from leisure in the period utility function. As we discuss later in the paper, under common assumptions
this simpli…cation has no impact on our welfare calculations.


                                                           14
which solves the following dynamic stochastic control problem (where t and d are random variables)

                                      Z         (                                                                               )
                                           t0
                                                                                 c(t)1               X
                                                                     t
                     max          :             [1       (t)]e               (t)                 +          (djt) (t)S(t; k(t); d) dt
                  c(t)t2[0;t0 ]        0                                          1
                                                                                                      d


subject to
                                                                 Z       T
                                                                                     z          c2 (zjt; k(t); d)1
                                           S(t; k(t); d) =                   e            (z)                         dz;
                                                                     t                                 1


                                                      dk(t)
                                                            = rk(t) + (1                         )w(t)      c(t);
                                                       dt

                                                                 k(0) = 0, k(t0 ) free;

where c2 (zjt; k(t); d) solves the post-retirement deterministic problem. For given k(t) and given realiza-
tions of t and d, the post-retirement problem can be written as

                                                                         Z       T
                                                                                          z         c(z)1
                                                        max          :               e        (z)            dz;
                                                      c(z)z2[t;T ]           t                       1

subject to
                                                     dK(z)
                                                           = rK(z)                        c(z); for z 2 [t; T ];
                                                      dz

                                      t and d given, K(t) = k(t) + B(t; d) given, K(T ) = 0;

where K(t) is total …nancial assets at retirement, which includes accumulated savings k(t) plus the
lump-sum payment B(t; d).
   The pre-retirement solution (c1 (t); k1 (t))t2[0;t0 ] obeys the following system of di¤erential equations and
boundary condition
                                "                            #                                                    !
dc(t)        c(t) e( r)t X           (k(t) + B(t; d))e rt                                                     1       c(t) (t)      0 (t)        c(t)
      =                    (djt) R T                                                                                           +            +r          ;
 dt                (t)                 rv+(r )v=    (v)1= dv                                                          1    (t)      (t)
                         d        t e


                                                      dk(t)
                                                            = rk(t) + (1                         )w(t)      c(t);
                                                       dt

                                                                                 k(0) = 0;

where the remaining boundary condition c(0) is chosen optimally as explained in Appendix B. The optimal




                                                                                         15
consumption path for z 2 [t; T ] after the retirement shock has hit at date t with optimal savings k1 (t) is

                                                     (k1 (t) + B(t; d))e                         rt
                   c2 (zjt; k1 (t); d) = R T                                                               e(r         )z=
                                                                                                                                (z)1= , for z 2 [t; T ]:
                                                     e   rv+(r               )v=         (v)1=        dv
                                                 t


3.3. Welfare

In this section we introduce two measures of the welfare cost of retirement uncertainty. The …rst is
our baseline welfare cost, which captures the value of fully insuring against retirement uncertainty. The
second captures just the value of early resolution of uncertainty. We refer to the baseline welfare cost
as the value of full insurance, and we refer to the second welfare cost as the timing premium. In each
case, our measure only captures the cost of uncertainty because we hold the individual’s expected wealth
constant across all comparisons.
   We begin with the value of full insurance. As a point of reference, consider the case where the
individual faces no risk (NR) about retirement. Instead, the individual is endowed at t = 0 with the same
expected future income (as in the world with retirement uncertainty) and solves

                                                                             Z     T
                                                                                             t          c(t)1
                                                         max             :             e          (t)                    dt;
                                                     c(t)t2[0;T ]              0                         1

subject to
                                                                 dk(t)
                                                                       = rk(t)                          c(t);
                                                                  dt
                                Z                            Z                                                                            !
                                    t0    X                          t
                                                                              rv                                                     rt
             k(0) =                           (djt) (t)                  e         (1            )w(v)dv + B(t; d)e                           dt, k(T ) = 0:
                                0         d                      0

The solution is
                                                             k(0)e(r                   )t=       (t)1=
                                          cN R (t) = R T                                                           , for t 2 [0; T ]:
                                                             e   rv+(r                 )v=       (v)1= dv
                                                         0

   The baseline welfare cost of living with retirement uncertainty (value of full insurance),                                                                   , solves the
following equation

             Z    T
                            t  [cN R (t)(1     )]1
                       e            (t)            dt
              0                        1
             Z                           Z t                                                             Z                                                      !
                  t0       X                        c (z)1                                                     T
                                                                                                                                  c (zjt; k1 (t); d)1
       =                     (djt) (t)       e z (z) 1                                          dz +               e     z
                                                                                                                               (z) 2                       dz       dt:
              0                            0          1                                                    t                             1
                            d


By equating utility from expected wealth to expected utility, our baseline welfare cost measures the
individual’s willingness-to-pay to have one’s expected wealth. This captures the value of full insurance


                                                                                           16
because the individual is paying to have his expected wealth with certainty, rather than paying merely
for information about retirement.
   While our baseline welfare cost,                    , follows in the tradition of calculating willingness-to-pay to avoid
uncertainty by equating utility from expected wealth to expected utility, there are other sensible ways to
calculate the welfare cost of retirement uncertainty. For example, rather than using utility from expected
wealth as the welfare benchmark, we could instead use as a benchmark a world in which the individual
learns at time 0 when and how retirement uncertainty will be resolved so that the individual follows the
optimal deterministic consumption path conditional on that information. To compute the welfare cost
of retirement uncertainty, we would then compare the ex-ante expected utility of this world (expected
utility just before the time 0 information is released) to the expected utility of living with retirement
uncertainty.
   Following this alternative approach, we now formally de…ne the timing premium. Now our point
of comparison is a world where at time 0 the individual learns both the retirement date t as well as
the disability indicator d. Upon learning these things, the individual solves the following deterministic
problem

                                                                             Z   T
                                                                                           z          c(z)1
                                                       max               :           e          (z)                   dz;
                                               c(z)z2[0;T ]                  0                         1

subject to
                                                                   dk(z)
                                                                         = rk(z)                      c(z);
                                                                    dz
                                            Z      t
                                                               rv                                                        rt
                             k(0jt; d) =               e            (1           )w(v)dv + B(t; d)e                           , k(T ) = 0:
                                               0

The solution is
                                              k(0jt; d)e(r                               )z=     (z)1=
                                 c(zjt; d) = R T                                                                   , for z 2 [0; T ]:
                                                   rv+(r                             )v=        (v)1= dv
                                              0 e

The timing premium           0   is the solution to the following equation

             Z                          Z                                                                                      !
                   t0   X                      T
                                                                         [c(zjt; d)(1                      0 )]
                                                                                                               1
                                                               z
                            (djt) (t)              e                 (z)                                                 dz        dt
               0                           0                                       1
                        d
             Z                          Z                                                             Z                                                 !
                   t0   X                      t
                                                                       c (z)1                              T
                                                                                                                             c (zjt; k1 (t); d)1
                                                           z                                                         z
       =                    (djt) (t)              e                (z) 1                      dz +            e          (z) 2                    dz       dt:
               0                           0                             1                             t                            1
                        d


   In other words, we are calculating how much an individual would pay at time 0 to know his retirement
date t and his future disability status upon retirement d. This exercise is guaranteed by Jensen’s inequality


                                                                                         17
to yield a smaller welfare cost from retirement uncertainty than what is generated by our baseline method
as shown in Appendix C. The individual would always pay more to have his expected wealth with certainty
( ) than he would pay for retirement information (                0 ),   because simply knowing one’s wealth is not as
good as insuring one’s wealth.
    Our timing premium is related to the timing premium in Epstein, Farhi and Strzalecki (2014). In both
cases, it is the amount individuals would pay for early resolution of uncertainty. However, their premium
is the result of Epstein-Zin recursive preferences, which carry a taste for early resolution of uncertainty
even if early information is not used to reoptimize. Indeed, in their setting individuals do not reoptimize
if information is released early. In constrast, in our setting with CRRA utility the timing premium is the
result of better decision making in the face of early information. Including a taste for early information
would only enhance the magnitude of the welfare cost of retirement uncertainty.21
    Finally, one may be concerned that we have abstracted from leisure in the period utility function.
For the common case in which utility from consumption and leisure is additively separable, including
leisure causes our baseline welfare cost to increase. This is because retirement timing uncertainty now
imposes an additional cost on the individual in the form of uncertainty about leisure time, and he would
pay an additional premium to fully insure this risk. On the other hand, including leisure leaves the
timing premium unchanged. The individual would not pay an additional premium for early resolution
of uncertainty about his …xed leisure endowment. These results are formally shown in Appendix D. In
addition, in Section 5 we explore the quantitative impact of non-separable consumption and leisure and
…nd that the welfare cost of retirement timing uncertainty is slightly smaller when they are substitutes.22


4. Calibration

The parameters to be chosen are the maximum lifespan T , the survival probability                     (t) as a function of
age t, the individual discount rate , the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion , the real return on assets
r, the age-earnings pro…le w(t), the p.d.f. over timing risk                  (t) and its upper support t0 , the present


  21
      There are at least two other ways in which our modeling of the welfare cost is conservative. First, we endow the
individual with full information about the distributions of the random variables over both timing risk and disability risk.
Second, we assume the individual saves optimally in the face of these risks and therefore accumulates optimal precautionary
savings balances to bu¤er the shocks.
   22
      If consumption and leisure are complements, then retirement timing uncertainty would become even more costly than
in our baseline model without leisure, because in this case an early retirement shock would leave the individual with reduced
wealth and with a reduced ability to enjoy that wealth. In this way, the stakes are ampli…ed and the welfare cost would
naturally increase. Alternatively, unlike our model where early retirement is bad news, some individuals may retire early
because of a large, positive shock to wealth. But even then individuals would be willing to pay for early information on the
timing of such wealth shocks in order to consume and save the right amount.


                                                             18
discounted value of post-retirement earnings Y (t) as a function of retirement date t, the Social Security
tax rate , the present discounted value of Social Security retirement and disability bene…ts SS(tjd) as
a function of retirement date t and disability state d, as well as the conditional p.d.f. over disability
risk (djt). Table 3 provides a comprehensive summary of our calibration of each of these parameters
explained in detail below.


4.1. Lifespan, preferences, and wages

The individual starts work at age 23 (model age t = 0) and passes away no later than age 100 (model
age t = 1). Hence we set the maximum lifespan to T = 1. The age-23 start time allows us to match the
fraction of workers who work less than 35 years (explained in detail below).
      Our survival data come from the Social Security Administration’s cohort mortality tables. These
tables contain the mortality assumptions underlying the intermediate projections in the 2013 Trustees
Report. The mortality table for each cohort provides the number of survivors at each age f1; 2; :::; 119g,
starting with a cohort of 10,000 newborns. We truncate the mortality data at age 100, assuming that
nobody survives past that age. In the baseline results, we assume individuals enter the labor market at
age 23, giving them a 77-year potential lifespan within the model. In our baseline parameterization, we
use the mortality pro…le for males born in 1992, who are assumed to enter the labor market in 2015. For
this cohort, we construct the survival probabilities at all subsequent ages conditional on surviving to age
23.
      We …t a continuous survival function that has the following form


                                                 (t) = 1   tx :


After transforming the survival data to correspond to model time, with dates on [0; 1], x = 3:41 provides
a close …t to the data (see Figure 1).
      The utility parameters   and   vary somewhat in the literature. We will consider a conservative value
for the discount rate,    = 0. Higher values cause the welfare cost of retirement timing uncertainty to
increase, because early consumption is quite valuable to the individual and hence it is relatively expensive
to self-insure retirement risk using precautionary savings. The CRRA parameter is typically assumed to
fall in the range of 1 to 5, and we choose the midpoint,    = 3. We assume a risk-free real interest rate of
2.9% per year, which is the long-run real interest rate assumed by the Social Security Trustees. In our
model, this implies a value of r = 77 0:029 = 2:233.


                                                     19
    We truncate wages w(t) at model time t0 = (75 23)=(100 23) or actual age 75 because of our concern
with the reliability of wage data beyond age 75.23 Using data for workers between 16 and 75 years of age,
we …t a …fth-order polynomial to a wage pro…le constructed from CPS data described in detail below, and
we normalize the result so that maximum wages are unity. Although we include observations before age
23 with the view that more observations are better, model time zero corresponds to age 23 and therefore
we only use the post-23 segment of the …tted wage pro…le (model time [0; t0 ]),


                w(t)t2[0;t0 ] = 0:3169 + 2:7198t      1:5430t2        12:8220t3 + 37:5777t4     33:1772t5 :


Figure 2 plots the …tted wage pro…le along with the data.
    Our simulated wage income is based on data from the 2014 Current Population Survey (CPS) Merged
Outgoing Rotation Group (MORG) …le created by the National Bureau of Economic Research. House-
holds that enter the CPS are initially interviewed for 4 months. After a break of 8 months, they are then
interviewed again for another 4 months before being dropped from the sample. Questions about earnings
are asked in the 4th and 8th interviews, and these outgoing interviews are included in the MORG …le.
We restrict the sample to men and calculate, at each age, the ratio of average annual earnings to the
2014 Social Security average wage index (AWI).24 Next, we project the AWI forward starting in 2015,
assuming that it grows at 3.88% per year in nominal terms. This is consistent with the 2015 Social
Security Trustees Report’s intermediate assumptions about nominal wage growth. Multiplying this series
by the previously calculated age-speci…c ratios produces a nominal wage pro…le for a hypothetical worker
who is aged 23 in 2015. This series is de‡ated to 2015 dollars assuming in‡ation of 2.7% per year, again
consistent with the Social Security Trustees’intermediate assumptions for 2015.


4.2. Retirement timing

We use a truncated beta density to capture uncertainty over the timing of retirement,

                                                 t   1 (t0   t)   1
                                       (t) = R t0                        ; for t 2 [0; t0 ]
                                                     1 (t0        1 dt
                                              0 t            t)




   23
      For instance, the data show an upward trend in wages for most education groups between ages 75 and 85, which would
seem to re‡ect selection problems rather than the true wage pro…le of a particular worker.
   24
      Average weekly earnings are provided for non-self employed workers. We multiply these by 52 to obtain annual earnings.
We use the CPS earnings weights to calculate average annual earnings by age. Since CPS earnings data are topcoded, our
average earnings estimates are likely to be biased downward.


                                                             20
with mean and variance
                                                 E(t) = t0
                                                                   +
                                                       t0 E(t)
                                        var(t) =                 :
                                                   ( + )( + + 1)

We truncate the density function at age 75 for consistency with the truncation of wages at age 75, or
model time t0 = (75    23)=(100   23). We set the mean retirement age to 65 which corresponds to model
time E(t) = (65    23)=(100   23) and the standard deviation to 5 years, consistent with our measure of
                                                               p
retirement timing uncertainty, which corresponds to model time var(t) = 5=(100 23). Then, from the
mean and variance equations we can calculate the remaining parameters

                                       [t0   E(t)] (E(t))2         E(t)
                                   =                                    = 12:7615
                                             t0 var(t)              t0

                                                    t0
                                             =                 1   = 3:0385:
                                                   E(t)

See Figure 3 for a graph of the p.d.f. of the calibrated distribution.
   Finally, the age-23 starting point, together with the above parameterization of the mean and variance
of the timing density, imply that the chance of working less than 35 years is 10%. This matches self-
reported data on career length in the HRS; it also ensures that we do not overstate the likelihood
of working less than a “full” career from the perspective of the calculation of Social Security bene…ts
(explained in detail below).


4.3. Retirement income and insurance

Finally, to simulate decision making and welfare we need to calibrate post-retirement earnings. We also
need to calibrate Social Security retirement bene…ts and disability bene…ts as a function of the date of
retirement, as well as the probability of becoming disabled upon retirement.
   We use the RAND version of the HRS dataset, which includes 3,517 men who are employed in wave
1, to estimate post-retirement earnings. We de…ne retirement (and determine a person’s retirement age)
as described in Section 2. We drop individuals who do not have a retirement age, who have a zero
respondent-level analysis weight, or who are only observed in a single wave (thus providing no within-
person variation for our …xed e¤ects models). This sample selection leaves us with 2,603 individuals and
23,617 person-wave observations over the 11 waves of the HRS. To check robustness, we also re-do all
of our analysis using the sample of 1,895 individuals (17,326 person-year observations) who provide an


                                                          21
expected retirement age, and the 2,216 individuals (20,526 person-year observations) who have never had
a disability episode.
    The RAND HRS includes infomation about several categories of income, including earnings from
work, capital income, pension and annuity income, Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and Social Se-
curity Disability Insurance (SSDI) income, Social Security retirement income, unemployment insurance
and worker’s compensation, other government transfers (including veteran’s bene…ts, welfare, and food
stamps), and other income (including alimony, lump sums from pensions and insurance, inheritances, and
any other income). Except for capital income and other income, which are provided at the household
level, all income categories are measured at the individual level. We focus on income in two categories:
earnings from work and income from non-Social Security transfers (in which we combine unemployment
insurance, worker’s compensation, and other government transfers). Since we explicitly model post-
retirement SSDI, Social Security retirement bene…ts, and asset income (which could include income from
pensions and annuities, as well as interest, rent, dividends, and other such income) we exclude these
components of income from our analysis.25 We also ignore the “other income”category, as pension lump
sums would be classi…ed as capital income, and alimony and inheritances are unlikely to be correlated
with retirement. All income …gures are converted to July 2015 dollars using the Consumer Price Index
for all urban consumers (CPI-U).
    To determine how income changes after retirement, we regress each component of income on a set of
indicators for time since/before retirement, a set of age dummies, a set of wave dummies, and a set of
individual …xed e¤ects. We use respondent-level analysis weights in our regressions and cluster standard
errors by individual. The results from these regressions are shown in Table 4. The …rst three columns
show results for the full sample, the next three for the subset of individuals who have an expected
retirement age, and the …nal three for the subset of individuals who have never had a disability episode.
We only report coe¢ cients for the time since/before retirement indicators; full results are available upon
request. The omitted category is 1-2 years before retirement; thus, all coe¢ cients show the change in
income relative to this benchmark. Since income amounts are provided for the previous calendar year,
the change in earnings 0-1 years after is relatively small. However, in subsequent waves, earnings from
work decline by between $37,011 and $41,040 in the full sample. Relative to their mean in the wave
just before retirement (shown in the table), earnings drop by around 79 percent in the 2-3 years after
retirement. Non-Social Security transfers rise slightly upon retirement and possibly continue 2-3 years


  25
     The capital income category in the HRS also includes self-employment, business, and farm income. Thus, we are also
excluding these components of income from our analysis.


                                                          22
after retirement. Results are very similar in the subsample of individuals who have an expected retirement
age and the subsample of individuals who have no disability episodes.
    Based on these estimates, we endow the individual with a lump sum at the date of retirement t, that
re‡ects the present value (as of the retirement date) of post-retirement earnings

                                                                Z      T
                                                                               r(v t)
                                            Y (t) = 0:21w(t)               e            dv:
                                                                   t


That is, post-retirement earnings are equal to 21% of what they were at the time of retirement. Recall
that this endowment is collected only if the individual does not draw the disability shock.26 We ignore
non-Social Security transfers since these appear to be small.
    The Social Security program ( ; SS(tjd)) is modeled after the current U.S. program with a tax of
  = 10:6% + 1:8% on wage earnings (which includes the retirement and disability parts of the program).
We adopt a simpli…ed Social Security arrangement that captures the most important channels through
which the stochastic retirement timing mechanism can in‡uence the level of Social Security bene…ts. First,
the date of the retirement shock a¤ects the individual’s average wage income, which in turn in‡uences
the individual’s bene…ts through the bene…t-earning rule. Second, for those who become disabled, the
Social Security disability program acts as a bridge between wage income and retirement bene…ts.
    The total level of Social Security bene…ts collected is state dependent. For those who do not become
disabled but instead retire for other reasons, we compute the individual’s average wage income corre-
sponding to the last 35 years of earnings (which is virtually equivalent to the top 35 years of earnings
for the wage pro…le that we are using). If retirement strikes before reaching 35 years in the workforce,
then some of these years will be zeros in the calculation. Conversely, as the individual works beyond 35
years, average earnings will increase because a low-wage early year drops out of the calculation while a
high-wage later year is added to the calculation. Then, we use a piecewise linear bene…t-earning rule that
is concave in the individual’s average earnings, re‡ecting realistic slopes and bend points. Finally, we
calculate bene…ts based on collection at age 65, and then we make actuarial adjustments to accomodate
early and late retirement dates.27


   26
      In reality, non-disabled retirees may or may not collect income from work, whereas in our model we are endowing them
with post-retirement earnings that re‡ect the average life-cycle experience. In doing this, we are suppressing another layer of
risk that could make our welfare cost even larger: in reality, non-disabled individuals face uncertainty about post-retirement
earnings (their skills may or may not become obsolete, for example).
   27
      In treating 65 as the normal retirement age, we are correctly calculating the present discounted value of Social Security
retirement bene…ts for individuals in the HRS sample while overestimating bene…ts for the 1992 birth cohort whose normal
retirement age is 67. For the latter group, the Social Security system in our model is more generous than it is likely to be
in reality.


                                                              23
    On the other hand, for those who become disabled we compute average wage income corresponding
to the last 35 years of earnings, and no zeros are included in the average if the individual draws a
timing shock that leaves him with fewer than 35 years of work experience. Moreover, he begins collecting
full bene…ts at the moment he retires (rather than waiting until age 65).28 See Appendix E for a full
explanation of the state-dependent Social Security program.
    Finally, to …nd the probability of becoming disabled conditional on retirement at t, (1jt), we …t a
…fth-order polynomial to the joint probability of becoming disabled and retired at age t (which comes
from 2009 disability awards for males between the ages of 17 and 67, reported in 5-year bins, Zayatz
(2011)), and then we divide the result by our p.d.f. over timing risk (t) to come up with the probability
of disability conditional on retirement age. If the resulting ratio is greater than 1, we assign a value of 1;
if the resulting ratio is less than 0, we assign a value of 0.29 Figure 4 plots our estimated (1jt) pro…le

                                 0:0014 + 0:0209t + 0:0485t2         1:51t3 + 6:1281t4      6:363t5
                       (1jt) =                                                                        :
                                                                  (t)




  28
      We have abstracted from certain aspects of the disability bene…t program. In the U.S., disability bene…ts are based on
average indexed earnings over the highest n years of earnings, where n is the number of years elapsed from age 21 through
the time of disability minus a certain number of “dropout years.”One dropout year is awarded for every …ve years that pass,
up to a maximum of …ve dropout years. The number of computation years, n, is further restricted to be between 2 and 35.
Our model ignores the age 21 start and the dropout year provision. Also, in the U.S., it takes a few months for a worker to
begin collecting disability bene…ts after becoming disabled. We have simpli…ed so that bene…ts commence upon disability.
   29
      In making these calculations, we are assuming that recovery doesn’t occur once someone is disabled; that is, disability
always implies retirement. In reality, some fraction of people do recover, but it’s less than 1% per year (Autor (2011)).


                                                             24
Table 3. Summary of Baseline Calibration of Paramaters


 Lifespan, preferences, and wages:
 T =1                                                         Normalized maximum lifespan (age 23 to age 100)
  (t) = 1          t3:41                                      Survival probabilities from SS mortality …les
  =0                                                          conservative discount rate
   =3                                                         midpoint CRRA value from the literature
 r = 0:029 77 = 2:233                                         Real interest rate from Trustees Report
        P
 w(t) = 5i=0 wi ti                                            pre-ret. wages (wi estimated from CPS MORG 2014)


 Retirement timing:
                    1 (t0         1
  (t) = R t0t                t)
                                         , for t 2 [0; t0 ]   truncated beta p.d.f. over retirement date
                     1 (t0        1 dt
            0 t              t)

 t0 = (75         23)=(100            23)                     truncation at age 75 (max retirement age)
 E(t) = (65 23)=(100 23)                                      mean retirement age 65
 p
   var(t) = 5=(100 23)                                        5-year standard deviation of ret. age (HRS)
       [t0 E(t)](E(t))2           E(t)
   =       t0 var(t)               t0     = 12:7615           calibrated value
             t0
   =        E(t)       1 = 3:0385                             calibrated value


 Retirement income and insurance:
                 RT
 Y (t) = 0:21w(t) t e r(v t) dv                               pdv of post-retirement earnings (HRS)
  (1jt)                                                       prob of disability cond. on ret. (Zayatz (2011) and HRS)
  = 10:6% + 1:8%                                              Statutory rates for SS ret. and SS dis. (U.S. system)
 SS(tjd)                                                      state-dependent pdv of SS bene…ts (U.S. system)




                                                                25
     Table 4. Post-Retirement Income

                                                     Full Sample                     Expected Retirement Observed                       No Disability Episodes
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)               (8)             (9)
                                                      Non SS                                     Non SS                                       Non SS
       VARIABLES                       Earnings      Transfers       Total       Earnings       Transfers       Total       Earnings         Transfers      Total


      >2 Years Pre-Retirement           2,731         221.8*         2,952         2,720          207.7         2,928         2,329           239.6*        2,569
                                       (2,099)        (129.9)       (2,103)       (2,441)        (157.3)       (2,445)       (2,305)          (133.4)       (2,308)
      0-1 Years Post-Retirement       -14,725***     439.2***      -14,286***   -14,969***       380.1**     -14,589***    -14,875***        436.5***     -14,438***
                                       (1,391)        (143.2)       (1,393)       (1,496)        (176.5)       (1,499)       (1,561)          (141.4)       (1,563)
      2-3 Years Post-Retirement       -41,040***      288.9*       -40,751***   -43,694***       405.2**     -43,289***    -42,328***        319.2**      -42,008***
                                       (1,792)        (162.0)       (1,798)       (2,169)        (202.0)       (2,176)       (2,013)          (151.3)       (2,020)
      4-5 Years Post-Retirement       -39,701***       86.42       -39,615***   -42,129***        134.0      -41,995***    -41,431***          181.8      -41,250***
                                       (2,288)        (193.6)       (2,297)       (2,834)        (238.6)       (2,844)       (2,570)          (189.0)       (2,581)




26
      6-7 Years Post-Retirement       -37,204***       6.740       -37,197***   -39,028***        21.49      -39,006***    -39,230***          190.9      -39,039***
                                       (2,689)        (223.1)       (2,699)       (3,466)        (275.4)       (3,478)       (3,032)          (225.3)       (3,045)
      8-9 Years Post-Retirement       -37,474***       -204.5      -37,679***   -39,183***       -111.1      -39,294***    -40,289***           -9.95     -40,299***
                                       (3,169)        (267.1)       (3,182)       (4,123)        (325.8)       (4,136)       (3,578)          (272.7)       (3,593)
      10-11 Years Post-Retirement     -37,011***       -28.63      -37,040***   -38,858***        27.42      -38,831***    -40,463***          180.0      -40,283***
                                       (3,641)        (306.9)       (3,657)       (4,760)        (374.9)       (4,777)       (4,104)          (313.4)       (4,122)
      >11 Years Post-Retirement       -37,037***       -114.3      -37,152***   -39,012***       -252.8      -39,265***    -42,377***          208.4      -42,169***
                                       (4,760)        (398.9)       (4,783)       (6,244)        (466.7)       (6,264)       (5,363)          (411.6)       (5,388)


      Pre-Retirement Mean             52,110.39       1,567.97     53,678.36     55,379.24      1,633.89      57,013.14     53,999.53        1,461.97      55,461.5
      % Change                          -78.8%         18.4%        -75.9%        -78.9%         24.8%         -75.9%        -78.4%           21.8%         -75.7%


      Observations                      23,617        23,617         23,617       17,326         17,326        17,326        20,526           20,526        20,526
      R-squared                         0.270          0.007         0.268         0.297          0.008         0.294         0.271            0.007        0.268
      Number of Individuals             2,603          2,603         2,603         1,895          1,895         1,895         2,216            2,216        2,216
     Notes: Standard errors clustered by individual in parentheses. All regressions include wave and age dummies, and individual …xed e¤ects.
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
5. Quantitative results with timing risk only

To focus attention on the main feature of our model (timing risk), we initially abstract from disability risk
and from the disability insurance aspect of the Social Security program. In the next section we consider
how these features impact our results.
   We begin by presenting quantitative results from a version of the model in which there is no Social
Security system. Then we assess whether various social insurance arrangements (including Social Security)
can mitigate the welfare cost of retirement timing risk.


5.1. Consumption, savings, and welfare without insurance

Figure 5 plots consumption over the life cycle for the case in which there is no Social Security taxation
and no Social Security retirement bene…ts. The consumption function c1 is the optimal consumption path
conditional on retirement having not yet occurred. The domain of this function stretches from zero up to
the maximum working age t0 = 52=77 (age 75). As soon as the individual draws a retirement shock, he
jumps onto the new optimal consumption path c2 . Although the retirement date is a continuous random
variable in the model, for expositional purposes in the …gure we show just four hypothetical shock dates
(age 60, 65, 70, and 75). The …gure helps to illustrate the magnitude of the distortions to consumption,
relative to a safe world in which the individual would simply consume cN R .
   Pre-retirement consumption c1 starts out below no-risk consumption, cN R . The individual must
be conservative during the earlier years because the timing of retirement is unknown. However, if he
continues to work, then eventually the risk of early retirement begins to dissipate and he responds by
spending more aggressively as c1 rises above cN R .
   Notice that the retirement shock is accompanied by a downward correction in consumption, with the
earliest dates generating the largest corrections. Only those who draw the shock at the last possible
moment will smooth their consumption across the retirement threshold. For example, if the shock hits
at the average age of 65, then consumption will drop by about 12%.
   Why does consumption always drop, even for those who experience a late shock? Because a shock
at age t is always earlier than expected (in a mathematical sense) from the perspective of age t        . In
other words, at t    the individual expects the shock to occur later than it actually occurs, and therefore
he turns out to be poorer at t than he anticipated at t       . Hence, the consumption drop is the result
of rational expectations over retirement timing risk, as previously recognized by both Blau (2008) and
Grochulski and Zhang (2013).



                                                      27
    The drop in consumption at retirement in our model is consistent with a large literature that docu-
ments a drop in consumption roughly in the range of 10%-30%.30 There have been a variety of explana-
tions for the drop, including the cessation of work-related expenses, consumption-leisure substitutability,
home production, and various behavioral explanations such as the sudden realization that one’s pri-
vate assets are insu¢ cient to keep spending at pre-retirement levels. Our paper reinforces the idea that
uncertainty about the timing of retirement could help to explain a drop in consumption at retirement.
    Our predictions are also consistent with the conjecture that the drop in consumption is anticipated
(Hurd and Rohwedder (2006), Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2007)). While the precise date of retirement
is a random variable that takes individuals in our model by surprise, the drop in consumption upon
retirement is all part of a rational, forward-looking plan. Individuals in our model at time zero cannot
say for sure how big the drop will be, but they can say how big the drop will be conditional on the date
of retirement.
    In addition, retirement timing uncertainty may help to explain precautionary savings balances that
otherwise seem large. For instance, Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun (2006) estimate that as much as
80% of Americans in the HRS have asset balances that exceed the optimal amount of savings from a life-
cycle optimization perspective. In their model households face longevity risk, earnings risk, and medical
expense risk but the date of retirement is known with certainty. In our baseline calibration with timing
uncertainty only (no disability risk), individuals in their 50’s who live with retirement timing uncertainty
would accumulate between 15% to 29% more savings by that age than otherwise identical individuals
who know that they will retire at the expected age of 65. In other words, a signi…cant portion of observed
savings for retirement may actually be due to uncertainty about the date of retirement.31
    Finally, the full welfare cost          to individuals who live with retirement timing uncertainty and no
insurance is 2.63%. That is, the individual would be willing to give up 2.63% of his total lifetime con-
sumption in order to fully insure the timing uncertainty and thereby live in a safe world with comparable


   30
      For instance, see Hamermesh (1984), Mariger (1987), Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg (2001), Hurd and Rohwedder
(2006), Hurst (2006), Haider and Stephens (2007), and Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2007) among others.
   31
      We obtain these estimates as follows. We compare asset holdings for two individuals, one who knows he will retire at
age 65 (which is model time t = 0:545), and one who expects to retire at age 65 but faces uncertainty about the retirement
date. In both cases, we assume the individual knows that he will not be disabled when he retires, d = 0. If the individual
knows the retirement date t = 0:545 and the disability status d = 0, then he consumes c(zjt; d) = c(zj0:545; 0), which is based
on an initial wealth endowment k(0jt; d) = k(0j0:545; 0). For comparison with the risky world, we use this consumption path
to compute an asset path a(z) with initial condition a(0) = 0 and law of motion

                                  da(z)
                                        = ra(z) + (1     )w(z)     c(zj0:545; 0) for z   0:545:
                                   dz
Then, the amount of additional savings that can be attributed to the precautionary motive to hedge retirement timing risk
is k1 (z)=a(z) 1 for z 0:545.


                                                              28
expected wealth. Moreover, the timing premium alone is                      0   = 1:93%, which is the fraction of total
lifetime consumption that he would give up just for early information about the timing of the shock.32
      These estimates are very conservative. We are using a 5-year standard deviation of retirement timing
uncertainty, which is signi…cantly less than the 6.82-year standard deviation that we obtain when we
use the full available sample from the HRS while making conservative assumptions each time the inter-
pretation of the data are ambiguous. With a standard deviation of 6.82 years (and holding the mean
…xed at age 65), the full cost of retirement timing uncertainty is                 = 5:67% and the timing premium is

  0   = 3:97%.
      While we have made conservative assumptions throughout, we could potentially overstate the welfare
cost of retirement uncertainty by not providing the individual any ability to foresee a retirement shock. In
our model, the individual learns about the retirement timing shock the moment it strikes. In reality, some
people may learn about the shock before it occurs. Early information about one’s retirement date allows
for early re-optimization, which would bring down the welfare cost. We address this concern by extending
our model to allow individuals to learn their date of retirement before it occurs (see Appendix F for
technical details). Suppose the individual faces retirement timing risk as usual, but with an information
revelation date t 2 (0; t0 ) when the individual learns the future date of retirement. The shock may
happen before t , in which case the individual is taken by surprise. If the shock happens after t then
the individual will adjust his saving behavior in response to the new information. We set t = 0:351,
which corresponds to actual age 50. By setting this age before the age at which uncertainty is measured
in the data, we generate a lower bound on our welfare costs. Hence, the individual knows that when he
turns 50, his future retirement date will be revealed if he is not already retired. The chance of drawing
the shock before age 50 is less than 1% in our calibration. The timing premium goes from                           0   = 1:93%
without early information revelation to            0   = 1:48% with early information revelation.33
      Taking the early information revelation setting one step further, we could assume there is no risk
of realizing the retirement shock before the information revelation date. That is, the timing density is

   32
      The welfare cost of retirement timing uncertainty is larger if people do not accumulate precautionary savings balances.
To see this, consider an individual who incorrectly assumes that he will retire with certainty at the mean age of 65 (model time
t = 0:545). He therefore follows the optimal consumption path conditional on this retirement date, c(zjt; d) = c(zj0:545; 0),
where we continue to assume temporarily that there is no risk of disability. The individual follows this path, rather than the
optimal path c1 (z), for all z before shock date t, at which point he depletes his available wealth in an optimal, deterministic
way over the remainder of the life cycle. To compute the welfare cost of retirement timing uncertainty, we compute the
timing premium 0 as usual but with c(zj0:545; 0) replacing c1 (z) in the calculation of expected utility. We …nd 0 = 2:54%,
as opposed to 0 = 1:93% when the individual self insures.
   33
      Of course, early information alters some of the predictions of our model. There will not necessarily be a drop in
consumption at retirement. For shocks that happen before the information revelation date, consumption will drop as
usual. But for shocks that happen after the information revelation date, consumption will either increase or decrease at the
revelation date (not at the retirement date), depending on whether the revealed shock is better or worse than expected.


                                                              29
truncated on the left at t and on the right at t0 . Under this assumption, the individual always knows
the timing of his future retirement date before it happens. After re-calibrating the timing density to
include truncation on both sides while preserving the mean at age 65 and the 5-year standard deviation,
the timing premium drops to       0   = 1:06%. The reduction here re‡ects the fact that now the individual
no longer faces any risk of retirement before age 50, which are potentially very costly events. However,
retirement uncertainty still is quite costly even without the risk of very early retirement.
     Finally, we report the welfare cost when utility from consumption and leisure is non-separable by as-
suming utility takes the form, u(c; l) = (c l1    )1     =(1         ), where c and l are instantaneous consumption
and leisure as in French and Jones (2011). We normalize leisure time to unity when retired and to 0.6
when working and set consumption’s share to            = 0:5, which is close to the low end of values considered
by French and Jones (2011). The lower the value of                 , the lower the welfare cost of retirement timing
uncertainty and the larger the drop in consumption at retirement. To be conservative, we choose the
lowest possible      while still producing a believable drop in consumption at retirement. When               = 0:5
the drop in consumption at retirement for an individual who retires at age 65 is 36%, which is at the
upper end of the range typically documented in the literature. Because we desire to hold risk aversion
constant at the baseline value of 3 in order to draw a comparison with our baseline welfare estimates (i.e.,
CRRA          c uuccc = 1   (1   ) = 3), we set        = 5. Under this parameterization, the timing premium
is   0   = 1:25%, compared to the baseline value of            0    = 1:93% when      = 1. Because the individual
treats consumption and leisure as substitutes, an early retirement shock that leaves him with a low level
of retirement consumption is partially o¤set by extra leisure time. These estimates ignore the possibility
that the individual’s health status could prevent him from enjoying the extra leisure.
     Given the size of the welfare cost of timing uncertainty, it is natural to consider whether the predom-
inant social insurance arrangement presently in place (Social Security) succeeds or fails to mitigate this
cost, and to consider alternative arrangements that could potentially do better. This is the subject of
the next subsection of the paper.


5.2. Policy experiments

In this section we quantify the impact of the U.S. Social Security system on the welfare of individuals
who face retirement timing uncertainty. While Social Security serves a variety of functions, our particular
focus here is on evaluating its potential role in hedging retirement timing risk, which we have shown to
be a major …nancial risk that imposes large welfare losses on individuals. We also consider alternative
arrangements, ranging from partial insurance to complete insurance, and we discuss the pros and cons of


                                                         30
each arrangement.
   Speci…cally, we consider four insurance arrangements: (1) U.S. Social Security retirement insurance,
(2) …rst-best insurance that perfectly protects the individual from timing risk, (3) a simple policy in
which bene…ts are completely independent of the individual’s earnings history, and (4) a hybrid system
as in Japan, the UK, Spain and other European countries with a bene…t component that is unrelated to
earnings and a component that is earnings based.
   Our …rst policy experiment is to add Social Security taxes and retirement bene…ts to the model. When
we do this, the baseline welfare cost         falls from 2.63% without Social Security to 2.46% with Social
Security, and the timing premium drops from                     0   = 1:93% without Social Security to               0   = 1:80% with
Social Security. Thus, Social Security reduces the welfare cost of timing uncertainty by a small amount.
   There are a few ways in which the current Social Security program helps to reduce the welfare cost
of retirement timing uncertainty. Drawing an early retirement shock means a better replacement rate
because of the progressive bene…t-earning rule and it also means a smaller overall Social Security tax
liability. In addition, Social Security boosts the individual’s expected wealth because it pays bene…ts as
a life annuity that lasts as long as the individual survives, which makes him less sensitive to retirement
timing risk. For the individual, the expected net present value of participating in Social Security (i.e.,
Social Security’s contribution to expected wealth) is

                                    Z    t0         Z   t                          Z   t0
                                                                rv                                        rt
                  E(N P VSS ) =               (t)           e         w(v)dvdt +            (t)SS(tj0)e        dt:
                                     0              0                              0

At our baseline calibration this quantity is positive, which in turn means that a given loss in wage income
is relatively small compared to when there is no Social Security program in place. However, Social
Security does not really help to insure the individual against retirement timing risk in a substantive way
because these e¤ects are almost entirely o¤set by the way that average earnings are calculated to penalize
those who retire early. Such individuals must claim bene…ts based on an earnings history that is both
short in length and low in level.
   The U.S. Social Security system is among the smallest in the OECD. Only Switzerland, Canada, and
Korea have slightly lower public pension tax rates. The average OECD rate is about twice the U.S. rate.
Countries such as Austria, Finland, Greece, Turkey, and Germany are close to the mean, while Poland,
Italy, Czech Republic, and the Netherlands all have rates that exceeds 30%. We run the experiment of
doubling the size of the Social Security program in our model by doubling the tax rate                                   and doubling
bene…ts SS(tj0). Doing this causes our baseline, full insurance welfare cost to drop a little further to



                                                                     31
  = 2:31% and it causes the timing premium to drop to                                         0   = 1:68%. Hence, even a very large Social
Security system would not provide much insurance against retirement timing uncertainty. The size of the
system is not really the issue, it is the structure that prevents it from providing much insurance.
   To make this point, suppose the individual participates in a …rst-best social insurance arrangement
rather than Social Security. By “…rst-best” we mean that the individual is perfectly insured against
retirement timing uncertainty by collecting a lump-sum payment F B(t) upon retirement at t. We continue
to assume wages are taxed at rate                = 10:6%. The magnitude of this lump-sum payment is selected to
make the individual indi¤erent about when the retirement shock is realized; and, to make a fair comparison
with Social Security, we assume F B(t) is wealth-neutral relative to Social Security in an expectation sense
(see Appendix G for full details). This gives

                                                      Z   t
                                            rt                                       dY (v)
                     F B(t) = F B(0)e +                           rY (v)                          (1    )w(v) er(t   v)
                                                                                                                          dv
                                                      0                               dv

where

                     Z   t0                               Z       t0         Z   t
                                            rt                                                     dY (v)                      rv
          F B(0) =            (t)SS(tj0)e        dt                    (t)            rY (v)                (1    )w(v) e           dvdt:
                     0                                        0              0                      dv

   Figure 6 plots F B(t) versus SS(tj0). Recall that both quantities represent the present value of
retirement bene…ts as of the retirement date t. Notice that the …rst-best social insurance arrangement
provides the individual with a large payment if he draws an early retirement shock, and a small payment
if he draws a late shock. On the other hand, Social Security does the opposite because of the positive
relationship between bene…ts and earnings: individuals who su¤er early retirement shocks have low
average earnings, while individuals who draw late shocks have high average earnings. In this sense, Social
Security fails to insure workers because it pays high in good states and low in bad states.
   The obvious drawback, however, is that the …rst-best insurance arrangement creates a disincentive to
work. A compromise between the …rst-best and the current system would be to make bene…ts independent
of earnings. This would reduce distortions to labor choices and also eliminate the implicit penalty on
early retirement shocks. Making retirement bene…ts completely independent of earnings can mitigate
about one-third of the welfare costs of retirement timing uncertainty. We continue to hold taxes …xed
at rate    = 10:6% on wage income, but with the twist that the individual collects the same bene…ts no
matter when he draws the retirement shock. As with the other arrangements, we utilize the assumption
that capital markets are complete by endowing the individual with a lump sum SP (t) at retirement age t



                                                                             32
that re‡ects the value at t of a ‡ow of bene…ts that start at age 65 (see Appendix H for a full explanation)

                                        R t0                         R1
                                         0     (t)SS(tj0)e rt dt     42=77 e
                                                                            r(t v) dv
                             SP (t) =            R t0     R1                            :
                                                      (t)            rv dv
                                                  0        42=77 e           dt

As with …rst-best insurance, we parameterize the simple policy to be wealth-neutral relative to Social
Security in order to make a fair comparison.
   The baseline welfare cost of retirement timing uncertainty drops from 2.63% without any social
insurance to 1.75% with the simple policy, and the timing premium drops from 1.93% without social
insurance to 1.26% with the simple policy. In other words, simply breaking the link between bene…ts and
earnings would signi…cantly increase the insurance value of Social Security.
   If breaking the link is not politically feasible or desirable, it still is possible to provide partial coverage
against retirement timing uncertainty while also encouraging labor force participation. To see this,
consider a hybrid system that requires the same taxes during the working period but whose bene…ts are
a convex combination of the U.S. Social Security retirement system and our simple policy. We assume a
50-50 split,
                                        HY (t) = 21 SS(tj0) + 12 SP (t):

With this hybrid system in place, the baseline welfare cost of retirement timing uncertainty is 2.08%,
and the timing premium is 1.50%. The hybrid system isn’t able to match the e¤ectiveness of the simple
policy in reducing the welfare cost of retirement timing uncertainty, but it does provide better insurance
than the current Social Security system.


6. Disability

To provide a more comprehensive evaluation of the Social Security program’s overall role in mitigating
retirement uncertainty, we extend the model to include disability risk and a disability component within
the Social Security program. In the extended model, individuals not only face uncertainty about the
timing of retirement, they also face uncertainty about their disability status upon retirement. If the
individual draws a disability shock along with the retirement shock, then he is unable to earn any labor
income during retirement. If the individual draws a retirement shock only (for instance, because of a
plant closing), then he does earn some income after retirement. The former individual collects disability




                                                        33
bene…ts and the latter individual collects retirement bene…ts for the remainder of life.34 A separate
literature discusses the optimal design of disability insurance as in Golosov and Tsyvinski (2006) and
its consumption smoothing properties as in Bronchetti (2012). Our purpose here is less ambitious as we
seek only to evaluate the degree to which the current disability program in the U.S. provides insurance
against retirement timing uncertainty.
    Figure 7 plots life-cycle consumption when the individual faces retirement timing risk and disability
risk, and he participates in a Social Security program that includes a disability component in addition
to a retirement component. Again, as with Figure 5, although retirement timing is a continuous random
variable, we show just a few of the potential realizations in order to keep the picture informative. For each
retirement shock date, we plot two c2 pro…les. One pro…le corresponds to an individual who also draws a
disability shock in addition to a retirement shock, and the other corresponds to an individual who does
not draw a disability shock. The …rst individual collects disability bene…ts but has no post-retirement
earnings, while the second individual collects income from work after retirement and no disability bene…ts.
    For relatively late retirement shock dates (for example, beyond age 65), drawing the disability shock
causes a loss in post-retirement income and does not lead to the payment of any disability bene…ts because
the individual is already at the age in which he can collect Social Security retirement bene…ts. For these
individuals, disability has a strictly negative e¤ect on lifetime wealth. It is therefore intuitive that a
retirement shock that is coupled with a disability shock causes a much bigger downward correction in
consumption than a retirement shock alone would cause.
    For early retirement shock dates, drawing the disability shock causes competing e¤ects on lifetime
wealth. On the one hand it reduces wealth because of lost earnings capacity after retirement, but on
the other hand the individual collects disability bene…ts. If the shock date is early enough (age 45, for
example), then the second e¤ect can dominate and therefore disability bene…ts are generous enough that
they more than replace lost post-retirement income in a present value sense.
    Under our calibration, the probability of becoming disabled upon retirement is much higher for those
who draw an early retirement shock than for those who draw a late retirement shock. Because of this,
disability insurance almost perfectly o¤sets the added disability risk that the individual faces, but it does
not o¤set the timing risk. When we compute the joint welfare cost of timing risk and disability risk, while
including both Social Security retirement and disability insurance, we get             = 2:43%. This is almost the
same as when there is only timing risk and Social Security retirement bene…ts in the model (                = 2:46%).


  34
     While disabled individuals technically switch to retirement bene…ts at the normal retirement age, the bene…t amount
is the same.


                                                          34
In other words, adding a second layer of risk and a second insurance component leaves the welfare cost
almost unchanged, which suggests that the second insurance component is insuring the second risk but
not the …rst risk. Finally, the timing premium is    0   = 1:77%.
   In sum, disability insurance helps to solve the disability risk problem but not the timing risk problem.
That is, it replaces lost post-retirement income due to the inability to work, but it does not solve the
problem that the individual doesn’t know when such a shock might strike. All of the welfare costs that
we have discussed throughout the paper are summarized in Table 5.

    Table 5. Summary of Welfare Costs of Retirement Timing Risk & Disability Risk:


                                       Panel A: Timing Risk Only


                                                          Full Insurance ( )   Timing Premium (   0)

      Laissez Faire (no Social Security)                        2.63%                 1.93%
      Laissez Faire, std dev of 6.82                            5.67%                 3.97%
      Laissez Faire, early information revelation                   —                 1.48%
      Laissez Faire, early info, double truncation                  —                 1.06%
      Laissez Faire, u(c; l) non-separable                          —                 1.25%
      U.S. Social Security, retirement only                     2.46%                 1.80%
      OECD Social Security, retirement only                     2.31%                 1.68%
      Simple policy (w/o bene…t-earning link)                   1.75%                 1.26%
      50-50 hybrid policy                                       2.08%                 1.50%


                               Panel B: Timing Risk and Disability Risk


                                                          Full Insurance ( )   Timing Premium (   0)

      U.S. Social Security, retirement and disability           2.43%                 1.77%



7. Conclusion

There is a large literature that measures and assesses the economic impact of various life-cycle risks
such as mortality risk, asset return risk, idiosyncratic earnings risk, and temporary unemployment risk,


                                                     35
but less attention has been paid to retirement uncertainty. We document that many individuals retire
earlier or later than planned by at least a few years, which can have dramatic consequences for lifetime
budgeting. For instance, an individual who draws a one-standard deviation retirement shock and retires
unexpectedly at age 60 instead of 65 loses 5 of his best wage-earning years. Moreover, the smaller amount
of total earnings must be spread over a longer retirement period. Not knowing when such a shock might
strike makes planning for retirement a di¢ cult task.
   We build a detailed microeconomic model that involves dynamic decision making under uncertainty
about the timing of retirement and uncertainty about one’s potential for earning income after retirement.
We calibrate the following model features to our own estimates from a variety of data sources: survival
probabilities are estimated from the Social Security cohort mortality tables; wage earnings are estimated
from the 2014 CPS; the retirement timing p.d.f. is calibrated to match our estimate of the standard
deviation between planned and actual retirement ages in the HRS; post-retirement earnings are estimated
from the HRS; the Social Security retirement and disability programs are calibrated to match the U.S.
system; and, the probability of becoming disabled conditional on retirement is estimated from the HRS.
   We use the calibrated model to compute conservative estimates of the welfare cost of retirement timing
risk. We …nd that the cost is quite large. Individuals would be willing to pay 2.6%-5.7% of their total
lifetime consumption to fully insure themselves against retirement timing risk, depending on the standard
deviation of timing risk. In fact, individuals would pay 1.9%-4.0% just to know their date of retirement.
   Finally, we consider the role of the Social Security retirement program in mitigating timing uncertainty.
We …nd that Social Security retirement bene…ts provide almost no protection against timing risk. We
also consider the role of the Social Security disability program in mitigating timing uncertainty. We
…nd that disability insurance almost completely protects against the risk of lost post-retirement income,
but it doesn’t provide much protection against timing risk. In short, retirement timing risk is a large
and costly risk that has not received very much attention in the literature, and existing social insurance
arrangements do not adequately deal with this risk.




                                                    36
References

Alonso-Ortiz, Jorge. 2014. “Social Security and Retirement across the OECD.” Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control, 47: 300–316.

Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy. 2003. “Wealth Accumulation and the Propensity
  to Plan.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 1007–1047.

Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy. 2007. “Retirement Consumption: Insights from
  a Survey.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 82: 265–274.

Autor, David. 2011. “The Unsustainable Rise of the Disability Roles in the United States: Causes,
  Consequences, and Policy Options.” NBER Working Paper.

Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and Sarah Tanner. 1998. “Is There a Retirement-Savings Puz-
  zle?” American Economic Review, 88: 769–788.

Benítez-Silva, Hugo, and Debra S. Dwyer. 2005. “The Rationality of Retirement Expectations and
  the Role of New Information.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87: 587–592.

Benítez-Silva, Hugo, Debra S. Dwyer, Wayne-Roy Gayle, and Thomas J. Muench. 2008.
  “Expectations in Micro Data: Rationality Revisited.” Empirical Economics, 34: 381–416.

Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1989. “The Timing of Retirement: A Comparison of Expectations and Real-
  izations.” In David Wise (Ed.), The Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg. 2001. “What Accounts for the
  Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households.” American Economic Review, 91: 832–857.

Blau, David M. 2008. “Retirement and Consumption in a Life Cycle Model.” Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 26: 35–71.

Bronchetti, Erin Todd. 2012. “Workers’ Compensation and Consumption Smoothing.” Journal of
  Public Economics, 96: 495–508.

Caliendo, Frank N., Aspen Gorry, and Sita Slavov. 2015. “The Cost of Uncertainty about the
  Timing of Social Security Reform.” Utah State University Working Paper.

Campbell, John Y. 2006. “Household Finance.” Journal of Finance, 61: 1553–1603.


                                                 37
Casanova, Maria. 2013. “Revisiting the Hump-Shaped Wage Pro…le.” UCLA Working Paper.

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John B. Jones. 2010. “Why Do the Elderly Save? The
  Role of Medical Expenses.” Journal of Political Economy, 118: 39–75.

Dwyer, Debra S., and Jianting Hu. 1999. “Retirement Expectations and Realizations: The Role of
  Health Shocks and Economic Factors.”In Olivia Mitchell, P. Brett Hammond, and Anna M. Rappaport
  (Eds.), Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth, University of Pennsylvania Press.

Epstein, Larry G., Emmanuel Farhi, and Tomasz Strzalecki. 2014. “How Much Would You Pay
  to Resolve Long-Run Risk.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

French, Eric. 2005. “The E¤ects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labour Supply and Retirement
  Behaviour.” Review of Economic Studies, 72: 395–427.

French, Eric, and John B. Jones. 2011. “The E¤ects of Health Insurance and Self-Insurance on
  Retirement Behavior.” Econometrica, 79: 693–732.

Golosov, Mikhail, and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2006. “Designing Optimal Disability Insurance: A Case for
  Asset Testing.” Journal of Political Economy, 114: 257–279.

Grochulski, Borys, and Yuzhe Zhang. 2013. “Saving for Retirement with Job Loss Risk.”Economic
  Quarterly, 99: 45–81.

Haider, Steven J., and Melvin Stephens. 2007. “Is There a Retirement-Consumption Puzzle? Evi-
  dence Using Subjective Retirement Expectations.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89: 247–264.

Hamermesh, Daniel. 1984. “Consumption During Retirement: The Missing Link in the Life Cycle.”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 66: 1–7.

Hurd, Michael, and Susann Rohwedder. 2008. “The Retirement Consumption Puzzle: Actual
  Spending Change in Panel Data.” NBER Working Paper 13929.

Hurd, Michael D., and Susann Rohwedder. 2006. “Some Answers to the Retirement-Consumption
  Puzzle.” NBER Working Paper.

Hurst, Erik. 2006. “Grasshoppers, Ants and Pre-Retirement Wealth: A Test of Permanent Income
  Consumers.” University of Chicago Working Paper.

Lucas, Robert E. 2003. “Macroeconomic Priorities.” American Economic Review, 93: 1–14.

                                                 38
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell. 2007. “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles of
  Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54: 205–224.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell. 2008. “Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do Women
  Fare?” American Economic Review, 98: 413–417.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia Mitchell. 2011. “Optimal Financial Lit-
  eracy and Saving for Retirement.” Pension Research Council Working Paper.

Mariger, Randall P. 1987. “A Life-Cycle Consumption Model with Liquidity Constraints: Theory and
  Empirical Results.” Econometrica, 55: 533–557.

McGarry, Kathleen. 2004. “Health and Retirement: Do Changes in Health A¤ect Retirement Expec-
  tations?” Journal of Human Resources, 39: 624–648.

Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun. 2006. “Are Americans Saving
  ‘Optimally’for Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy, 114: 607–643.

Smith, Sarah. 2006. “The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle and Involuntary Early Retirement: Evidence
  from the British Household Panel Survey.” Economic Journal, 116: C130–C148.

Stokey, Nancy L. 2014. “Wait-and-See: Investment Options under Policy Uncertainty.” University of
  Chicago Working Paper.

Szinovacz, Maximiliane, and Adam Davey. 2005. “Predictors of Perceptions of Involuntary Retire-
  ment.” The Gerontologist, 45: 36–47.

van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2012. “Financial Literacy, Retirement
  Planning and Household Wealth.” Economic Journal, 122: 449–478.

Vidangos, Ivan. 2009. “Household Welfare, Precautionary Saving, and Social Insurance under Multiple
  Sources of Risk.” Federal Reserve Board Working Paper.

Zayatz, Tim. 2011. “Social Security Disability Insurance Program Worker Experience.”Social Security
  Administration Actuarial Study 122.




                                                   39
                                    Technical appendices

Appendix A: Measuring retirement uncertainty

This appendix describes the construction of the variables measuring an individual’s expected retirement
age (Eret) and actual age at retirement (Ret), together with the computation of the standard deviation
of X = (Eret    Ret).
   As described in Section 2, we use a sample of male respondents aged 51 to 61 in the …rst wave of
the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). There are 4,541 male respondents in this age group in wave 1.
Out of these, we drop 864 individuals whose retirement expectations were not elicited because they were
already retired, disabled, or out of the labor force; 255 individuals for whom the retirement expectation
is missing; and 175 individuals who are unemployed, and hence would be considered retired according to
our de…nition below. This leaves us with 3,251 observations of the variable Eret. The details of sample
selection are summarized in Table 6.

    Table 6. Sample Selection for Variable Eret


      Males Aged 51 to 61 in wave 1                                                            4,545
         Work status missing                                                             4
         Unemployed                                                                     175
         Retired                                                                        613
         Disabled                                                                       189
         Not in the labor force                                                         47
         Total dropped because not employed                                            1,028
      Males Aged 51 to 61 and Employed in wave 1                                               3,517
         Proxy interview (Eret not asked)                                               244
         Already retired                                                                15
         Other missing                                                                   7
         Total dropped because of missing Eret                                          266
      Males Aged 51 to 61, Employed, and Eret observed in wave 1 (Final Sample)                3,251



   To be consistent with the wording of the questions used by the HRS to elicit retirement expectations,
we de…ne retirement as working zero hours. We follow individuals over time, and construct the variable

                                                   40
Ret using information on the month and year when they left their last job prior to retirement. There
are a small number of observations (102, or 3% of the total sample) for which we do not observe the
actual retirement year, but for which it is possible to obtain both an upper and a lower bound of their
retirement date. We make the conservative assumption that they retired on the date within that interval
that is closest to Eret.
   If either the variable Eret or Ret are measured with error, this will increase the standard deviation
of X, and in turn overstate our measure of retirement uncertainty. We are particularly concerned about
measurement error in the variable Eret. HRS respondents are allowed to report their expected retirement
time as both an age or a speci…c year. All responses are then transformed into a retirement year, and this
process is bound to generate some rounding error. We deal with this issue by allowing for plus/minus
one year of error in Eret. We compute the variable X as


                           minfj(Eret   1)   Retj; jEret   Retj; j(Eret + 1)   Retjg:


   Table 7 describes retirement outcomes as a function of retirement expectations in wave 1. There are
2,449 individuals in the sample, shown in column 1, who expect to retire before the end of the HRS panel.
1,893 (77%) of those actually retire within that period; 244 (10%) are still employed by the time they
reach their expected retirement age, but their actual retirement age cannot be established because of
attrition, truncation of retirement date, or death; 102 (4%) die and 210 (9%) are lost to attrition before
their expected retirement date. The second column shows 17 individuals who expect to retire after the
last wave in the HRS panel. 10 (59%) of those retire during the sample period, 2 (12%) die before the end
of the panel, and the remaining 5 (29%) remain employed by the time they leave the sample. Column 3
shows retirement outcomes for 475 individuals who state on the …rst wave that they will never retire. 324
(65%) eventually retire before the end of the panel, while the remaining 35% are still employed when they
exit the sample due to death, attrition, or truncation. Finally, the last column shows retirement outcomes
for 310 individuals who state that they do not know when they will retire. 212 (68%) of those retire
during the sample period, and the remaining 22% remain employed when last observed in the sample.




                                                     41
    Table 7. Retirement Outcomes by Eret Category


                                                                     Eret
                                     Expect to retire     Expect to retire   Will never   DK if they
                                        by wave 11         after wave 11       retire     will retire
      Retire during sample period          1,893                10              324          212
      Work past Eret,
      retirement age not observed           244
      Die before Eret                       102                  2
      Exit sample before Eret               210
      Employed by last wave
      observed in the sample                                     5              151           98
      Total                                2,449                17              475          310



   The value of the variable X can be computed directly from the data for individuals for whom both
Eret and Ret are observed. In cases when one of those two variables is missing, we can sometimes make
a conservative assumption that allows us to assign a value to the variable X. Table 8 describes these
assumptions in detail. Row 1 shows that X is computed as the di¤erence between the expected and actual
retirement age for the 1,903 (58% of the sample) individuals for whom both Eret and Ret observed. The
244 (8%) individuals in row 2 are still employed by the time they reach their expected retirement age, so
we know that they have made a mistake in their predictions. However, because of truncation or attrition
they leave the sample before their retirement age can be observed, and the exact size of the di¤erence
between Eret and Ret cannot be established. To be as conservative as possible, we assume that those
individuals retire the …rst year after exiting the sample. The 5 (0%) individuals in row 3 expect to retire
after the sample period and are still employed by the time they exit the panel. Because we have no
evidence that they have made a mistake in their predictions, we assign a value of 0 to the variable X
for this group. Row 4 shows 104 (3%) individuals who die before reaching their expected retirement age.
We do not use these individuals in the computation of retirement timing uncertainty, as mortality risk
is modeled separately. Row 5 shows 210 (6%) individuals who exit the sample because of truncation or
attrition before their expected retirement age. Because we cannot establish whether they have made a
mistake in their prediction, and any assumption to that regard would be ad hoc, we do not use these


                                                     42
individuals in the computation of uncertainty either.
   The next two rows represent individuals who say they will never retire. For those in row 6 (324, or
10%) retirement is observed. We compute the size of the di¤erence between their expected and actual
retirement ages by subtracting the latter from the average life expectancy for this cohort, which is 76.5
years of age. Those in row 7 (151 or 5%) die or leave the sample before retirement is observed, and we
assume the size of their mistake is 0.
   Finally, individuals in the last two rows (310 or 10%) say they do not know when they will retire.
It is particularly di¢ cult to assign a value to the variable X without making ad-hoc assumptions, as we
have no way of telling what their expected retirement age is. However, their eventual retirement behavior
closely mirrors that of those who say they will never retire. The proportion retiring in every wave of the
panel, as well as the proportion whose retirement is not observed during the sample period, are essentially
the same for the two groups. Therefore, we compute X in the same way for the two groups.

    Table 8. Computation of X = Eret            Ret


                                                                         X computed as                  N
      Eret observed
         1. Ret observed                                                  (Eret       Ret)             1,903
         2. Work past Eret, Ret not observed                 Eret-(Age in last wave in sample +1)       244
         3. Eret is after sample period, Ret not observed                         0                      5
         4. Dies or leaves sample before Eret                               Not used                    104
         5. Leaves sample before Eret                                       Not used                    210
      Will never retire
         6. Ret observed                                         (Average life expectancy - Ret)        324
         7. Ret not observed                                                      0                     151
      DK when they will retire
         8. Ret observed                                         (Average life expectancy - Ret)        213
         9. Ret not observed                                                      0                     97
      Total                                                                                            3,251



   Table 9 shows the value of the standard deviation of X for di¤erent subsamples. The …rst column
considers the baseline subsample of individuals aged 51 to 61 in wave 1. Within this age group, using


                                                      43
only individuals for whom both expected and actual retirement are observed (row 1) yields a standard
deviation of 4.28. Adding individuals who work past their expected retirement age and for whom X
is computed as discussed in Table 8, the standard deviation increases to 5.05 (row 2). Row 3 adds
individuals who do not expect to retire before the end of the sample period and whose retirement is
indeed not observed before that date. Because we are assuming that they make no mistakes in their
predictions, the standard deviation decreases slightly, to 5.04. Row 4 adds individuals who say they
will never retire, but whose retirement is observed. Assuming they expected to work until death, and
using the average life expectancy for the cohort, increases the standard deviation to 6.54. Finally, adding
individuals who do not expect to retire and who are still employed by the time they exit the sample
reduces the standard deviation to 6.35.
   The second and third columns of Table 9 compute the standard deviation for a younger (51 to 55) and
an older (56 to 61) age group within the baseline sample. This computation is carried out to illustrate
that retirement uncertainty declines slowly as retirement approaches, even for age groups very close to
retirement age. The two age groups considered here are 5 years apart, on average, but the standard
deviation of the variable X declines only between half a year and one year for the older group.

    Table 9. Standard Deviation of X for Di¤erent Subsamples


                                                                Baseline
                              Sample                         Age 51 to 61    Age 51 to 55    Age 56 to 61
      1   Ret observed                                            4.28            4.59            3.88
      2   1 + Work past Eret, Ret not observed                    5.05            5.26            4.78
      3   2 + Eret after sample period, Ret not observed          5.04            5.25            4.77
      4   3 + Will never retire, Ret observed                     6.54            6.93            6.05
      5   4 + Will never retire, Ret not observed                 6.35            6.73            5.88
      6   5 + DK when they will retire, Ret observed              6.92            7.37            6.37
      7   6 + DK when they will retire, Ret not observed          6.82            7.24            6.29




                                                    44
Appendix B: Solution to individual optimization problem

The individual’s problem is solved recursively as in Caliendo, Gorry and Slavov (2015) and Stokey (2014)
but modi…ed extensively to …t the current setting.35


Step 1. The deterministic retirement problem

The optimal consumption path c(z) for z 2 [t; T ] after the retirement shock has hit at date t solves

                                                                                    Z     T
                                                                                                   z              c(z)1
                                                                     max        :             e          (z)                         dz;
                                                                c(z)z2[t;T ]          t                            1

subject to
                                                               dK(z)
                                                                     = rK(z)                       c(z); for z 2 [t; T ];
                                                                dz

                                       t and d given, K(t) = k(t) + B(t; d) given, K(T ) = 0:

It is straightfoward to show that the solution to this deterministic control problem is

                                                                (k(t) + B(t; d))e                   rt
                  c2 (zjt; k(t); d) = R T                                                                         e(r          )z=
                                                                                                                                        (z)1= , for z 2 [t; T ]:
                                                                e    rv+(r          )v=       (v)1=          dv
                                                           t


This solution, for an arbitrary k(t) and for given realizations of t and d, will be nested in the continuation
function in the next step.


Step 2. The time zero stochastic problem

Facing random variables t and d, at time zero the individual seeks to maximize expected utility

                                                   Z   t                                                 Z   T
                                                                 z             c(z)1                                       z           c2 (zjt; k(t); d)1
                      max             :E                   e             (z)                  dz +                e             (z)                         dz
                   c(z)z2[0;t0 ]       t;d         0                            1                        t                                    1

which can be rewritten as

                                  Z        Z                                                                  Z                                                  !
                                      t0       t
                                                                             c(z)1                                    t0       X
                                                                     z
                 max          :                        (t)e              (z)                      dzdt +                               (djt) (t)S(t; k(t); d) dt
              c(z)z2[0;t0 ]       0        0                                  1                                   0             d




  35
     Relative to Caliendo, Gorry and Slavov (2015) and Stokey (2014), the current paper has the added complication that
the timing density is truncated, which in turn renders the usual Pontryagin …rst-order conditions insu¢ cient to identify a
unique optimum. We will elaborate more below.


                                                                                                  45
where
                                                                         Z    T
                                                          c2 (zjt; k(t); d)1             z
                                              S(t; k(t); d) =                 dz: e              (z)
                                             t                   1
                                                 R t0 R t           R t0 R t0
Using a change in the order of integration, i.e., 0 0 ( )dzdt = 0 z ( )dtdz, we can write

                  Z    t0   Z   t                                                                     Z    t0   Z    t0
                                                    z           c(z)1                                                               z             c(z)1
                                        (t)e                (z)               dzdt =                                      (t)e              (z)            dtdz
                   0        0                                    1                                     0         z                                 1
                                                                                                      Z    t0
                                                                                                                                        z          c(z)1
                                                                                             =                  [1         (z)]e             (z)            dz
                                                                                                       0                                            1
                                                                                                      Z    t0
                                                                                                                                        t         c(t)1
                                                                                             =                  [1         (t)]e            (t)            dt:
                                                                                                       0                                           1

Using this result we can state the stochastic problem as a standard Pontryagin problem

                                        Z          (                                                                                                       )
                                              t0
                                                                                      c(t)1                      X
                                                                             t
                      max           :                [1          (t)]e            (t)                      +               (djt) (t)S(t; k(t); d) dt
                 c(t)t2[0;t0 ]            0                                            1
                                                                                                                     d


subject to
                                                                         Z    T
                                                                                         z             c2 (zjt; k(t); d)1
                                              S(t; k(t); d) =                     e              (z)                                        dz;
                                                                          t                                   1


                                                             dk(t)
                                                                   = rk(t) + (1                            )w(t)            c(t);
                                                              dt

                                                                         k(0) = 0, k(t0 ) free;

                                                              (k(t) + B(t; d))e                  rt
                 c2 (zjt; k(t); d) = R T                                                                        e(r       )z=
                                                                                                                                   (z)1= , for z 2 [t; T ]:
                                                             e   rv+(r        )v=        (v)1=         dv
                                                        t

   To solve, form the Hamiltonian H with multiplier (t)

                                                   c(t)1             X
                                    t
        H = [1     (t)]e                 (t)                     +           (djt) (t)S(t; k(t); d) + (t)[rk(t) + (1                                        )w(t)   c(t)]:
                                                    1
                                                                     d


The necessary conditions include

                                                     @H                                      t
                                                          = [1                   (t)]e            (t)c(t)                       (t) = 0
                                                    @c(t)

                                    d (t)                     @H                 X                              @S(t; k(t); d)
                                          =                        =                     (djt) (t)                                                (t)r;
                                     dt                      @k(t)                                                 @k(t)
                                                                                  d

where the usual transversality condition (t0 ) = 0 is automatically satis…ed by the Maximum Condition



                                                                                             46
(since    (t0 ) = 1 by de…nition). Note that

                        Z   T
@S(t; k(t); d)                      z                      @c2 (zjt; k(t); d)
                   =            e(z)[c2 (zjt; k(t); d)]                       dz
   @k(t)              t                                          @k(t)
                     Z T             "                                                                                  #
                              z            (k(t) + B(t; d))e rt                                                                          e   rt e(r    )z=      (z)1=
                   =      e      (z) R T                                e(r )z=                              (z)   1=
                                                                                                                                RT                                           dz
                                              rv+(r    )v=        1=                                                                         rv+(r      )v=     (v)1= dv
                      t                 t e                   (v) dv                                                             t       e
                     "                                  #
                            (k(t) + B(t; d))e rt
                   =   RT                                    e rt :
                           e  rv+(r )v=      (v)1= dv
                        t


Using this result, together with the Maximum Condition, we can rewrite the multiplier equation as
                                          "                                                 #
         d (t)         X                          (k(t) + B(t; d))e           rt
                                                                                                    rt                               t
               =                (djt) (t) R T                                                   e            [1         (t)]e                (t)c(t)       r:
          dt                                      e   rv+(r       )v=   (v)1=          dv
                        d                     t


Now di¤erentiate the Maximum Condition with respect to t

               t                                              t                    t    0                                   t                         1 dc(t)           d (t)
   (t)    e        (t) c(t)         +[1   (t)]           e          (t) + e                 (t) c(t)                e           (t) c(t)                          =
                                                                                                                                                         dt              dt

and combine the previous two equations and solve for dc(t)=dt

                                 "                            #                                          !
dc(t)         c(t) e( r)t X           (k(t) + B(t; d))e rt                                          1         c(t) (t)                        0 (t)               c(t)
      =                     (djt) R T                                                                                  +                              +r                 ;
 dt                 (t)                 rv+(r )v=    (v)1= dv                                                 1    (t)                        (t)
                          d        t e


which matches the Euler equation stated in the body of the paper.
   The Euler equation, together with the law of motion for savings dk=dt and the initial condition
k(0) = 0 are used to pin down solution consumption and savings conditional on c(0), which has yet to
be identi…ed.
   In general, in stochastic stopping time problems where there is no restriction on the state variable
at the maximum stopping date— a setting that arises naturally if the timing p.d.f. is truncated— the
usual Pontryagin …rst-order conditions for optimality are not su¢ cient to identify a unique solution. The
transversality condition is redundant and the …rst-order conditions therefore produce a family of potential
solutions rather than a unique solution. We provide a “work-around” that works in general and is easy
to use. The answer is to use the limiting case of the transversality condition, together with the other
…rst-order conditions, to derive what we refer to as a “stochastic continuity” condition to provide the
needed endpoint restriction. This extra condition allows us to identify the unique solution.




                                                                        47
   We can identify c(0) as follows. Rewrite the Maximum Condition as

                                                                      t                                         (t)
                                                         e                  (t)c(t)            =                      :
                                                                                                      1           (t)

Noting the transversality condition and properties of the c.d.f.

                                                                                    (t0 )    0
                                                                                          0
                                                                                            = ;
                                                                            1          (t )  0

we can use L’Hôpital’s Rule on this indeterminate expression

                                   t                                                    (t)         d (t)=dt   d (t0 )=dt
                        lim0 e           (t)c(t)             = lim0                          = lim0          =
                        t!t                                           t!t       1         (t) t!t       (t)        (t0 )

and hence we can use the following as a boundary condition in lieu of the redundant transversality
condition
                                                                 t0                                   d (t0 )=dt
                                                    e                      (t0 )c(t0 )            =              :
                                                                                                          (t0 )

Note that                                                                       "                                                         #
                        d (t0 )           X                                              (k(t0 ) + B(t0 ; d))e                rt0
                                                             0              0                                                                          rt0
                                =                   (djt ) (t ) R T                                                                                e
                         dt                                                               e    rv+(r             )v=      (v)1=     dv
                                            d                                       t0

so the new boundary condition becomes
                                                                                    "                                                         #
                                                     X                                        (k(t0 ) + B(t0 ; d))e                rt0
                         t0                                                                                                                                rt0
                    e         (t0 )c(t0 )       =                         (djt0 ) R T                                                                  e         :
                                                                                              e    rv+(r            )v=    (v)1=         dv
                                                         d                               t0


Simplify

                                                "                                                                   #                                            !    1=
                              X                          (k(t0 ) + B(t0 ; d))e                            rt0
                0                           0                                                                                       (r      )t0        0     1
             c(t ) =                   (djt ) R T                                                                             e                    (t )
                                                         e            rv+(r         )v=           (v)1= dv
                               d                    t0
                                                "                                                                                                  #         !       1=
                              X                          (k(t0 ) + B(t0 ; d))e                            rt0
                                                                                                                           )t0 =
                    =                  (djt0 ) R T                                                                  e(r                  (t0 )1=
                                                         e            rv+(r         )v=           (v)1= dv
                               d                    t0
                                                                                                  ! 1=
                              X
                    =                  (djt0 ) c2 (t0 jt0 ; k(t0 ); d)                                          :
                               d


In sum, we choose c(0) so that the Euler equation dc=dt, together with dk=dt and the initial condition
                                                                 P                                1=
k(0) = 0 all imply “stochastic continuity” at time t0 : c(t0 ) =        0        0 0      0
                                                                  d (djt ) [c2 (t jt ; k(t ); d)]    . Note
that we literally have continuity if d is deterministic, c(t0 ) = c2 (t0 jt0 ; k(t0 ); d). For the more general case


                                                                                         48
where d is stochastic, there is continuity between marginal utility and expected marginal utility.


Appendix C: Welfare decomposition with Jensen’s inequality

Here we prove using Jensen’s inequality that the timing premium is smaller than the value of full insurance.
Making use of the following equations
                                                                        cN R (t) = k(0)G(t)
                                                                   Z                                                              !
                                                                        t0   X
                                                k(0) =                                   (djt) (t)k(0jt; d) dt
                                                                    0            d

                                                                                 e(r         )t=           (t)1=
                                                         G(t)          RT
                                                                             e   rv+(r               )v=        (v)1= dv
                                                                         0

                                                              c(zjt; d) = k(0jt; d)G(z)
                                                                 Z T
                                                           NR                   cN R (t)1
                                                         U     =      e t (t)                                                 dt
                                                                   0               1
                                           Z                                             Z                                                         !
                                                    t0       X                                   T
                                                                                                                        c(zjt; d)1
                                                                                                            z
                      EU (t; d) =                                  (djt) (t)                         e              (z)                     dz         dt;
                                                0                                            0                             1
                                                             d

we note that

                                               Z T
                                       k(0)1
                  U NR =                           e t (t)G(t)1 dt
                                        1       0
                                       hR 0 P                          i1
                                          t
                                            (    (djt) (t)k(0jt; d)) dt                                               Z       T
                                         0    d                                                                                       t
                                =                                                                                                 e       (t)G(t)1      dt
                                                                        1                                                 0



                                      Z                                              Z                                                                       !
                                           t0        X                                   T
                                                                                                                                      k(0jt; d)1
                                                                                                      z
               EU (t; d) =                                       (djt) (t)                   e              (z)G(z)1                                   dz         dt
                                       0                                             0                                                   1
                                                         d
                                      Z                                                                    !          Z
                                           t0        X                     k(0jt; d)1                                      T
                                                                                                                                      z
                                =                                (djt) (t)                                      dt                e       (z)G(z)1          dz:
                                       0                                      1                                        0
                                                         d


By Jensen’s inequality,

                 hR         P                             i1                                                                                            !
                   t0                                                                         Z
                  0     (   d       (djt) (t)k(0jt; d)) dt                                           t0     X                   k(0jt; d)1
                                                                                         >                            (djt) (t)                              dt
                                           1                                                     0                                 1
                                                                                                                d




                                                                                         49
which implies U N R > EU (t; d) and hence         >     0.   In other words, the individual would always pay more
to have his expected wealth with certainty than he would pay for retirement information, because simply
knowing his wealth is not as good as insuring his wealth.


Appendix D: Leisure

Suppose period utility is additively separable in consumption c and leisure l. In keeping with our main
assumption that retirement is an uncertain event, utility from leisure is now an uncertain quantity as
well. Early retirement brings extra utility from leisure while late retirement erodes utility from leisure.
    Without loss of generality, we normalize instantaneous leisure time to l = 0 before retirement and
l = 1 after retirement. We also normalize the instantaneous utility of leisure during the working period
to u(0) = 0. The utility of leisure during retirement is u(1). We assume u0 > 0 and u00 < 0. For a
                                                                          RT
given retirement realization t, the total lifetime utility from leisure is t e z (z)u(1)dz. The additive
separability of consumption and leisure implies that consumption decisions are not in‡uenced by the
presence of leisure in the utility function. Hence, the individual will continue to follow c1 (z) for all
z before the retirement date t is realized and c2 (zjt; k1 (t); d) for all z after the retirement date t and
disability status d are realized.


Full insurance

For the case in which the individual is fully insured against retirement uncertainty, he collects with
certainty his expected wealth as before and makes optimal consumption decisions over the life cycle as
before, cN R (t). Concerning leisure, he receives at each moment t his expected leisure at that moment


                                     lN R (t) =       (t)    1 + [1    (t)]   0

                                                                              RT       t
which confers period leisure utility u( (t)) and total leisure utility        0    e       (t)u( (t))dt, where   (t) = 1
for all t   t0 .
    Equating utility from expected wealth and expected leisure to expected utility, and then solving for




                                                             50
  (willingness to pay to avoid uncertainty), gives the full insurance value of timing uncertainty

            Z   T                                    Z T
                         [cN R (t)(1
                         t               )]1
                    e        (t)               dt +      e t (t)u( (t))dt
           0                     1                     0
          Z t0 X                   Z t                         Z T                                                                                                     !
                                          z      c1 (z)1                  c (zjt; k1 (t); d)1
        =              (djt) (t)       e     (z)          dz +     e z (z) 2                                                                                      dz       dt
           0                         0             1            t                1
                  d
             Z t0        Z T
          +        (t)       e z (z)u(1)dz dt:
                    0              t


Now performing some algebra on the last term on both the left and right sides, including a change in the
order of integration on the term on the right, we have

                                                                Z    T
                                                                                  t
                                       I                                  e           (t)u( (t))dt
                                                                 0
                                                                Z    t0                                          Z       T
                                                                                  t                                                     t
                                                =                         e           (t)u( (t))dt +                           e            (t)u(1)dt
                                                                 0                                                    t0



                                   Z       t0   Z       T
                                                                              z
                        II                                      (t)e                  (z)u(1)dzdt
                                       0            t
                                   Z       t0   Z       z                                                    Z       T     Z       t0
                                                                              z                                                                 z
                             =                                  (t)e                  (z)u(1)dtdz +                                     (t)e        (z)u(1)dtdz
                                       0            0                                                            t0            0
                                   Z       t0   Z       z                                                    Z       T
                                                                              z                                                     z
                             =                                  (t)e                  (z)u(1)dtdz +                        e                (z)u(1)dz
                                       0            0                                                            t0
                                   Z       t0                                                  Z      T
                                                            z                                                         z
                             =                  e                   (z)u(1) (z)dz +                          e                 (z)u(1)dz
                                       0                                                            t0
                                   Z       t0                                                 Z   T
                                                            t                                                    t
                             =                  e                   (t)u(1) (t)dt +                      e                 (t)u(1)dt:
                                       0                                                       t0


Using the concavity of u and the fact that                                             (t) < 1 for all t < t0 , it must be that


                                                    u( (t)) > u(1) (t) for all t < t0 =) I > II:


Finally, this implies that                  must be strictly larger when we include leisure in the utility function than
when we do not. Hence, we are safe to ignore leisure and treat our calculations of the welfare cost of
retirement uncertainty as a lower bound. While including leisure may at …rst glance seem to mitigate
the welfare loss of timing uncertainty because early retirement shocks are accompanied by more leisure,
the additive separability of utility prevents this from happening. Instead, retirement timing uncertainty
simply implies that the individual faces risk over two (unrelated) margins, consumption as well as leisure,


                                                                                             51
and the presence of the second margin only ampli…es his willingness to pay to avoid uncertainty.


Timing premium

Similar arguments can be made for the timing premium. With leisure in the period utility function, the
timing premium           0   is the solution to the following equation

      Z                            Z                                                                    Z                             !
              t0   X                    T
                                                             [c(zjt; d)(1            0 )]
                                                                                         1                   T
                                                    z                                                                z
                       (djt) (t)            e            (z)                                     dz +            e       (z)u(1)dz        dt
          0                         0                                  1                                t
                   d
      Z                            Z                                         Z                                                                    !
              t0   X                    t
                                                           c (z)1                    T
                                                                                                            c2 (zjt; k1 (t); d)1
                                                z                                            z
  =                    (djt) (t)            e           (z) 1        dz +                e        (z)                                + u(1) dz        dt:
          0                         0                        1                   t                                  1
                   d


The leisure terms cancel out and we are left with the same timing premium                                                0   as when we ignore leisure.
This is an immediate implication of the assumption that leisure is …xed before and after retirement.
Early resolution of retirement uncertainty does not change leisure allocations over the life cycle, which
means the individual isn’t willing to pay any more for retirement information in this case than in the
case without leisure.


Appendix E: Social Security

Because the individual faces uncertainty about becoming disabled, we must model Social Security in both
states.


Without disability

Suppose the individual never becomes disabled but instead retires for other reasons (such as a health
shock to a spouse or parent).
   Let w(t) be the individual’s average wage income corresponding to the last 35 years of earnings before
retirement (which is virtually equivalent to the top 35 years of earnings given the wage pro…le that we
are using), where t is the stochastic retirement age. If the individual draws a bad enough shock, some of
these years will be zeros. If the individual draws a very good shock, then the average of his last 35 years
can increase because wages are lowest at age 23 in our calibration.
   Let b(w(t)) be the constant, ‡ow value of Social Security bene…ts if claimed at age 65. The individual
receives this constant ‡ow until death. Bene…ts are a piecewise linear function of an individual’s average
wage, where the kinks (bend points) are multiples of the economy-wide average wage e. Social Security
replaces 90% of w(t) up to the …rst bend point, 32% of w(t) between the …rst and second bend points,

                                                                            52
15% of w(t) between the second and third bend points, and 0% of w(t) beyond the third bend point.
The nominal values of the bend points change each year, but Alonso-Ortiz (2014) and others assume the
bend points are the following multiples of the average economy-wide wage: 0:2e, 1:24e, and 2:47e.
   To simplify, we assume the economy-wide average wage equals the average wage of an individual who
draws a retirement shock at the average age (65)


                                             e = w(42=77);


which means that the ‡ow value of bene…ts claimed at 65 is
               8
               >
               >                             90%     w(t) for w(t)          0:2e
               >
               >
               >
               >
               <               90%   0:2e + 32%     (w(t)        0:2e) for 0:2e              w(t)      1:24e
   b(w(t)) =
               >
               > 90% 0:2e + 32% (1:24e 0:2e) + 15% (w(t) 1:24e) for 1:24e w(t) 2:47e
               >
               >
               >
               >
               :    90% 0:2e + 32% (1:24e 0:2e) + 15% (2:47e 1:24e) for 2:47e w(t):

   Finally, SS(tjd) is the present discounted value (as of retirement date t) of Social Security bene…ts,
conditional on disability status. Taking advantage of our assumption that capital markets are complete,
and assuming d = 0, we endow the individual with the following lump sum at t,

                                                     Z                                   !
                                                          1
                                                                     r(v 42=77)
                   SS(tjd) = SS(tj0) =    b(w(t))                e                dv er(t           42=77)
                                                                                                             :
                                                         42=77


With disability

If the individual becomes disabled, we re-use notation and assume w(t) is his average wage income
corresponding to the last 35 years of earnings, where t is the stochastic retirement age, and no zeros are
included in the average if the individual draws a timing shock that leaves him with fewer than 35 years
of work experience. Moreover, he begins collecting full bene…ts at the moment he retires (rather than
waiting until age 65). Hence

                                                                           Z     1
                                                                                         r(v t)
                     SS(tjd) = SS(tj1) = max SS(tj0); b(w(t))                        e            dv :
                                                                             t

   The max operator is to recognize that a disability shock after t = 42=77 (age 65) can’t lead to lower
bene…ts than a system without disability. In other words, disability leads to higher total bene…ts if the
shock is early and has no e¤ect on total bene…ts if the shock happens late.



                                                    53
Appendix F: Early revelation of information

The individual’s problem is solved recursively as before. All random variables are the same as before.
The retirement date t has p.d.f.            (t) with support [0; t0 ]; and the disability indicator d 2 f0; 1g has
conditional p.d.f. (djt).
   If the individual has not already drawn the stochastic retirement shock, he learns with certainty at
date t 2 (0; t0 ) when he will ultimately retire and he also learns at that date whether he will be disabled
upon retirement. We refer to t as the information revelation date.


Step 1. The deterministic problem after the information revelation date

We break into two cases which are di¤erentiated by whether the retirement shock hits before or after the
information revelation date.
   First consider the situation in which the retirement shock strikes before the information revelation
date (t < t ). If so, then the optimal consumption path c(z) for z 2 [t; T ] after the retirement shock has
hit at date t solves
                                                                Z     T
                                                                                 z           c(z)1
                                              max           :               e          (z)                 dz;
                                          c(z)z2[t;T ]            t                           1

subject to
                                         dK(z)
                                               = rK(z)                           c(z); for z 2 [t; T ];
                                          dz

                            t and d given, K(t) = k(t) + B(t; d) given, K(T ) = 0:

The solution to this deterministic control problem is

                                           (k(t) + B(t; d))e                      rt
                c2 (zjt; k(t); d) = R T                                                      e(r     )z=
                                                                                                             (z)1= , for z 2 [t; T ]:
                                          e   rv+(r             )v=         (v)1=      dv
                                     t


This solution, for an arbitrary k(t) and for given realizations of t and d, will be nested in the continuation
function in the next step.
   On the other hand, suppose the retirement shock hits on or after the infomation revelation date. If
so, then the optimal consumption path c(z) for z 2 [t ; T ] after retirement date t                                           t has been revealed
at t solves
                                                                 Z      T
                                                                                 z           c(z)1
                                              max           :               e          (z)                 dz;
                                          c(z)z2[t   ;T ]           t                         1

subject to
                                     dK(z)
                                           = rK(z)                              c(z); for z 2 [t ; T ];
                                      dz

                                                                                54
                                                                  Z       t
                                                                                                           r(v t )                                                                            r(t t )
        t and d given, K(t ) =                                                (1          )w(v)e                         dv + k(t ) + B(t; d)e                                                           given, K(T ) = 0:
                                                                      t

The solution to this deterministic control problem is
                                              Rt
                                                          (1                  )w(v)e rv dv + k(t )e rt + B(t; d)e                                                            rt
  c2R (zjt; t ; k(t ); d) =                           t
                                                                               RT                                                                                                 e(r             )z=
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (z)1= , for z 2 [t ; T ]:
                                                                                    rv+(r )v=     (v)1= dv
                                                                                t e


This solution, for arbitrary k(t ) and t and for given realizations of shocks t and d, will also be nested
in the continuation function in the next step.


Step 2. The time zero stochastic problem

Facing random variables t and d, at time zero the individual seeks to maximize expected utility
                           "    Z t                                                                                                       Z              t
                                                                              z            c(z)1                                                                      z                   c(z)1
   max           :   E 1ft < t g e                                                     (z)                 dz + 1ft                    t g                   e                    (z)                     dz
c(z)z2[0;t   ]       t;d                                      0                             1                                                        0                                     1
                                                      Z       T                                                                                                               Z       T
                                                                              z       c (zjt; k(t); d)1                                                                                             z          c2R (zjt; t ; k(t ); d)1
                     +1ft < t g                                   e                (z) 2                                         dz + 1ft                        t g                          e          (z)                              dz
                                                          t                                 1                                                                                     t                                       1

which can be written as

                                  Z       t       Z       t                                                                                                      Z       t
                                                                                   z        c(z)1                                                                                         z             c(z)1
             max              :                                   (t)e                  (z)                    dzdt + [1                            (t )]                     e                   (z)              dz
        c(z)z2[0;t    ]               0               0                                      1                                                                       0                                   1
                                          Z                                                                              !                Z                                                                                !
                                                  t           X                                                                                     t0       X
                                  +                                           (djt) (t)S(t; k(t); d) dt +                                                                    (djt) (t)R(t; t ; k(t ); d) dt
                                              0                   d                                                                             t                d


where
                                                                                              Z        T
                                                                                                                    z                c2 (zjt; k(t); d)1
                                                                  S(t; k(t); d) =                          e             (z)                                                          dz
                                                                                                   t                                        1
                                                                                             Z     T
                                                                                                                z            c2R (zjt; t ; k(t ); d)1
                                              R(t; t ; k(t ); d) =                                     e                (z)                            dz:
                                                                                               t                                        1
                                                                                                            Rt          Rt             Rt Rt
Using a change in the order of integration, i.e.,                                                              0         0 ( )dzdt = 0       z ( )dtdz, we can write

                     Z        t   Z   t                                                                                  Z       t    Z     t
                                                                  z           c(z)1                                                                                      z                    c(z)1
                                              (t)e                        (z)                 dzdt =                                                     (t)e                     (z)                     dtdz
                          0       0                                            1                                             0          z                                                      1
                                                                                                                         Z       t
                                                                                                                                                                                          z            c(z)1
                                                                                                               =                     [ (t )                          (z)]e                         (z)        dz
                                                                                                                             0                                                                          1
                                                                                                                         Z       t
                                                                                                                                                                                          t           c(t)1
                                                                                                               =                     [ (t )                          (t)]e                        (t)        dt:
                                                                                                                             0                                                                         1



                                                                                                                    55
Using this result we can state the stochastic problem as a standard Pontryagin problem

                                        Z             (                                                                                                            )
                                              t
                                                                                                        c(t)1                 X
                                                                                            t
                 max            :                          [1            (t)]e                      (t)                 +             (djt) (t)S(t; k(t); d) dt
               c(t)t2[0;t   ]             0                                                              1
                                                                                                                              d
                                              Z                                                                                   !
                                                      t0        X
                                        +                                (djt) (t)R(t; t ; k(t ); d) dt
                                                  t              d


subject to
                                                                               Z        T
                                                                                                     z             c2 (zjt; k(t); d)1
                                         S(t; k(t); d) =                                    e                (z)                                dz;
                                                                                    t                                     1
                                                                               Z    T
                                                                                                    z             c2R (zjt; t ; k(t ); d)1
                                R(t; t ; k(t ); d) =                                        e            (z)                                            dz;
                                                                                t                                            1


                                                                dk(t)
                                                                      = rk(t) + (1                                  )w(t)         c(t);
                                                                 dt

                                                                               k(0) = 0, k(t ) free;

                                                                (k(t) + B(t; d))e                            rt
                c2 (zjt; k(t); d) = R T                                                                                 e(r   )z=
                                                                                                                                        (z)1= , for z 2 [t; T ];
                                                                e    rv+(r              )v=          (v)1=         dv
                                                           t
                                Rt
                                        (1             )w(v)e rv dv + k(t )e rt + B(t; d)e                                               rt
 c2R (zjt; t ; k(t ); d) =          t
                                                        RT                                                                                    e(r     )z=
                                                                                                                                                              (z)1= , for z 2 [t ; T ]:
                                                             rv+(r )v=     (v)1= dv
                                                         t e

   To solve, form the Hamiltonian H with multiplier (t)

                                              c(t)1                      X
                                t
      H = [1        (t)]e               (t)                          +              (djt) (t)S(t; k(t); d) + (t)[rk(t) + (1                                       )w(t)    c(t)]:
                                               1
                                                                          d


The necessary conditions include

                                                   @H                                                    t
                                                        = [1                            (t)]e                 (t)c(t)                 (t) = 0
                                                  @c(t)

                                 d (t)                          @H                       X                              @S(t; k(t); d)
                                       =                             =                                  (djt) (t)                                   (t)r;
                                  dt                           @k(t)                                                       @k(t)
                                                                                                d

and the transversality condition

                                                                         Z                                                                          !
                                                 @                             t0        X
                                        (t ) =                                                          (djt) (t)R(t; t ; k(t ); d) dt:
                                               @k(t )                      t                    d


   Note that the Maximum Condition and the multiplier equation are the same as in our model without


                                                                                                         56
early revelation of information. Therefore, the Euler equation is the same as well
                                  "                            #                                                    !
dc(t)          c(t) e( r)t X           (k(t) + B(t; d))e rt                                                     1       c(t) (t)                   0 (t)             c(t)
      =                      (djt) R T                                                                                           +                         +r               :
 dt                  (t)                 rv+(r )v=    (v)1= dv                                                          1    (t)                   (t)
                           d        t e


     To pin down c(0), we need to use the transversality condition. Evaluate the Maximum Condition at
t
                                                                                       t
                                                         [1             (t )]e               (t )c(t )     = (t )

and insert into the transversality condition

                                                                                             Z                                                 !
                                                                              @                   t0   X
                                      t
                 [1        (t )]e                  (t )c(t )              =                                (djt) (t)R(t; t ; k(t ); d) dt:
                                                                            @k(t )            t        d


Note that

             @
                  R(t; t ; k(t ); d)
          @k(t )
          Z T
                                                  @c2R (zjt; t ; k(t ); d)
     =         e z (z)[c2R (zjt; t ; k(t ); d)]                            dz
           t                                             @k(t )
          Z T "R t                                                           # "                                                                                #
                  t (1     )w(v)e rv dv + k(t )e rt + B(t; d)e rt rz=                e rt e(r                                          )z=           (z)1=
     =                       RT                                       e           RT                                                                                dz
                                    rv+(r )v=   (v)1= dv                                rv+(r                                          )v=           (v)1= dv
           t                  t e                                                  t e
          "R t                                                    # Z           "                                                                               #
             t (1      )w(v)e rv dv + k(t )e rt + B(t; d)e rt             T
                                                                                     e rt e(r                                          )z=           (z)1=
     =                  RT                                                  e rz R T                                                                                dz
                               rv+(r )v=    (v)1= dv                                    rv+(r                                          )v=           (v)1= dv
                         t e                                            t          t e
          "R t                                                    #
             t (1      )w(v)e rv dv + k(t )e rt + B(t; d)e rt
     =                  RT                                            e rt
                               rv+(r   )v=     1=
                         t e                (v) dv
     = [c2R (t jt; t ; k(t ); d)]                  e(r        )t
                                                                     (t )e        rt

                                                         t
     = [c2R (t jt; t ; k(t ); d)]                  e               (t ):


Hence, we can rewrite the transversality condition again as

                                                                    Z                                                                                      !
                                                                         t0       X
                             t                                                                                                             t
          [1      (t )]e            (t )c(t )                 =                            (djt) (t)[c2R (t jt; t ; k(t ); d)]    e                (t ) dt;
                                                                     t            d

or                                                                                                                       !        !
                                      Z       t0       X
                                                                                                                                      1=
                                                                                  (t)
                      c(t ) =                                      (djt)                [c (t jt; t ; k(t ); d)]             dt                :
                                          t                                   1     (t ) 2R
                                                         d

     Hence, we can choose c(0) so that this transversality condition holds, given the Euler equation dc=dt,


                                                                                            57
the law of motion for savings dk=dt, and the initial condition k(0) = 0.


Welfare

The timing premium                        0   is the solution to the following equation (which has the same left side as before
but the right side is now modi…ed),

         Z                                             Z                                                                                      !
              t0            X                                  T
                                                                                       [c(zjt; d)(1                   0 )]
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                               z
                                    (djt) (t)                      e               (z)                                                 dz         dt
          0                                                0                                     1
                            d
         Z                                             Z                                                          Z                                                         !
              t             X                                  t
                                                                                      c (z)1                           T
                                                                                                                                           c (zjt; k1 (t); d)1
                                                                           z                                                       z
     =                              (djt) (t)                      e               (z) 1               dz +                e            (z) 2                         dz        dt
          0                                                0                            1                          t                              1
                            d
              Z                                                Z                                                       Z                                                              !!
                       t0       X                                      t
                                                                                           c (z)1                              T
                                                                                                                                                  c (zjt; t ; k1 (t ); d)1
                                                                                   z                                                    z
         +                            (djt) (t)                            e            (z) 1                dz +                  e           (z) 2R                            dz        dt:
                   t                                               0                         1                             t                               1
                                d


In this context, the timing premium is the amount the individual would pay at time 0 to know his
retirement date and his future disability status upon retirement, rather than learning this information
no later than time t .


Appendix G: First-best insurance against timing risk

Let’s assume the individual participates in a …rst-best arrangement that perfectly insures against retire-
ment timing uncertainty by providing a lump-sum payment F B(t) upon retirement at t. We continue to
assume wages are taxed at rate .
     Suppose there is no disability risk in the model. If so, then the present value (as of time zero) of total
lifetime income, as a function of the retirement date t, is

                                               Z       t
                                                                   rv                                        rt                         rt
                                P V0 (t) =                 e            (1             )w(v)dv + e                Y (t) + e                  F B(t) for all t 2 [0; t0 ]:
                                                   0


By de…nition, the …rst-best arrangement would make the individual indi¤erent about when the retirement
shock is realized, hence it must satisfy
                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                     P V0 (t) = 0;
                                                                                                  dt

or
             d                           rt                                                 rt                rt dY     (t)                    rt                rt dF B(t)
                P V0 (t) = e                  (1               )w(t)                   re        Y (t) + e                              re          F B(t) + e                =0:
             dt                                                                                                        dt                                            dt




                                                                                                        58
Simplify
                                  dF B(t)                                                                  dY (t)
                                          = rF B(t) + rY (t)                                                             (1     )w(t):
                                    dt                                                                      dt

   The general solution to this di¤erential equation is

                                                Z     t
                                                                                      dY (v)                                          rv
                          F B(t) =        C+                  rY (v)                                         (1          )w(v) e              dv ert
                                                                                       dv

where C is a constant of integration. Evaluate at t = 0 and solve for C

                                                     Z    0
                                                                                          dY (v)                                              rv
                               C = F B(0)                         rY (v)                                       (1         )w(v) e                  dv
                                                                                           dv

which gives the particular solution

                                                          Z       t
                                               rt                                                 dY (v)
                      F B(t) = F B(0)e +                                  rY (v)                                    (1        )w(v) er(t                v)
                                                                                                                                                             dv:
                                                              0                                    dv

   Notice that the level is not pinned down; the overall generosity of the …rst-best arrangement is
indeterminate. To make a fair comparison with Social Security, we assume the …rst-best arrangement is
wealth-neutral relative to Social Security in an expectation sense

                                     Z    t0                                                  Z       t0
                                                                               rt                                              rt
                                               (t)F B(t)e                           dt =                    (t)SS(tj0)e             dt;
                                      0                                                           0


which pins down F B(0)

                      Z   t0                                   Z          t0              Z   t
                                                rt                                                                   dY (v)                                        rv
           F B(0) =            (t)SS(tj0)e           dt                             (t)               rY (v)                         (1            )w(v) e              dvdt:
                      0                                               0                   0                           dv

Appendix H. Simple policy

Independent of work history, suppose the government makes a …xed payment p from 65 forward that is
not a function of past earnings. Utilizing the assumption that capital markets are complete, we endow
the individual with the following lump sum at retirement age t,

                                                                      Z                                             !
                                                                           1
                                                                                          r(v 42=77)
                                   SP (t) =               p                          e                         dv er(t         42=77)
                                                                                                                                          :
                                                                      42=77

   To make a fair comparison with Social Security, we assume the simple policy is wealth-neutral relative




                                                                                          59
to Social Security in an expectation sense

                             Z     t0                             Z    t0
                                                      rt                                  rt
                                        (t)SP (t)e         dt =             (t)SS(tj0)e        dt;
                               0                                   0


which implies
                                                   R t0
                                                    0    (t)SS(tj0)e rt dt
                             p= R 0               R1                                  :
                                 t                          r(v 42=77) dv e r42=77 dt
                                        0   (t)    42=77  e




                                                              60
                                                    Figure 1. Simulated and Fitted Survival Probabilities

                                               1
                                                                                fitted
   unconditional survival probability, Ψ(t)




                                                                   simulated
                                              0.8



                                              0.6



                                              0.4



                                              0.2



                                               0
                                                0            0.2          0.4            0.6   0.8      1
                               model age, t
Fit Ψ(t) = 1 − tx to Social Security Administration cohort mortality tables.
                          Figure 2. CPS and Fitted Wages, Age 16-75
                  1
                                                                truncation
                                                                t0 = 52/77
                                   data                         (age 75)


                                                       fitted
wage rate, w(t)




                              model time 0
                              (age 23)


                          0                                 52/77            1
                                             model age, t
                      Fifth-order polynomial fit to simulated male CPS data.
Figure 3. Calibrated p.d.f. over Retirement Timing Uncertainty


                         7
                                                                     truncation
                         6                                           t0 = 52/77
                                mean 42/77 (age 65)                  (age 75)
density function, φ(t)




                         5      st. dev. 5/77 (5 years)


                         4


                         3


                         2


                         1


                         0
                          0         0.2         0.4        0.6                0.8           1
                                                model age, t
                                                                     R t0
                         Truncated beta: φ(t) = tγ−1 (t0 − t)β−1 {    0
                                                                            tγ−1 (t0 − t)β−1 dt}−1 .
Figure 4. Probability of Disability, Conditional on Retirement Age

                                     1

                                                                       truncation
probability of disability, θ(1|t)




                                                                       t0 = 52/77
                                    0.8
                                                                       (age 75)


                                    0.6         θ(1|t)



                                    0.4



                                    0.2



                                     0
                                      0   0.2        0.4       0.6         0.8      1
                                                   retirement age, t
Figure 5. Consumption over the life cycle with retirement timing uncertainty


                         1.2

                                                          shock at 75      c∗2
                          1                           shock at 70          c∗2
     consumption, c(t)




                                               shock at 65
                         0.8
                                                                          c∗2
                                           shock at 60


                         0.6   cNR                                         c∗2
                                     c∗1
                         0.4
                                                                        max retirement
                                                                        at 75
                         0.2


                          0
                           0    0.2             0.4             0.6              0.8     1
                                                model age, t
        Figure 6. U.S. Social Security vs. First-Best Insurance




     0.2                                       t0 = 52/77
                         F B(t)                (age 75)


    0.15



     0.1



    0.05          SS(t|0)



       0
        0         0.2        0.4        0.6       0.8         1
                          retirement age, t
F B(t) and SS(t|0) are lump-sum payments at the date of retirement, t.
Figure 7. Consumption over the life cycle with timing risk and disability risk


                         1.2

                                                            shock at 75
                          1
                                                        shock at 70
     consumption, c(t)




                                                 shock at 65
                         0.8                 shock at 60

                               shock at 45
                         0.6                       cNR
                                 c∗1
                         0.4


                                                                          max retirement
                         0.2
                                                                          at 75


                          0
                           0           0.2        0.4             0.6           0.8        1
                                                   model age, t
                     Dashed lines are c∗2 with d = 0, dotted lines are c∗2 with d = 1.
