                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   EMOTIONAL JUDGES AND UNLUCKY JUVENILES

                                         Ozkan Eren
                                         Naci Mocan

                                      Working Paper 22611
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22611


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




We thank Janet Currie, Caroline Hoxby, David Figlio, Barry Hirsch, Daniel Millimet, Madeline
Mocan, Greg Upton, Jim Kleinpeter, James Garand, Richard Boylan, Duha Altindag, Randi
Hjalmarsson, Jeff Butler, Leyla Mocan, Michael Malinowski, John Palmer, Peter Lewisch and
seminar participants at Georgia State University, University of Manitoba, American University,
Spanish Law and Economics Association Meetings in Lisbon, Portugal, the Economics of
Litigation Meeting in Montpellier, France, NBER’s Children’s Program and Education Program
Joint Meeting in Washington DC, and the European Economic Association Meetings in Geneva,
Switzerland for helpful comments. We also thank the Office of Social Service Research and
Development (OSSRD) in the College of Human Sciences and Education at Louisiana State
University for guidance with the data. Masayaki Onda, Suneye Holmes and Han Yu provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Ozkan Eren and Naci Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Emotional Judges and Unlucky Juveniles
Ozkan Eren and Naci Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 22611
September 2016
JEL No. D02,D03,J15,J71,K4,K41

                                         ABSTRACT

Employing the universe of juvenile court decisions in a U.S. state between 1996 and 2012, we
analyze the effects of emotional shocks associated with unexpected outcomes of football games
played by a prominent college team in the state. We investigate the behavior of judges, the
conduct of whom should, by law, be free of personal biases and emotions. We find that
unexpected losses increase disposition (sentence) lengths assigned by judges during the week
following the game. Unexpected wins, or losses that were expected to be close contests ex-ante,
have no impact. The effects of these emotional shocks are asymmetrically borne by black
defendants. We present evidence that the results are not influenced by defendant or attorney
behavior or by defendants’ economic background. Importantly, the results are driven by judges
who have received their bachelor’s degrees from the university with which the football team is
affiliated. Different falsification tests and a number of auxiliary analyses demonstrate the
robustness of the findings. These results provide evidence for the impact of emotions in one
domain on a behavior in a completely unrelated domain among a uniformly highly-educated
group of individuals (judges), with decisions involving high stakes (sentence lengths). They also
point to the existence of a subtle and previously-unnoticed capricious application of sentencing.


Ozkan Eren
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2305 Business Education Complex
Baton Rouge, LA, 70803
oeren@lsu.edu

Naci Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
3039 BEC
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu
                         Emotional Judges and Unlucky Juveniles

   1. Introduction

       It has been documented that emotions in one domain influence decisions in a completely

unrelated domain. For example, sunshine improves mood (e.g. Schwarz and Clore 1983), and

there is a positive relationship between sunshine and stock market performance (Kamstra et al.

2003, Hirshleifer and Shumway 2003). Edmans et al. (2007) show that controlling for pre-game

expected outcome, there is a short-lived but significant stock market decline after a loss of an

international soccer games (e.g. a World Cup game) in the country of the national team that lost

the game, presumably because the results of such important games drive the moods of the

residents of the country. More generally, it has been shown that emotions have powerful impacts

on judgments, decisions and choices. Anger and sadness can influence judgments (Bodenhausen

et al. 1994, Keltner et al. 1993). When one’s sense of well-being is low, one spends more time

focusing on negative attributes of others (Forgas 1995), and feelings of disgust can intensify the

extent of moral condemnation (Schnall et al, 2008). As summarized by Lerner et al. (2015),

“incidental anger triggered in one situation automatically elicits a motive to blame individuals in

another situation even though the targets of such anger have nothing to do with the source of the

anger (Quigley & Tedeschi 1996). Moreover, carryover of incidental emotions occurs without

awareness.”

       In this paper we test the impact of emotional influences using naturally-occurring micro

data. We investigate whether emotional shocks, experienced by a highly-educated group of

individuals, have any impact on these individuals’ professional behavior which, by law, should

be free of personal feelings and biases. Specifically, we examine the effects of emotional shocks

associated with unexpected outcomes of football games played by a prominent college team

                                                1
- Louisiana State University (LSU) - on all judicial decisions handed down by judges in

Louisiana’s juvenile courts between 1996 and 2012.

        We employ the Las-Vegas pregame point spread as fans' (judges in our case) rational

expectations about the outcome of the game. To the extent that pregame point spread provides

efficient prediction of game outcomes, controlling for the spread allows us to interpret any

differential impact between a win and a loss as the causal impact of the game outcome (Card and

Dahl 2011). A key background to our analysis is the fact that LSU football team, with its long

and successful history in college football, has an enormous group of loyal followers. The fan base

of the team goes well beyond the student body of the university: average attendance to home

games was around 92,500 between 1996 and 2012. 2 Clotfelter (2015) details the extent of fans’

devotions and their emotional ties to college teams.

        By special permission from Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections,

Youth Services, Office of Juvenile Justice, we obtained access to the universe of defendant files

from 1996 to 2012. For each file, we have basic demographic information on the defendants,

details of the offense committed, as well as information on the disposition (sentence) length and

disposition type (i.e., custody or probation). The files also contain identifiers that allow us to

gather information on the race, gender, age, and party affiliation of judges who adjudicated these

cases, as well the law school and the undergraduate institution from which they graduated. We

2
  Describing LSU football just as an event would be a huge understatement for the residents of the state of
Louisiana. Devotion to LSU football is deeply ingrained into the culture of the state. Weddings are
scheduled based on LSU games, convention halls and similar organizations are besieged by phone calls the
moment LSU schedule for the following football season is finalized, and charitable organizations have
their fund-raising events scheduled on the nongame weeks (Feinswog 2013). Note that the popularity of
college football in the U.S. is not limited to Louisiana. Average attendance to college football games
among all Division I teams was around 45,000 in 2012. Average attendance among the top-20 teams was
more than 75,000. Moreover, around 216 million viewers tuned in to watch the regular college football
season with another 126 million watching the bowl games (National Football Foundation 2013).



                                                    2
link our defendant-judge paired data to the record of the LSU football team over the same time

period to analyze the impact of unexpected game outcomes on judicial decision.

        Our results provide important insights. First, we find that upset losses (i.e., losses by LSU

football team when they were expected to win) increase the disposition length imposed by judges

on juvenile defendants.       In contrast, upset wins (i.e., games won by LSU when they were

expected to lose) have no significant impact on the disposition length set by judges. Similarly,

close losses (games lost by LSU when the outcome was uncertain ex-ante) have no impact. A

number of robustness analyses confirm our results. A placebo test based on unexpected game

results of other prominent college football teams shows that non-LSU games have no impact on

judge behavior. Similarly, judicial decisions in a given week are not impacted by LSU games

played the following week. Further examination of the data suggests that these results are

unlikely to be driven by emotional reactions of prosecutors or defense attorneys, by defendant

socio-economic background, or by potential courtroom misconduct of juveniles that could have

prompted judges’ agitation. Most importantly, we find that the results are driven entirely by those

judges who have received their bachelor’s degrees from LSU.

        Second, analyses based on juvenile defendants’ race provide information pertaining to

disparity of treatment and sheds light on the application of the equal protection clause of the law.

Our results suggest that the brunt of the burden of judges’ reaction is borne by black defendants. 3

We also find that the impact is larger for trials that take place after an upset loss in an important

game (when LSU was ranked in the top 10 of the Associated Press Rankings).

        The results are important for a number of reasons. First, they provide evidence for the

impact of emotions on decisions in an environment where the decision-makers are uniformly


3
  Adjusting for observable defendant attributes and judge fixed effects, there is no difference in sentence
lengths between black and white defendants in the absence of an unexpected LSU loss.

                                                      3
highly educated, and when the decisions in question should have been bound by institutional

restrictions and ethics. Specifically, application of the relevant legal principles to the facts of the

case is expected to eliminate arbitrary and capricious decisions by judges. Yet, we find that the

severity of sentences handed down by judges are impacted by the results of a football game for

those   judges who are more likely to be emotionally attached to the team.                   This finding

underscores the importance of emotions in decision making even in a high-stake environment.

The results are also consistent with models of expectation-based, reference-dependent preferences

which postulate that economic agents assess the outcome of a choice by its departure from a

reference point that is determined by the probabilistic beliefs about that outcome held in the past

(Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Koszegi and Rabin 2006).

        The second contribution of the paper is related to the investigation of whether the judicial

process is unbiased. It is well-documented that inequalities exist in the application of the law to

different groups of individuals (e.g., Argys and Mocan 2004; Shayo and Zussman 2011; Abrams

et al. 2012; Alesina and La Ferrara 2015). A different layer of complication arises in the

application of the law because some of the capricious judicial decisions seem arguably

unintentional. For example, Danziger et al. (2011a) show that the propensity of judges to make

favorable parole decisions goes down significantly as they adjudicate the cases sequentially; and

that judges’ propensity to be lenient jumps up after a food break. Their finding suggests a

“decision fatigue’ of judges that results in differential treatment of defendants based on the time

of day their case is adjudicated. 4 In this paper we find that the impact of an upset loss is observed


4
  Weinshall-Margel and Shaphard (2010) raised issues about the randomness of the order in which the
cases are seen by judges and the timing of the meal breaks. Also see the response of Danziger et al.
(2011b). Similarly, but in a different domain, Linder et al. (2014) find that primary care physicians’
propensity to prescribe antibiotics for acute respiratory infections (an inappropriate decision) goes up as
the clinic session gets longer, indicating that cognitive fatigue impairs judgment. Chen et al. (2015) find
negative autocorrelation in the decisions of judges, loan officers and baseball umpires that is unrelated to

                                                     4
immediately after the game (on Monday), and it lasts for one work-week. Thus, it cannot be

attributed to decision fatigue of judges.        It is, however, consistent with the hypothesis that

emotional stress is responsible for judges’ behavior. Our finding that the results are driven

entirely by those judges who have received their bachelor’s degrees from LSU indicates that

emotional shocks are in fact the driver of this behavior. 5

        Although harsher punishment handed down by judges is not deliberate (because it is

triggered by an emotional shock), we find some evidence that black defendants bear much of the

burden of judges’ wrath due to this emotional shock, which hints at a negative predisposition

towards black defendants. This result, coupled with the fact that there are no race related

differences in the disposition length in the absence of judges’ emotional stress, is suggestive of

the existence of a subtle, and previously-unnoticed, bias in sentencing. 6

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the institutional

settings. Section 3 presents the data. Section 4 describes the econometric methodology. Section 5


the merits of the cases. They report that this behavior is consistent with decision-makers suffering from
gambler’s fallacy, i.e., underestimation of the likelihood of streaks occurring by chance (Rabin and
Vayanos 2010; Tversky and Kahneman 1974).
5
  The impact of mood changes, triggered by unexpected losses of sports teams, has been documented in
other domains. For example, Edmans et al. (2007) show that there is a short-lived stock market decline
after the national soccer team loses an international soccer game. The authors show that this result cannot
be explained by economic factors and stock market dynamics, and attribute it to the change in investor
mood due to the loss of the national team. Card and Dahl (2011) find that unexpected losses of home
teams in the National Football League (NFL) increase the domestic violence rates by men in the city in
which the team is located. Chen and Spamann (2014) show that asylum grant rates in U.S. immigration
courts differ by the success of the court city’s NFL team. Healy et al. (2010) investigate the electoral
impact of local college football games and show that a win during the 10 day window before the election
day causes the incumbent to receive a higher percentage of the vote in the Senate, gubernatorial and
presidential elections. In a related, but different domain, Lindo et al. (2012) find that the grade point
average of male students declines in relation to the grade point average of female students at the University
of Oregon during the football seasons when the university’s football team is successful, which is attributed
to increased alcohol consumption of male students in response to the team’s success.
6
 There are a variety of other outside factors, identified by previous research, that are unrelated to the
merits of the case but ends up affecting sentencing decisions. See, for example, Lim et al. (2015) and
Philippe and Ouss (2015) for the relationship between media and sentencing decisions.

                                                     5
presents the results. Conclusions are provided in Section 6.



      2. Institutional Setting

          In Louisiana, youth through age 17 may enter the juvenile justice system when they are

accused of committing a crime and arrested or referred by the police to a juvenile court. 7 Having

received a formal complaint from a local law officer, the District Attorney's (DA) Office must

decide whether or not to petition the case to the court. Prosecutors may choose not to do so

because of lack of sufficient evidence. The DA's Office may also choose to enter into an informal

agreement (diversion program) with the juvenile and the parents to prevent incarceration. This

occasionally entails the child participating in community service, restitution, or treatment and

complying with certain behavioral requirements such as satisfactory school attendance (Louisiana

Children's Code CHC 631). Alternatively, prosecutors may proceed with a petition to the court.

In this situation the case moves to adjudication, and the disposition, which is similar to a sentence

in the adult courts, must be determined by a juvenile court judge (Louisiana Children's Code CHC

650-675). Under the provisions of the Louisiana juvenile justice system, a computer generated

random allotment (open to public) is implemented on a daily basis by the Clerk's office for all

cases filed in each district court (Rules for Louisiana District Courts, Chapter 14, Appendix

14.0A, various years). Thus, cases are randomly assigned to judges within each district court. 8

          A judge may simply dismiss the case if the prosecutor is unable to provide evidence to

find the youth delinquent. The juvenile would then be found not guilty and does not enter into the



7
    Children under age 10 are addressed through the Families in Need of Service programs.
8
 Random assignment of judges to cases excludes charges involving heinous crimes such as first-degree
murder.


                                                     6
juvenile justice system. 9 If the judge finds the defendant guilty, the judge has to then make a

disposition decision. This involves placing the juvenile in custody (secure or non-secure) or on

probation. In either case, the judge also has to assign the disposition length (sentence length).

Judges are responsible for weighing the severity of the offense committed and the prior offense

history of the youth. Louisiana Children's Code requires that crimes of first degree murder,

second degree murder, aggravated or first degree rape and aggravated kidnapping receive a

mandatory disposition of secure custody until the age of twenty-one years without the benefit of

parole, probation, suspension of imposition or execution of sentence, or modification of sentence

(Louisiana Children’s Code CHC 897.1). 10 In general, the judge will impose the least restrictive

disposition consistent with the circumstances of the case, the health and safety of the child, and

the best interest of the society (Louisiana Children's Code CHC 683). 11 Judges can set a

maximum duration of disposition up to the youth's 21st birthday. 12



      3. Data

3.1        Defendant Data and LSU College Football Team Records

           The defendant data for this study are obtained from the Louisiana Department of Public

Safety and Corrections, Youth Services, Office of Juvenile Justice (OJJ) and include all case

records from 1996 to 2012 in which juvenile was found to be delinquent. For each case record,



9
    We will return to this point later in the paper.
10
  There are only 32 of such cases during the sample period. Because a guilty verdict in these cases
requires mandatory sentencing, they are excluded from the analysis.
11
  In setting the appropriate disposition, judges may also consider the predisposition investigation report
prepared by probation officers involving information about youth, their risk to public safety and their
needs (Louisiana Children's Code CHC 680).
12
     Statutory exclusion laws apply to certain offenses to youth over 14 in the state of Louisiana.

                                                        7
we have information on both the juvenile defendant and the case itself. Information on the

defendants include the race, gender, age, parish of residence, parish of offense, the exact statute

offense committed, the date the individual was admitted into the juvenile system and a unique

individual identifier. The case data include information on the date the juvenile was disposed

before the judge, the judge's decision on the case (the disposition type and disposition length), the

court in which the disposition was held, and the identifier of the judge. In order to circumvent

any potential confounding effects that may arise from multiple offenses and/or criminal history of

the juvenile, we limit our attention to first-time delinquents ages 10 through 17 who were

convicted for only one statute offense.          Using the judge identifiers provided in the OJJ

administrative data, we also gathered information on judges’ race, gender, political party

affiliation, age, the law school from which they graduated, and the university from which they

have obtained their undergraduate degree. 18

        We link our defendant-judge data to LSU college football team records. Specifically, we

analyze all dispositions handed down by judges during the work week following a Saturday game

throughout the college football season and post season (i.e., bowl games). We analyze the

decisions during the 5-day work week (Monday through Friday) following the game, although

later in the paper we also investigate whether the impact of the game outcome lasts longer than a

week. Having imposed these restrictions and excluding 32 cases involving first and second

degree murder and aggravated rape, we end up with a sample of 8,228 unique case (juvenile)

records from a total of 207 judges. 19


18
  Information on judges is based on data from Louisiana District Judges Association Periodicals (1956-
2000), as well as phone conversations with the relevant parish clerk’s office.
19
  To minimize any potential confounding effects that may arise due to measurement error and outliers, we
also exclude defendants whose disposition length is more than the 99th percentile of the disposition length
distribution. This restriction applies to sentence lengths longer than 1,857 days and to 83 defendants. The

                                                    8
         Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for juveniles and judges. Panel A displays

juvenile attributes while Panel B presents judge characteristics. The average disposition length is

about 513 days. Figure 1 displays the distribution of disposition length. There is bunching at

about half-year thresholds (i.e., half a year, one year and one and a half year) with a median of

366 days. The spikes in disposition length are driven by judges commonly choosing disposition

lengths at half-year intervals for high frequency offenses such as simple burglary, possession of
                                                         20
drugs, simple battery, and disturbing the peace.              However, it should be noted that there is no

mandatory sentencing guidelines and judges exercise considerable discretion in sentencing. For

example, the average disposition length of disturbing the peace is 307 days, with a standard

deviation of 228, and the mean (standard deviation) disposition length of simple battery is 348

(193) days.

         The average incarceration rate is 26 percent. Put differently, 26 percent of those who are

found guilty of the charge are placed on (secure or non-secure) custody. This is similar to the

national average (25 percent in 2011) among all adjudicated delinquent cases (Hockenberry and

Puzzanchera 2014). 21 Sixty-two percent of the convicted juveniles are black, while 36 percent are

white.

results of the paper remain intact if we drop this restriction and use all observations in the data, or if we
impose a symmetric restriction and drop defendants whose disposition length is less than the 1st percentile
of the disposition length distribution as well. See Section 5.6 for several different robustness checks.
20
   While the football season spans late-August to December, there is nothing different about this time of
year in comparison to the rest of the year in terms of the composition of offenses. The five most frequent
offenses between the beginning of September and the end of December, in descending order, are
ungovernable (10.3%), simple burglary (8.9%), simple battery (8.4%), possession, manufacturing and
distribution of drugs (6.8%), and disturbing the peace (5.0%). The five most frequent offenses during
January-August, in descending order, are: ungovernable (10.2%), simple battery (8.4%), simple burglary
(8.0%), possession, manufacturing and distribution of drugs (7.5%), and disturbing the peace (5.5%).
21
   As for non-incarceration disposition options, probation forms the backbone of the Louisiana's juvenile
justice system. Our definition of incarceration status (secure and non-secure custody) is standard in the
literature (e.g., Aizer and Doyle 2015).


                                                     9
       The overwhelming majority of judges (88 percent) are white, and only about 23 percent

are female. Average age of judges is 56, and about 73 percent of judges are affiliated with the

Democratic Party. 22 It is interesting that in terms of observable characteristics, the judge sample

used in this study is similar to that reported in Abrams et al. (2012) for adult courts in Cook

County of the state of Illinois. Note also that 47 percent of the judges graduated from LSU law

school, while about one-third have received their bachelor’s degree from LSU. 23

       Table 2 reports win-loss record of the LSU football team for the seasons 1996 to 2012.

There is non-trivial variation from year to year. For example, LSU had a disappointing season

with a 3-8 win-loss record in 1999, while the record in 2000 was 8 wins and 4 losses.



3.2    LSU College Football Team’s Predicted and Actual Outcomes

       Spread betting on professional and college football games is organized through Las Vegas

bookmakers. The market assessment of the outcome of a game is assumed to be contained in the

closing value of the spread. For example, if the pregame point spread is -5 for LSU against

another team, this means that LSU is predicted to win by 5 points or more. Card and Dahl (2011)

provide credible evidence on efficient prediction of the pregame point spread on game outcomes

in the NFL. To build upon this evidence, we collected data on pregame point spreads and final

scores of all LSU college football games for seasons from 1996 to 2012 and ran a simple

regression of the actual spread on the predicted spread (closing value of the pregame point




22
  In empirical analyses, we use the age of the judge at the disposition date. For summary statistics, we
report the judge's age at the last observed disposition date.
23
  The undergraduate institutions from which the judges have graduated could be determined in case of 180
judges.


                                                  10
spread). 24 The coefficient estimate (standard error) from this exercise is 0.98 (0.07) with a R2

value of 0.49. Figure 2 plots the relationship between actual and predicted point spread. It is

important to note that the estimated effect on the predicted spread for LSU football games is

almost identical to that reported in Card and Dahl (2011) for the games played by six NFL teams

during the 1995-2006 seasons.

       Having shown support for efficient prediction hypothesis of the point spread on game

outcomes in college football, our next step is to divide the point spread into segments. Following

Card and Dahl (2011), we define ex ante classification of LSU college football games as (i)

predicted win if point spread is -4 or less, (ii) predicted close if point spread is between -4 and 4,

and (iii) predicted loss if point spread is 4 or more. Our results, however, are robust to using

different spread value cutoffs (discussed in section 5.6).

       Our sample includes all dispositions during the weekdays following a Saturday game of

the regular college football season between 1996 and 2012, as well as post-season bowl games

that are played on Saturdays. LSU has played 184 Saturday games during this time span, but

betting information is not available for five of these games. Thus, we utilize the remaining 179

games -- or about 85 percent of all games played by LSU over 16 years (Table 3, Panel A). As

shown in Panel B, LSU football team won 133 of these 179 Saturday games, which translates into

a win rate of 74 percent. Of these 179 games, 122 (68 percent) were predicted wins, 29 (16

percent) were predicted close games and 28 (16 percent) were predicted losses. As displayed at

the lower section of Panel B of Table 3, LSU lost 14 of the 122 games in which it was favored to

win by four or more points: these are upset losses. LSU lost about 48 percent of the games that

were predicted to be close contests: these are c1ose losses; and LSU won 10 of the 28 games

24
   Pregame point spread data come from an online betting agency (www.goldsheet.com) and game
statistics are obtained from LSU athletics department (www.lsusports.net).


                                                 11
(almost 36 percent) in which it was predicted to lose by four or more points: these are upset LSU

wins.

        The total number of dispositions associated with game outcomes is reported in [brackets]

beneath each category in Panel B of Table 3. There were 781 dispositions during the 14 work

weeks after upset losses, generating an average of 56 dispositions per week. There were 44

weekly dispositions, on average, associated with close losses (612 total dispositions after 14 close

losses), and there were 55 dispositions per week after upset wins. Note that the number of

dispositions handled by judges each week is a function of the flow of cases coming in to the

docket, and it takes an average of 60 days between the petition hearing (following the motion of

the district attorney) and the decision of the judge at the disposition trial. Thus, the alleged crimes

committed by these juveniles and the charges filed against them took place at least two months

before the relevant LSU game. Put differently, the difference in weekly average dispositions is

not a function of any potential concurrent local criminal activity at the time of judge’s decision.

        Figures 3-5 display the frequency distribution of opponent teams for all Saturday games

disaggregated by predicted spreads and actual outcomes of the games. Unexpected game

outcomes generally involve opponent teams that are known to be LSU's historical rivals such as

the University of Alabama and University of Florida. Finally, LSU college football team was

ranked in the top 10 based on Associated Press rankings for 86 games (48 percent) played on

Saturdays over the sample period.



   4. Empirical Methodology

        To estimate the impact of emotional shocks generated by unexpected wins or losses on

disposition length imposed by judges, we specify the following equation:



                                                  12
(1)

  𝐷𝑖𝑗𝑑𝑘𝑠 = 𝜆0 + 𝜆1 1(𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 ≤ −4) + 𝜆2 1(𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 ≤ −4 )1(𝑦𝑘−1𝑠 = 0) + 𝜆3 1(−4 < 𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 < 4)
                 + 𝜆4 1(−4 < 𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 < 4)1(𝑦𝑘−1𝑠 = 0) + 𝜆5 1(𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 ≥ 4)
                 + 𝜆6 1(𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 ≥ 4)1(𝑦𝑘−1𝑠 = 1) + 𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑑𝑘𝑠 𝛽 + 𝜂𝑗 + 𝛾𝑑 + 𝛿k + 𝜃𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖𝑗𝑑𝑘𝑠


       where 𝐷𝑖𝑗𝑑𝑘𝑠 is the disposition length for defendant 𝑖 set by judge 𝑗 on day 𝑑 of week 𝑘

in season 𝑠; 𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 is the observed pregame point spread for a Saturday game and is defined as

indicator functions for the three ranges of the spread value. In this set-up, games are classified as

close match-ups if the point spread in the betting market is between -4 and +4. Thus, 1(Sk-1s ≤ -4)

takes the value of one if LSU was predicted to win the game that was played on the Saturday

immediately preceding the work week k during season s by a margin of at least four points

Similarly, if the point spread is 4 or more, the indicator function 1(𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 ≥ 4) takes the value of

1, implying that LSU was predicted to lose that game. As detailed in the Section 5.6, using

different cutoffs for the point spread did not alter the results. 𝑦𝑘−1𝑠 is another indicator function

that takes the value of one for LSU football team’s victory. 𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑑𝑘𝑠 represents the vector of

observed juvenile (i.e., gender, race, age and detailed offense type), judge (i.e., gender, race, party

affiliation and age) and game (i.e., home/bowl game status) characteristics, 𝜂𝑗 is the set of judge

fixed effects, 𝛾𝑑 , 𝛿𝑘 and 𝜃𝑠 denotes day of the week, week, and season effects, respectively, and

𝜖𝑖𝑗𝑑𝑘𝑠 is the error term. Standard errors are clustered at the judge level. The results remain intact

if we instead cluster at the season×week or at the season×week×day of the week level.

       The coefficient estimates for 𝜆2 , 𝜆4 and 𝜆6 measure the effects of an upset loss, a close

loss and an upset win on disposition length set by the judges, respectively. In estimations below,

we treat predicted win 1(𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 ≤ −4) as our base category. As discussed in the robustness

section, treating nongame (bye) weeks as the base category produces very similar results.

                                                  13
        The key identifying assumption underlying this framework is that the outcome of a college

football game is as good as random, conditional on pregame point spread. Put differently, to the

extent that Las Vegas spread provides efficient prediction of the LSU college football game

outcomes, controlling for the point spread in Equation (1) allows us to tease out the effects of

emotional cues of game outcomes. 25



     5. Results

5.1 Baseline Results

        Table 4 presents the baseline results. Column (1) displays the results of a parsimonious

model which includes only spread indicators (treating predicted win as the base category),

interactions of spread indicators with win/loss variables and indicators for the day of the week,

week and season. The results show that an upset loss leads to a 37 day increase in the disposition

length set by the judge. Turning to other coefficient estimates associated with game outcomes

(second and third rows), we observe that the estimated effect from a close loss is positive, but it is

imprecisely estimated. On the other hand, row (3) shows that an upset win generates a 15 day

decrease in disposition length, although this effect is statistically insignificant.

        We extend our baseline specification by incrementally adding controls for observable

judge (column 2), juvenile (column 3) and game (column 4) characteristics. The coefficient

estimates on the effects of upset losses, close losses and upset wins remain intact. Column (5)

25
  It should be noted that random assignment of juveniles to judges is not necessary in this design to obtain
unbiased estimates of the causal effects of game outcomes. However, because the Louisiana juvenile court
system employs random assignment of case files to judges, we investigated whether random assignment
holds true in the data; and we found strong evidence for it. For example, controlling for the unit of
randomization (year-by-court fixed effects), a regression of black defendant indicator on a black judge
indicator yields a coefficient (standard error) estimate of 0.007 (0.022). Similarly, a regression of female
defendant indicator on female judge indicator produces a coefficient (standard error) estimate of 0.005
(0.024).


                                                    14
demonstrates that adding detailed measures of offense types (171 offense fixed effects) and judge

fixed effects to our extended specification in column (4) does not alter our findings either.

A comparison of our most extensive specification in column (5) of Table 4 with our baseline

specification in column (1) shows that the estimated effect on an upset loss in row (1) does not
                                                                                         26
change either in magnitude or in statistical significance in any meaningful manner.           Column (5)

of Table 4 demonstrates that an upset loss increases disposition length set by the judges by about

35 days. Taking the average disposition length (513 days) as the baseline, this magnitude

corresponds to a 7 percent increase. The impact of close losses and upset wins on disposition

length are very small in magnitude and they are not statistically different from zero (column 5,

Table 4).

       Although there exists evidence in the psychology literature pointing out a relatively long

lasting (almost over a week) association between emotional shocks following major sporting

events (Phillips 1983; Miller et al. 1991), it is conceivable that the emotional impact attributable

to an upset loss fades out as judges proceed through the week. To address this potential transitory

nature of emotional shocks associated with college football game outcomes, we interact our three

key measures of upset loss, close loss and upset win with an Early Week Day indicator. Table 5

presents the results from this exercise for our most extensive (and preferred) specification. We

treat the Early Week Day indicator to only include Monday in the first column, while Monday

through Wednesday are considered early weekdays in the second column of Table 5. The

interaction term for the effect of an upset loss with early week indicator is negative in the first

column and neither one is statistically significant. The effects of a close loss and an upset win

continue to be statistically indistinguishable from zero. Thus, the evidence suggests that the


26
  This is reassuring because college game outcomes, conditional on pregame point spread, are expected to
be as good as random.

                                                   15
causal impact on disposition length (i.e. sentence severity) of judges’ negative emotions, triggered

by an upset loss of a football game, lasts for an entire week after the game.

            To investigate whether the impact of game outcomes on judges’ decisions lasts for two

weeks, we modify our model by including spread indicators and their interactions with win/loss

variables from the week before ( 𝑆𝑘−2𝑠 and 𝑦𝑘−2𝑠 ). This specification can be estimated using

the weeks in which LSU football team has played games in consecutive weeks. The results are

provided in Table 6. Column (1) replicates our benchmark regression. This is the same regression

reported in column (5) of Table 4, but it is estimated using the sample based on games played in

consecutive weeks. 27 Column (2) of Table 6 reports the model where the disposition length

assigned by judges is explained by the spread and game outcomes pertaining to the previous

week’s game.        No coefficient is statistically different from zero, indicating that the result of a

game played on a given Saturday has no impact on judges’ decisions during the second week

following the game. Finally, the model reported in column (3) investigates the extent to which

upset losses have a lingering effect beyond the first week after the game by including both the

information about the game played in the immediately preceding Saturday and the previous

Saturday. The results show that an upset loss has an impact on the decisions made by judges

during the week following the game, but the result of the previous week’s game has no impact. 28

The upshot is that, the emotional impact of an upset loss lasts for one week, but no longer.

          In summary, our baseline specifications provide three important insights. First, we detect a

large and statistically significant effect from an upset loss on disposition length imposed by

judges. On the other hand, losses that were expected to be close contests ex ante have no

27
     That is, the weeks before and after the nongame weeks are omitted.
28
  Treating nongame weeks (bye weeks) as the omitted category and including full set of interactions
between ex ante classification of games and outcomes of games yield similar results.


                                                      16
statistically significant impact. This implies that less anticipated losses generate stronger negative

cues relative to more anticipated ones. A test of equality between the coefficient estimates of the

effect of upset loss and that of close loss in Column 5 of Table 4 is rejected (p-value=0.04).

Second, our results indicate that judges show emotional reactions to an upset loss while they do

not do so in case of an upset win. A test of equality between the coefficient estimates of the effect

of upset loss and upset win from Column 5 of Table 4 is rejected (p-value=0.04). 29 Finally, we

do not find evidence for quick decay of emotional cues associated with college football game

outcomes. The effect of an upset loss persists over the entire week, although it does not carry over

to the following week. 30



5.2 High-Stake Games, Types of Criminal Offenses, and the Race of the Juvenile

        To further improve our understanding of behavioral responses, we explore judges'

emotional reactions to unexpected college football game outcomes along three dimensions: (i) the

impact on disposition length by the importance of the game, (ii) the impact by type of offense:

felony vs. non-felony (minor), and (iii) the impact by the defendant’s race.

        Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 report the results where the games are classified based on

their importance.    Specifically, we consider a game to be more important if LSU football team

was ranked in the top 10 of the Associated Press rankings in the week prior to the game. The
29
  The asymmetry between the impact of negative and positive shocks lends support to loss aversion:
agents value losses more than they value commensurate gains (Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Koszegi and
Rabin 2006).
30
  Using aggregate level county data, Card and Dahl (2011) show that an upset loss leads to around 10
percent increase in the rate of at-home violence by men against their wives or girlfriends. Closes losses and
upset wins, on the other hand, have little to no impact on domestic violence. The authors also show that
violence is concentrated in a narrow time interval surrounding the end of the game. Comparing our results
with Card and Dahl (2011), we find similar but more persistent effects of emotional cues to unexpected
game outcomes. Several factors including but not limited to the unit of observation (judge vs. domestic
abuser), outcome of interest (disposition vs. domestic violence) and nature of the data (micro vs.
aggregate) may all contribute to the divergence in the results of these two natural experiments.

                                                     17
results demonstrate that judges’ reactions are harsher if the team suffers an unexpected loss when

the team was ranked in the top-10 going into the game. This result is not surprising because

losing a game is quite consequential towards national championship when the team is ranked in

the top 10, and this is even more so if the team loses such a game when it was predicted to win.

Such a loss generates 63 additional days longer disposition imposed by judges. On the other

hand, the impact of an unexpected loss is 36 days and statistically not different from zero for

relatively low-stake games. 31

       Columns (3) and (4) of Table 7 display the results where judges' emotional responses to

unexpected game outcomes by the severity of the offense are explored. Using the OJJ's own

classification system, we grouped the 171 offense types as felony and non-felony crimes. Judges

seem to react somewhat similarly following an upset loss for both felony and non-felony offenses.

The effect sizes are 5.4 and 7.2 percent, relative to their sample-specific averages, for juveniles

who have committed felony and non-felony offenses, respectively. We continue to observe no

statistically significant impact from a close loss or an upset win on disposition length set by the

judge, irrespective of the offense type.

         Looking at the effects by juveniles’ race (columns 5 and 6, Table 7), we observe that an

upset loss increases the disposition length by about 46 days for black defendants, which translates

into an increase in sentence severity by almost 9 percent. The impact of an upset loss for white

defendants is about one-sixth as large (about 8 days) and statistically not different from zero.

These results suggest that the brunt of judges’ emotional reaction is borne mostly by black


31
  When we examined the impact of emotional shocks by home game status, we find the effect of an upset
loss to be more pronounced for home games. Specifically the coefficient estimates (standard error) are
45.332 (22.557) and 34.781 (39.474) for home and away games, respectively. None of the other coefficient
estimates on game outcomes are different from zero.



                                                  18
defendants. This disparity in sentencing following an upset loss implies unequal treatment of

black defendants, triggered by an outside event, unrelated to the merits of the case.

        It is important to note that when we run our benchmark regression, accounting for all

factors employed in previous regressions (ranging from offense fixed-effects to judge fixed-

effects, defender attributes) but omitting the variables related to football, we find that the

coefficient of the variable for black defendants is -4.70 with a standard error of 7.87. This

specification indicates in the absence of the football effect average disposition lengths are not

different between black and white defendants. 32     33
                                                          Yet, the results in columns (5) and (6) of Table

7 suggest that after having been exposed to an upset loss, judges treat black and white defendants

differently and that much of the burden of the emotional trauma generated by the upset loss seems

to fall on black defendants. 34



5.4 Is this Result because of Other Actors in the Courtroom?

        We argue that longer sentences stemming from an upset loss reflect judges’ behavior.

However, unexpected game outcomes may somehow affect the performance of defense attorneys

or prosecutors and therefore the estimated effect of an upset loss may not solely reflect judge’s

behavior. For example, if the prosecutor recognizes that the judge is upset about the outcome of

the football game that was played the previous weekend and that the judge may be harsher on the
32
  A simple test of equality of the mean sentence lengths between blacks and whites is rejected at the 5
percent level, underlying the importance of controlling for confounders.
33
   We also estimated this benchmark regression by including interaction terms for black defendant
indicator with other control variables. The estimated coefficient on black defendant indicator was not
different from zero.
34
  To further explore the source of racial disparity in sentencing, we interacted our measures of unexpected
game outcomes with an indicator for judge’s race and re-estimated the models reported in the last two
columns of Table 7. In none of these additional specifications the interaction term was statistically
different from zero.


                                                    19
defendants as a result, the prosecutor may present the case against the juvenile with a more lenient

predisposition. Conversely, prosecutors themselves may be upset about the game outcome and

therefore they may be harsher on the defendants as well. To shed light on concerns about

potential interventions of the prosecutors or defense attorneys, we examine the sensitivity of the

results to the timing of adjudication and disposition (sentencing) trials.

       Table 8 presents the results from this exercise. In column (1) we display the results

obtained from the sample of defendants for whom the adjudication (guilty v. not guilty) and

disposition (sentence length and sentence type) decisions were made during the same week. As

before, the estimated impact of an upset loss is positive and statistically significant. In the second

column of the table we limit our attention to case files for which the adjudication and disposition

trial dates are at least one week apart. This sample consists of juveniles whose adjudication

decision has been made at least one week before the disposition hearing (i.e., the decision on guilt

vs. innocence was made before the football game was played). In other words, any influence the

attorneys may have had on the adjudication outcome of this group of defendants took place before

the football game, and the judge has made a sentencing decision after the game without the

influence of the attorneys. If the game outcome has no impact on judge behavior, the estimated

coefficient of an upset loss should be zero in this sample. Although we have a small sample of

1,314 observations that do not permit the coefficient to be estimated with precision, the point

estimate of an upset loss on disposition length is far different from zero (column 2, Table 8).

Thus, the results reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 8 are consistent with the explanation

that it is the emotional reaction of judges that is the driving force in extended sentencing.

       Could the results be attributable to the attitude of the juvenile defendants in the

courtroom? It can be argued that it is not the judges, but the juveniles who are the root cause of



                                                  20
longer sentences they receive after an upset loss. More specifically, it could be the case that

juveniles get distraught or depressed after an upset loss of the LSU football team, and as a result,

when they appear in the courtroom for the sentencing hearing, they act in manners that would

aggravate or irritate judges. Hence, it could be the courtroom behavior of juvenile defendants,

due to an upset loss, that prompts judges to impose higher sentencing. We provide two

counterarguments to this point. First, if this conjecture is true, one would expect all juveniles,

regardless of race, be impacted by an upset loss in the same manner. There is no reason to expect

black or white defendants to be more or less distraught about the game outcome to act more or

less inappropriately in the court room. Yet, our results show that sentence lengths of black

defendants are impacted by an upset loss, while there is no statistically significant impact on

white defendants (columns 5 and 6, Table 7). Second, it is plausible that younger defendants

might be more timid in the court room in comparison to older juveniles. Note that everybody in

our sample is a first-time offender; so they all go through this experience for the first time.

Nevertheless, to the extent that the courtroom experience in front of a judge is more intimidating

for younger youths than older juveniles, the propensity to misbehave in front of the judge (due to

an upset loss) would be lower for younger defendants. Thus, the impact of an upset loss should

be zero (or at least smaller) for younger defendants in comparison to older ones. However, when

we estimate the model by dividing the sample into two age groups (ages 15 or lower, and ages

older than 15), we obtain similar coefficients. The impact of an upset loss is extra 34 days of

sentencing for those defendants who are older than 15 (p-value=0.10); and the impact is 42 days

among the sample of kids who are 15 or younger (p-value=0.07). To the extent that courtroom

misbehavior is correlated with age, this result suggests that our findings are not driven by the

behavior of juveniles in front of judges.



                                                21
       It could be the case that juvenile defendants with lower socio-economic status are

impacted by an unexpected LSU loss differently in comparison to their economically better-off

counterparts. This can happen if, for example, poorer defendants are represented by attorneys

who exhibit a lower degree of professionalism in the courtroom. Consequently, the performance

of these attorneys may be negatively impacted by an unexpected LSU loss, whereas the attorneys

of economically better-off defendants may not be impacted by football game results. Although

we have no direct information on the socio-economic status of juvenile defendants, we could

identify, for much of the sample, whether or not they were enrolled in school free lunch program.

Enrollment in the free lunch program is an indicator of poverty, which enables us to gain some

insights into potential differential impacts by defendants’ poverty status. The coefficient of

unexpected LSU loss in the sample of juveniles who are free school lunch recipients was 35.5

(standard error= 18.2). The estimated coefficient of an unexpected LSU loss was 30.2 (standard

error= 25.4) in the sample of defendants who are not free school lunch recipients. This result

indicates that the identified impact of an upset loss is not a function of the socio-economic status

of the defendants.



5.5 Judges who have Bachelor’s Degrees from LSU

       Our final and the most convincing evidence that the results are not driven by anyone other

than the judges themselves is provided in columns (3) and (4) of Table 8. In these regressions we

divided the sample into two segments: the cases handled by judges who have received their

undergraduate degrees from LSU, and those judges whose bachelor’s degrees have been obtained

from a college or university other than LSU. Because we could identify alma maters of 180 of the

207 judges, sample sizes are somewhat smaller, but a striking result emerges. As shown in



                                                22
column (3) of Table 8, unexpected losses of the LSU football team prompts judges to impose

sentences that are 74 days longer if these judges have received their undergraduate degrees from

LSU. On the other hand, as displayed in column (4), the results of LSU football games have no

impact on sentence lengths in the sample of judges who have received their bachelor’s degree

from a college/university other than LSU. 35

       To investigate whether judges with bachelors’ degrees from LSU are driving all the rest of

results, we re-estimated the models presented in Table 7. Recall that the regressions of Table 7

have analyzed the impact of an unexpected loss on sentence lengths by the importance of the

football game, by offense type, and by defendant race. We added to these models an interaction

term between LSU game results and a dummy variable that indicates if the judge has received

his/her undergraduate degree from LSU. The results are displayed in Table 9. Column (1)

presents the analysis of judicial decisions following a game when LSU football team was ranked

in the top-10 going into the game. The coefficient of the upset loss, reported in the first row, is

about 45 but it is not statistically different from zero. On the other hand, if the judge has a

bachelor’s degree from LSU, the impact of an upset loss on disposition length is 86 days

(44.8+41.8), and as reported towards the bottom of the table, this effect is significantly different

from zero at the 2-percent level. Column (2) of Table 9 shows that the effect of an upset loss is

smaller in magnitude and less precisely estimated when LSU is ranked below top 10. The impact

is 57 days and significant at 11 percent for judges who have a bachelor’s degree from LSU. Table

9 also shows that if the undergraduate degree of the judge is from LSU, an upset loss triggers an

35
   We also examined heterogeneity by the law school judges graduated from, but did not detect any
significant discrepancy between the coefficient estimates for judges who graduated from LSU law school
versus other law schools. This suggests students’ exposure to the culture of LSU football during their
undergraduate education is more impactful than during law school education. This is intuitive because the
duration of the former is longer (four years) and undergraduates are younger and arguable more
impressionable.


                                                   23
increase in sentence lengths for blacks defendants (column 5) as well as for those who are

charged with felony crimes (column 3). On the other hand, upset losses have no impact on

disposition lengths if LSU is not the undergraduate alma mater of the judge. This regularity

implies that judges who have received their undergraduate education from LSU, and were

therefore exposed to the LSU football culture, have stronger emotional attachments to the team in

comparison to other judges. Thus, it is plausible that an unexpected loss of the LSU football team

triggers a stronger emotional reaction among this group of judges, which translates into harsher

sentences handed down. 36

        Using the estimated parameters of the model, we calculate that the excess punishment of

juvenile defendants in Louisiana associated with each upset loss of the LSU football is about

1,332 days, including time in custody and probation. 37 For defendants convicted of a felony, total

additional jail time (secure custody) is 149 extra days due to an upset loss. 38



5.6 Additional Estimates and the Threat of Selection Bias

        In addition to their effects on disposition length, emotional cues generated by unexpected

wins and losses on college football games may also have an impact on juveniles' propensity to be

incarcerated (disposition type). To shed light on this issue, we define an indicator variable that

takes the value of one if the disposition set by the judge was to incarcerate (secure/non-secure
36
  Strong emotional ties to college teams that last a lifetime have been documented recently by Clotfelter
(2015).
37
  We observe a weekly average of 56 dispositions following an upset loss, and that 18 of these are handled
by judges who have received their bachelor’s degrees from LSU. Multiplying the estimated effect from an
upset loss using column (3) of Table 8 (74 days) with the number of dispositions yields a total of 1,332
days.
38
   Recall that 43 percent of all dispositions in our data are felony crimes. We observe that 18 percent of
felony crimes receive dispositions in secure custody by judges who have a bachelor’s degree from LSU.
Using the average weekly dispositions of 56 as our benchmark, we multiply the number of felonies ending
up as secure custody with the estimated effect from Column 3 of Table 9.

                                                    24
custody) the youth. In this analysis, the outcome in Equation (1) is an indicator that takes the

value of one for incarceration, and it is zero if the defendant is placed on probation. The results

from this specification are provided in Table 10. The results reported in column (1) are based on

the entire sample. The regression in column (2) employs the decisions made by judges who have

received their undergraduate degrees from LSU, and column (3) reports the results of the

regression which uses the sample based on judges whose alma mater is not LSU. 39 None of the

coefficient estimates in the table is statistically different from zero. 40 Further examination of the

effects of emotional shocks on the probability of incarceration by nature of the game (LSU being

in the top-10 vs. below top 10), broad offense types (felony vs. non-felony) and juvenile’s race do

not alter this result. 41   42



         So far, we have not addressed the potential bias in the coefficient estimates that may arise

due to sample selection. Recall that, if the judge has dismissed the case, the case is not disposed;

i.e., no sentence length is assigned. In this situation, the juvenile is treated as if he/she had no

contact with the OJJ, and the case is not recorded in the OJJ system. Consequently, our data

allow us to observe only those cases that are not dismissed by the judge (see Section 2 for details).

This particular selection, which could have been implemented by judges, does not constitute a


39
  The sum of the sample sizes in columns (2) and (3) is less than the sample size in column (1) because in
some cases we could not identify the undergraduate institution of the judges. Running the regression
based on the sample of 6,789 observations (column 2 plus column 3) did not alter the results.
40
  Our conclusions remain intact if we instead classify the incarceration dummy to only include secure-
custody.
41
     These results, which are not reported in the interest of space, are available upon request.
42
   Given that judges make decisions on two margins (disposition type and disposition length), it is
inappropriate econometrically to divide the sample by disposition type and analyze whether the impact of
an unexpected loss is different between types of disposition. Nevertheless, when we ran the models for
those who were assigned to secure custody and for those who were placed on probation, we found that the
point estimates of an unexpected loss were similar in both regressions, although imprecisely estimated in
the former case because of the small sample size (n=1,225).

                                                        25
problem for our results to the extent that emotional cues from game outcomes impact the

propensity of dismissal in the same direction as the severity of the sentence length. More

specifically, if judges have a lower propensity to dismiss a case after an upset loss, this implies

that borderline cases (e.g. those with weak evidence and probably involving petty offenses) will

end up at the docket during the week following an upset loss, rather than being dismissed

(Robinson 2000; Bowers and Robinson 2012).               This, in turn, implies that, selection would

generate a sample which would include “less-guilty” defendants who are brought to trial after an

upset loss. Thus, the impact we identify could be an underestimate of the true effect of an upset

loss. 43



5.7 Robustness Checks

           We implemented several sensitivity checks to examine the validity of our results. First, as

an alternative to our discrete parameterization in Equation (1), we included a cubic polynomial in

the point spread and an interaction between the polynomial and indicator for LSU football team

loss (Card and Dahl 2011). Figure 6 plots the estimated interaction effect over a range of spread

along with the associated pointwise 90% confidence interval. The effect of a loss on disposition

length set by the judges is decreasing in the spread, and it is only statistically significant for

spread values roughly less than -5. Second, keeping our discrete parameterization, we also

experimented with different cutoff values (e.g., -3 and 3) to describe unexpected college football

game outcomes. The results remained intact.

           Third, we used a Poisson regression to estimate the cuing effects on disposition length.

Our results from this alternative model specification are consistent with those reported throughout

43
  In the same manner, the impact we identify could be an underestimate (overestimate) of the true effect of
a close loss (upset win).


                                                    26
the paper. Specifically, an upset loss leads to a 6.2 percent increase (7 percent from our preferred

specification in the last column of Table 4) in the disposition length and we do not observe any

statistically significant impact from a close loss or an upset win (column 1, Table A1). Fourth,

employing the logarithm of the disposition length as the dependent variable did not affect the

findings (column 2, Table A1).

       Fifth, it is conceivable that emotional turmoil generated by hurricanes Katrina and Rita

might have impacted the judicial decisions and game outcomes simultaneously. To address this

concern we dropped all games played in the 2005 and 2006 football seasons. Doing so had almost

no impact on our estimated effects (column 3, Table A1). Similarly, excluding bowl games from

the sample or including very serious felonies (first and second degree murder and aggravated

rape) produced virtually identical results (columns 4 and 5, Table A1).

       Sixth, as mentioned earlier, we limit our attention to first-time delinquents because repeat

offenders are assigned to the same judge who presided over the case of the defendant in previous

conviction. Dropping this restriction and including offenders with criminal history into the

sample does not alter the results (column 6, Table A1). Seventh, we also dropped season-weeks

where the total number of dispositions is more than the 90th percentile of the number of weekly

disposition distribution. This exercise minimizes any concerns regarding congestion of the

docket; but doing so has no effect on the results (column 7, Table A1).

       Eighth, to examine whether our results are driven by the decisions of a particular judge,

we estimated Equation (1) repeatedly, each time removing dispositions set by a different judge. In

a total of 207 regressions, the effect of an upset loss on disposition length was always statistically

significant, whereas the coefficient estimates for the impact of a close loss or an upset win were

never different from zero. The distribution of these 207 estimated coefficients were tight with a



                                                 27
mean of 34.8 and standard deviation of 0.98, indicating that the results are not driven by the

behavior of a few judges.

       Ninth, note that the results reported in the paper are based on the sample that excluded

judicial decisions which took place during the weeks in which LSU had not played a game.

Treating these weeks (bye weeks) as the omitted category in Equation (1) and adding full set of

interactions between ex-ante classification of games and outcomes of games yield similar results

(Table A2). Recall that we excluded one percent of the case files from the analysis where the

sentence lengths were extraordinarily long as these could be data entry errors. Adding these

observations to the sample did not change the results. Similarly, dropping the shortest one percent

of disposition lengths did not alter the results either. And finally, dropping the defendants residing

out of state (2 percent of the sample) generated almost identical results.



5.8 Falsification Tests

       We performed two falsification tests. First, we replaced the LSU pregame point spread

(𝑆𝑘−1𝑠 ) and the game outcome (𝑦𝑘−1𝑠 ) records with those of several other prominent college

football Division I-A teams, and re-estimated the specification depicted by Equation (1) using

these placebo values. Although these games were played during the same time period as the LSU

games (1996-2012 football seasons), upset wins or upset losses of these other teams should

trigger no emotional response from judges. To avoid any emotional spillover effects, we did not

choose teams that are direct competitors of LSU (i.e., we did not focus on Southeastern

Conference teams or teams from the neighboring states). Instead, we focused on three teams with

national championship titles over the sample period (Florida State, Miami-Florida, and Ohio

State), and two other teams from different subdivisions with successful histories (Brigham Young



                                                 28
and Stanford). The results, displayed in Table 11, show that upset losses of Brigham Young,

Florida State, Miami-Florida, Ohio State or Stanford have no impact on the decisions handed

down by judges in Louisiana. 44 The point estimates are either close to zero in magnitude or are of

the opposite sign of theoretical expectations. In summary, the results of Table 11 indicate that,

consistent with our expectations, college football results, obtained by other prominent teams have

no impact on judges’ decisions in Louisiana.

        Second, we investigated whether judicial decisions in a given week are impacted by the

game results of the following week. We estimated this specification using the weeks in which

LSU football team has played games in consecutive weekends. The results are provided in Table

12. Column (1) replicates our benchmark regression (column 5, Table 4), but it is estimated using

the sample based on games played in consecutive weeks. Column (2) of Table 12 reports the

model where the disposition length assigned by judges is explained by the spread and game

outcomes pertaining to the following week’s game. All point estimates are small in magnitude and

none of them is different from zero. Finally, in Column (3) we include both the information about

the game played in the immediately preceding Saturday and the following Saturday. The results

show that an upset loss has an impact on dispositions imposed by judges during the week

following the game, but that the result of the following week’s game has no impact.



     6. Summary and Discussion

        In this paper we utilize the universe of juvenile court decisions in the state of Louisiana

between 1996 and 2012 to investigate the effects of emotional shocks associated with unexpected

outcomes of football games played by Louisiana State University (LSU) football team on judicial


44
  We employed a number of other teams as well. In no case were the results different from those reported
in Table 11.

                                                  29
decisions of juvenile court judges. We employ the Las Vegas bookmakers’ pregame point spread

to determine fans' (judges) rational expectations about the outcome of the game, and analyze the

impact of unexpected game results on judicial decisions. Our ability to employ detailed micro-

level data allows us to make inference on the disparity in sentencing based on observable juvenile

and judge characteristics.

       Using these naturally-occurring data which involve high-stake decisions, we analyze the

behavior of judges. We show that upset losses of the LSU football team increase disposition

(sentence) length imposed by judges, and that this effect persists throughout the work week

following a Saturday game. On the other hand, losses of games that were expected to be close

contests ex-ante, as well as upset wins have no impact. We also find that judges’ reaction,

triggered by an upset loss, is more pronounced after more important games (when LSU was

ranked in top-10).

       Different falsification tests and a variety of auxiliary analyses demonstrate the robustness

of the results. We also provide evidence indicating that the results cannot be explained by

attorney interference, defendant socio-economic background, or by potential courtroom

misconduct of juveniles that could have prompted judges’ anger.

       The reaction of judges to an upset football loss cannot be attributed to decision fatigue of

judges because the impact of an upset loss lasts for one work-week.            They are, however,

consistent with the hypothesis that emotional stress of judges is responsible for this outcome. It

has been documented that emotions in one domain influence emotions, judgments and decisions

in a completely unrelated domain (e.g. Edmans et al. 2007; Healy et al. 2010; Bodenhausen et al.

1994). Our results indicate that emotional stress is responsible for this reaction of judges because

we find that the entire set of results are driven by judges who have received their bachelor’s



                                                30
degrees from LSU.

        We calculate that each upset loss of the LSU football team generates excess punishments

of juvenile defenders in Louisiana by a total of more than 1,332 days, including time in custody

and probation. Importantly, 159 extra days of jail time has been assigned to juveniles convicted of

a felony due to an upset loss in a football game.

       From a broader perspective, these results contribute to the investigation of unequal

treatment of defendants in the judicial process. Differential treatment of minorities could emerge

because of preferences, political reasons, in-group bias, or other systemic factors (Argus and

Mocan 2004; Shayo and Zussman 2011; Abrams et al. 2012; Alesina and La Ferrara 2015;

Grossman et al. 2016).      In this paper, we show that emotional stress, imposed on judges

externally, prompts them to impose harsher sentences on defendants who were unlucky enough to

face the judge during the period of the stress. Furthermore, although the average sentence lengths

(conditional on case, defendant and judge attributes) do not differ by defendant race in the

absence of a football effect, it appears that an upset LSU football game loss increases the

disposition length (sentence severity) of black defendants more severely in comparison to white

defendants. Thus, the burden of the emotional trauma generated by the upset loss seems to fall on

black defendants.

       Our results also contribute to a growing body of literature that aims to find ways to test the

impact of emotions on behavior in settings outside of the laboratory environments. In addition to

its large sample size (the universe of juvenile court cases over a period of 16 years) and the detail

of the data it employs, our paper has two other distinguishing aspects. First, it investigates the

impact of an emotional shock among a group of decision-makers (judges) who are uniformly

highly educated. Second, the decisions analyzed in the paper are made within the constraints of a



                                                    31
legal framework which should minimize the extent of capricious judgments. Although legal

realists have long argued that judges’ decisions may be influenced by extraneous factors, high-

stake decisions about punishment severity are nevertheless expected to be free of person-specific

reference points. 45 Thus, it is noteworthy that the judicial decisions are in fact impacted by

emotions that are unrelated to the merits of the case.




45
  For example, leading legal realist Judge Jerome Frank, who served as the Chairman of the Securities and
Exchange Commission and a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, has famously
argued that a judge’s decision may be impacted by mundane things, including what he/she ate for
breakfast.

                                                   32
                                         References

Abrams, D., M. Bertrand, and S. Mullainathan (2012). Do Judges Vary in Their Treatment of
Race? Journal of Legal Studies 41 (2), 347-383.

Aizer, A. and J. J. Doyle (2015). Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital and Future Crime:
Evidence from Randomly-Assigned Judges. Quarterly Journal of Economics forthcoming.

Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2014). A Test of Racial Bias in Capital Sentencing. American
Economic Review 104 (11), 3397-3433.

Argys, L. M. and N. H. Mocan (2004). Who Shall Live and Who Shall Die? An Analysis of
Prisoners on Death Row in the United States. Journal of Legal Studies 33 (2) 255-282.

Bodenhausen, G, L. Sheppard, and G. Kramer. (1994). Negative Affect and Social Judgment: The
Differential Impact of Anger and Sadness. European Journal of Social Psychology 24 (1), 45-62.

Bowers, J. and P. H. Robinson (2012). Perceptions of Fairness and Justice: The Shared Aims and
Occasional Conflicts of Legitimacy and Moral Credibility. Wake Forest Law Review 47 (2), 211-
284.

Card, D. and G. B. Dahl (2011). Family Violence and Football: The Effect of Unexpected
Emotional Cues on Violent Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 103-143.

Chen, D., T. Moskowitz, and K. Shue (2015). Decision-Making under the Gambler’s Fallacy:
Evidence from Asylum Judges, Loan Officers, and Baseball Umpires. Working Paper.

Chen, D. and H. Spamann (2014). This Morning’s Breakfast, Last Night’s Game: Detecting
Extraneous Influences on Judging. Working Paper.

Clotfelter, C. (2015). Die-Hard Fans and the Ivory Tower’s Ties that Bind. Social Science
Quarterly 96 (2), 381-399.

Danziger, S., J. Levav, and L. Avnaim-Pesso (2011a). Extraneous Factors in Judicial Decisions.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108 (17),
6889-6892.

Danziger, S., J. Levav, and L. Avnaim-Pesso (2011b). Reply to Weinshall-Margel and Shapard:
Extraneous Factors in Judicial Decisions Persist. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 108 (42), E834.


                                             33
Edmans, A., D. Garcia, and Ø. Norli (2007). Sports Sentiment and Stock Returns. Journal of
Finance 62 (4), 1967-1998.

Feinswog, L. (2013). Tales from the LSU Tiger Sideline: A Collection of Greatest Tiger Stories
Ever Told. Sports Publishing.

Forgas, Joseph. (1995) Mood and Judgment. The Affect Infusion Model (AIM). Psychological
Bulletin. 117(1), 39-66.

Grossman, G., O. Gazal-Ayal, S. Pimentel, and J. Weinstein (2016). Descriptive Representation
and Judicial Outcomes in Multiethnic Societies. American Journal of Political Science 60 (1), 44-
69.

Healy, A., N. Malhotra, and C. H. Mo (2010). Irrelevant Events affect Voters’ Evaluations of
Government Performance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (29), 12804-
12809.

Hockenberry, S. and C. Puzzanchera (2014). Juvenile Court Statistics. National Center for
Juvenile Justice.

Hirshleifer, D. and T. Shumway. (2003). Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and the Weather.
Journal of Finance 58 (3), 1009-1032.

Hunt, K. A., T. Bristol, and E. R. Bashaw (1999). A Conceptual Approach to Classifying Sports
Fans. Journal of Services Marketing 13 (6), 439-452.

Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1979). Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.
Econometrica 47 (2), 263-292.

Kamstra, M., L. Kramer, and M. Levi (2003). Winter Blues: A SAD Stock Market Cycle.
American Economic Review 93 (1), 324-343.

Keltner, D., P. C. Ellsworth, and K. Edwards (1993). Beyond simple Pessimism: Effects of
Sadness and Anger on Social Perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 64 (5),
740-752.

Koszegi, B. and M. Rabin (2006). A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121 (4), 1133-1165.



                                               34
Landy, J. F. and G. P. Goodwin (2015). Does Incidental Disgust Amplify Moral Judgment? A
Meta-Analytic Review of Experimental Evidence. Perspectives on Psychological Science 10 (4),
518-536.

Lerner, J., Y. Li, P. Valdesolo, and K. Kassam. (2015). Emotion and Decision Making. Annual
Review of Psychology 66. 799-823.

Lim, C. S. H., J. M. Snyder Jr., and D. Strömberg (2015). The Judge, the Politician, and the Press:
Newspaper Coverage and Criminal Sentencing across Electoral Systems. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 7 (4), 103-135.

Linder, J. A., J. Doctor, M. Friedberg, H. R. Nieva, C. Birks, D. Meeker, and C. Fox (2014). Time
of Day and the Decision to Prescribe Antibiotics. JAMA International Medicine 174 (12), 2029-
2013.

Lindo, J., I. Swensen, and G. Waddell (2012). Are Big-time Sports a Threat to Student
Achievement? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4), 254-274.

Louisiana Children's Code (1996-2012). Louisiana State Legislature-Various Chapters.

Louisiana District Judges Association Periodicals (1956-2000). Guide to the Louisiana Judiciary.

Miller, T. Q., L. Heath, J. R. Molcan, and B. L. Dugoni (1991). Imitative Violence in the Real
World: A Reanalysis of Homicide Rates Following Championship Prize Fights. Aggressive
Behavior 17 (3), 121-134.

National Football Foundation (2013). Passion for College Football Remains Robust.

Philippe, A. and A. Ouss (2015). “No Hatred or Malice, Fear or Affection”: Media and
Sentencing. Working Paper.

Phillips, D. P. (1983). The Impact of Mass Media Violence on U.S. Homicides. American
Sociological Review 48 (4), 560-568.

Quigley, B. and J. Tedeshi. (1996). Mediating Effects of Blame Attributes on Feelings of Anger.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 22 (12), 1280-1288.

Rabin, M. and D. Vayanos (2010). The Gambler’s and Hot-hand Fallacies: Theory and
Applications. Review of Economic Studies 77 (2), 730-778.




                                                35
Robinson, P. H. (2000). Why Does the Criminal Law Care What the Lay Person Thinks Is Just?
Coercive versus Normative Crime Control. Virginia Law Review 86 (8), 1838-1869.

Schnall, S., J. Haidt, G. Clore, and A. Jordan (2008). Disguts as Embodied Moral Judgment.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34 (8), 1096-1109.

Schwarz, Norbert and Gerald Clore. (1983). Mood, Misattribution, and Judgments of Well-being:
Informative and Directive Functions of Affective States. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology. 45 (3), 513-523.

Shayo, M. and A. Zussman (2011). Judicial Ingroup Bias in the Shadow of Terrorism. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126 (3), 1447-1484.

Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1974). Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.
Science 185 (4157), 1124-1131.

Weinshall-Margel K. and J. Shapard (2011). Overlooked Factors in the Analysis of Parole
Decisions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108
(42), E833.




                                             36
                                          Table 1
                         Summary Statistics for Juveniles and Judges
                                                              Mean                           SD
Panel A: Juvenile Characteristics
  Disposition Length                                         512.639                      338.679
  Incarceration (Secure and Non-secure Custody)                0.264                       0.441
  Black                                                        0.623                       0.484
  White                                                        0.356                       0.478
  Female                                                       0.236                       0.424
  Age                                                         14.767                       1.501
  Committed a Felony                                           0.419                       0.493
  Sample Size                                                  8,228
Panel B: Judge Characteristics
  Black                                                        0.115                        0.320
  White                                                        0.885                        0.320
  Female                                                       0.227                        0.419
  Age                                                         56.111                        9.470
  Party Affiliation-Democratic Party                           0.727                        0.444
  College Degree from LSU                                      0.327                        0.470
  LSU Law School                                               0.473                        0.500
  Number of Judges                                              207
The statistics above reflect our research sample, which consists of juveniles who were disposed before the
judge the week following a Saturday LSU football game during the seasons from 1996 to 2012, as well as
their corresponding disposition judges. The variables are only a subset of those used in the analysis. The
descriptive statistics of the 171 individual offense categories are not reported. There are 180 judges with
non-missing information on their alma mater.




                                                   37
                                   Table 2
      LSU Football Games Win-Loss Record for the Seasons from 1996 to 2012
                                                       Seasons
                             1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003                            2004
LSU Season
Record (Win-Loss)            10-2 9-3      4-7    3-8    8-4 10-3 8-5      13-1                 9-3

                                    2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010                2011    2012
LSU Season
Record (Win-Loss)                    11-2   11-2     12-2   8-5    9-4   11-2    13-1    10-3

Win-Loss records include all season games and bowl and championship games from 1996 to 2012.




                                                38
                                     Table 3
      Summary Statistics for LSU Football Games for Seasons from 1996 to 2012
                                                   Number of Games        Percent of
                                               [Number of Dispositions] Category
Panel A: All LSU Football Games
  Football Games on Saturday*                            179                84.8
  Football Games on Other Days                            32                15.2
Panel B: Saturday Games
  Outcome
    Win                                                                133                   74.3
    Loss                                                                46                   25.7
  Predicted Outcomes
    Predicted Win: point spread -4 or less                             122                   68.1
                                                                     [5,350]                [65.0]
     Predicted Close: -4<point spread<4                                 29                   16.2
                                                                     [1,326]                [16.1]
     Predicted Loss: point spread 4 or more                             28                   15.6
                                                                     [1,552]                [18.8]
  Actual Outcomes
    Actual Loss (Upset Loss)                                           14                    11.5
                                                                      [781]                 [14.5]
     Actual Loss (Close Loss)                                          14                    48.3
                                                                      [612]                 [46.1]
     Actual Win (Upset Win)                                            10                    35.7
                                                                      [552]                 [35.5]
  Associated Press Rankings
    Football Games when LSU was ranked                                 86                    48.0
    in Top 10
Win-Loss records include all regular season games and bowl and the championship games from 1996 to
2012. Associated Press ranking lists the top 25 college football teams, and it is published every Sunday
during the college football season. See text for further details. (*) There are 7 post-season bowl
games played on Saturdays during this period.




                                                    39
                                                              Table 4
                   The Effect of Emotional Shocks from LSU Football Games on Disposition Length Imposed by Judges
                                                                                       Dependent Variable: Disposition Length
                                                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)                 (4)                     (5)
Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                            37.494**              39.815**          40.559**             40.971**            34.798**
                                                             (18.840)              (18.902)          (18.548)             (18.368)            (13.848)
Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)                           24.225                 20.383           21.081               21.439                3.708
                                                             (20.242)              (20.036)          (19.324)             (19.356)            (17.915)
Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                              -15.490               -17.488           -11.809              -10.878             -10.548
                                                             (27.507)              (27.416)          (27.003)             (26.738)            (21.329)
Predicted Close                                                -1.177                 0.616            -4.612               -5.877              -7.832
                                                             (17.922)              (17.516)          (17.458)             (17.575)            (13.178)
Predicted Loss                                                20.701                 22.485           21.123               19.398                4.902
                                                             (18.282)              (18.166)          (18.063)             (18.859)            (14.413)

Sample Size                                                     8,288               8,288              8,288                8,288               8,288

Controls:
Season, Week, and Days of Week                                   Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Judge Attributes                                                 No                  Yes                Yes                  Yes                 No
Juvenile Attributes                                              No                  No                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Game Attributes                                                  No                  No                 No                   Yes                 Yes
Offense Fixed Effects                                            No                  No                 No                   No                  Yes
Judge Fixed Effects                                              No                  No                 No                   No                  Yes
The sample is restricted to all juvenile dispositions following a Saturday football game during the seasons from 1996 to 2012. Predicted Win indicates a
point spread of -4 or less, Predicted Close indicates a point spread between -4 and 4 (exclusive), and Predicted Loss stands for a point spread of 4 or more.
Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses. Judge controls include indicators for judge's gender, race and political
party affiliation as well as judge's age and its square. Juvenile controls include indicators for juvenile's gender and race as well as age and its square. The
game controls include indicators for home and bowl games. There are 171 detailed offense types and 207 judges in the effective sample. Judge fixed effect
specification include time varying characteristics (indicator for party affiliation, age and its square). Predicted Win is the omitted category. *significant at
10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                                              40
                                            Table 5
        The Effect of Emotional Shocks from LSU Football Games on Disposition Length
               Imposed by Judges: Differential Impact of Early Weekday Decisions
Dependent Variable:                                  Early Week               Early Week=
Disposition Length                                     ={Mon.}             {Mon., Tu., Wed.}
                                                           (1)                       (2)
Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                      37.141**                   32.084
                                                       (15.206)                  (21.569)
Loss × Predicted Win × Early Week Days                  -14.546                    3.980
                                                       (30.405)                  (22.809)
Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)                       2.550                    5.687
                                                       (18.781)                  (27.640)
Loss × Predicted Close × Early Week Days                  9.067                    -2.979
                                                       (31.905)                  (32.219)
Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                        -13.487                   -19.127
                                                       (22.255)                  (28.129)
Win × Predicted Loss × Early Week Days                   23.448                   14.623
                                                       (45.772)                  (36.396)
Predicted Close                                          -7.842                    -7.993
                                                       (13.182)                  (13.141)
Predicted Loss                                            4.960                    4.794
                                                       (14.418)                  (14.489)
Sample Size                                               8,228                    8,228
Controls:
Season, Week, and Days of Week                             Yes                      Yes
Judge Attributes                                           No                        No
Juvenile Attributes                                        Yes                      Yes
Game Attributes                                            Yes                      Yes
Offense Fixed Effects                                      Yes                      Yes
Judge Fixed Effects                                        Yes                      Yes
Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses. Early Weekday indicator in
column (1) includes only Monday, while it includes Monday through Wednesday in column (2). See notes to Table 4
 and the text for data and control variable details. *significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                         41
                                             Table 6
               The Long-Run Effect of Emotional Shocks from LSU Football Games on
                             Disposition Length Imposed by Judges
 Dependent Variable: Disposition Length                                        (1)           (2)           (3)
 Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                                          31.488**        …..        30.861**
                                                                            (14.994)                   (15.054)
 Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)                                         18.074         …..          23.030
                                                                            (20.190)                   (19.020)
 Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                                            -16.074        …..         -26.716
                                                                            (25.042)                   (26.816)
 Predicted Close                                                             -26.479        …..        -35.062*
                                                                            (19.771)                   (19.547)
 Predicted Loss                                                              15.468         …..          14.073
                                                                            (18.826)                   (18.801)
 Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)-Week Before                                 …..          -3.709       -1.848
                                                                                          (22.452)     (23.378)
 Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)-Week Before                               …..          -0.718        3.953
                                                                                          (32.001)     (31.113)
 Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)-Week Before                                  …..           0.531       -2.346
                                                                                          (25.366)     (25.579)
 Predicted Close-Week Before                                                   …..           3.875        1.065
                                                                                          (22.472)     (22.275)
 Predicted Loss-Week Before                                                    …..         -21.526      -27.962
                                                                                          (18.980)     (19.018)
 Sample Size                                                                  5,896          5,896        5,896
The sample is restricted to all juvenile dispositions following Saturday games played in consecutive weeks during
the seasons from 1996 to 2012. Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses.
All specifications control for day of the week, week and season effects, (time-variant) judge, juvenile
characteristics and offense and judge fixed effects. There are 156 detailed offense types and 205 judges in the
effective sample. See notes to Table 4 and the text for data and control variable details. *significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                        42
                                                                Table 7
                The Effect of Emotional Shocks from LSU Football Games on Disposition Length Imposed by Judges:
                                     by Type of Game, Type of Crime, and the Race of the Juvenile
                                                            Game Type                   Offense Type          Juvenile Race
 Dependent Variable:                             LSU Ranks        LSU Ranks        Felony Non-Felony        Black       White
 Disposition Length                               in Top 10      Below Top 10
                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)
 Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                62.823***         36.244         34.421       30.734*  46.053***       8.308
                                                   (22.704)        (26.622)       (21.834)     (17.420)   (15.459)     (23.098)
 Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)                 26.201          2.667         10.103        13.465      3.007      11.159
                                                   (34.402)        (30.009)       (38.631)     (22.335)   (23.099)     (35.637)
 Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                    45.913         -24.810        -38.242        7.075     -5.491      -0.478
                                                   (62.649)        (24.541)       (40.143)     (23.330)   (28.259)     (32.209)
 Predicted Close                                     -9.847         -10.144        -10.726      -11.885    -18.477       5.767
                                                   (17.282)        (21.965)       (25.487)     (15.132)   (20.000)     (24.056)
 Predicted Loss                                     -40.371         21.358          1.041         9.516     -3.256      27.220
                                                   (31.129)        (24.181)       (28.669)     (16.970)   (22.457)     (22.345)

 Average Disposition Length                                 476.286            539.256              636.340       423.096            519.294       500.844

 Sample Size                                                 3,478                 4,750             3,455          4,773              5,132         2,932
 Controls:
 Season, Week, and Days of Week                               Yes                  Yes                Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
 Judge Attributes                                             No                   No                 No             No                 No            No
 Juvenile Attributes                                          Yes                  Yes                Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
 Game Attributes                                              Yes                  Yes                Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
 Offense Fixed Effects                                        Yes                  Yes                Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
 Judge Fixed Effects                                          Yes                  Yes                Yes            Yes                Yes           Yes
Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses. Offense classifications (felony and non-felony) are based on the
Louisiana Office of Juvenile Justice categorization. See notes to Table 4 and the text for data and control variable details. The p-value pertains to the null
hypothesis that the coefficients on upset loss are equal to each other across relevant subgroups. *significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant
at 1%.




                                                                              43
                                                                 Table 8
                   The Effect of Emotional Shocks from LSU Football Games on Disposition Length Imposed by Judges:
                            by Differences in Adjudication and Disposition Dates, and by Judges' Alma Mater
                                                                                                      Judges with                                Judges with
                                                    Adjudication and        Adjudication and           Bachelor's                                 Bachelor's
Dependent Variable:                                Disposition Dates in   Disposition Dates At        Degree from                               Degree from
Disposition Length                                   the Same Week       Least One Week Apart            LSU                                     Universities
                                                                                                                                               other than LSU
                                                                      (1)                         (2)                          (3)                    (4)
Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                                 35.619**                       47.485                    74.157**                 11.608
                                                                  (15.314)                     (48.622)                    (28.234)                (18.228)
Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)                                  9.158                       10.611                       5.833                 32.162
                                                                  (20.699)                     (41.770)                    (36.548)                (22.291)
Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                                    -5.173                      -52.545                      26.540                  3.711
                                                                  (21.997)                     (68.309)                    (35.363)                (29.181)
Predicted Close                                                     -6.356                      -39.241                       1.036               -34.035**
                                                                  (14.792)                     (43.337)                    (26.049)                (16.941)
Predicted Loss                                                       2.969                       11.560                     -28.103                 15.569
                                                                  (14.556)                     (51.112)                    (28.661)                (16.146)
Average Disposition Length                                         502.167                     567.739                      503.966                515.975

Sample Size                                                         6,914                       1,314                        2,106                  4,683
Controls:
Season, Week, and Days of Week                                       Yes                         Yes                          Yes                    Yes
Judge Attributes                                                     No                          No                           No                     No
Juvenile Attributes                                                  Yes                         Yes                          Yes                    Yes
Game Attributes                                                      Yes                         Yes                          Yes                    Yes
Offense Fixed Effects                                                Yes                         Yes                          Yes                    Yes
Judge Fixed Effects                                                  Yes                         Yes                          Yes                    Yes
Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses. There are 180 judges with non-missing information on their alma mater (166
detailed offense types). 59 judges have received their undergraduate degree from LSU. See notes to Table 4 and the text for data and control variable details. The p-
value pertains to the null hypothesis that the coefficients on upset loss are equal to each other. *significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

                                                                                 44
                                                                            Table 9
                  The Effect of Emotional Shocks from LSU Football Games on Disposition Length Imposed by Judges who have Received Their
                                    Bachelor's Degree from LSU: by Type of Game, Type of Crime, and the Race of the Juvenile
                                                                          Game Type                        Offense Type               Juvenile Race
Dependent Variable:                                           LSU Ranks in         LSU Ranks
Disposition Length                                                 Top 10        Below Top 10        Felony         Non-Felony     Black         White
                                                                     (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)        (5)            (6)
Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                                  44.792            -8.269          22.339             0.768     23.439        -27.874
                                                                  (29.745)          (32.521)        (31.561)          (21.853)   (19.877)      (28.399)
Loss × Predicted Win × Judge's Bachelor's Degree from LSU          41.812            64.590          79.768            32.159     53.080         77.020
                                                                  (40.323)          (39.931)        (46.368)          (33.948)   (33.485)      (49.358)
Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)                                52.329            24.738          56.973            19.352     11.487         42.446
                                                                  (47.246)          (31.332)        (51.929)          (30.722)   (26.216)      (35.080)
Loss × Predicted Close × Judge's Bachelor's Degree from LSU       -43.870            31.146          -8.636           -37.046     7.485          -7.071
                                                                  (45.908)          (52.644)        (60.818)          (42.365)   (47.350)      (42.374)
Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                                   15.304            -0.975         -40.617            38.450     15.649          2.228
                                                                 (100.837)          (31.105)        (49.397)          (28.920)   (35.663)      (40.207)
Win × Predicted Loss × Judge's Bachelor's Degree from LSU          23.869            -3.069          62.571           -52.238    -24.090         35.015
                                                                 (117.580)          (38.155)        (69.066)          (35.104)   (52.419)      (55.956)
Predicted Close                                                   -14.221           -36.304         -33.691           -18.618    -41.387         10.250
                                                                  (19.012)          (22.718)        (28.504)          (17.097)   (21.106)      (28.723)
Predicted Loss                                                    -35.626            -1.303          -0.136            -4.655    -14.052         25.533
                                                                  (34.791)          (26.636)        (35.010)          (18.581)   (24.567)      (25.407)
Average Disposition Length                                        482.208           534.746         630.738           425.478    515.913        505.096
Sample Size                                                         2,907             3,882           2,870             3,919     4,204           2,452

p-value (Upset Loss+ Upset Loss× LSU Degree)                                0.02                0.11                0.01               0.23              0.01           0.27
Controls:
Season, Week, and Days of Week                                             Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes            Yes
 Judge Attributes                                                           No                   No                  No                 No                No             No
 Juvenile Attributes                                                       Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes            Yes
 Game Attributes                                                           Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes            Yes
 Offense Fixed Effects                                                     Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes            Yes
 Judge Fixed Effects                                                       Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes            Yes
Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses. Offense classifications (felony and non-felony) are based on the Louisiana Office of
Juvenile Justice categorization. See notes to Tables 4 and 8 as well as the text for data and control variable details. The first p-value pertains to the null hypothesis that the
sum of the coefficients in the first two rows is zero. The second p-value pertains to the null hypothesis that the coefficients on upset loss are equal to each other. *significant
at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
                                                                                       45
                                                         Table 10
               The Effect of Emotional Shocks from LSU Football Games on the Propensity for Incarceration
                                                                                             Judges with Bachelor's
Dependent Variable: Incarceration                  Full Sample    Judges with Bachelor's    Degree from Universities
(Secure and Non-Secure Custody)                                     Degree from LSU             other than LSU
                                                        (1)                 (2)                         (3)
Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                     -0.002              -0.023                      -0.011
                                                     (0.018)             (0.034)                     (0.026)
Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)                   -0.016              -0.008                       0.005
                                                     (0.023)             (0.042)                     (0.028)
Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                      -0.020               0.050                      -0.043
                                                     (0.026)             (0.051)                     (0.034)
Predicted Close                                        0.024               0.012                       0.008
                                                     (0.018)             (0.037)                     (0.023)
Predicted Loss                                      0.041**               -0.000                     0.057*
                                                     (0.020)             (0.028)                     (0.031)
Sample Size                                            8,228               2,106                       4,683
Controls:
Season, Week, and Days of Week                          Yes                 Yes                         Yes
Judge Attributes                                        No                  No                          No
Juvenile Attributes                                     Yes                 Yes                         Yes
Game Attributes                                         Yes                 Yes                         Yes
Offense Fixed Effects                                   Yes                 Yes                         Yes
Judge Fixed Effects                                     Yes                 Yes                         Yes
The dependent variable takes the value of one if the juvenile defendant was in incarcerated (received disposition in secure or non-secure
custody) and zero if the defendant was put on probation. Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses.
See notes to Tables 4 and 8 as well as the text for data and control variable details. *significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at
1%.




                                                                         46
                                                       Table 11
              Falsification Tests- The Effect of Emotional Shocks from Selected College Football
                           Teams' Games on Disposition Length Imposed by Judges
Dependent Variable:                           Brigham           Florida    Miami-
Disposition Length                              Young             State    Florida    Ohio State                    Stanford
                                                   (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)                        (5)
Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                4.668            0.338     -15.525         6.552                     -0.454
                                               (17.083)         (11.850)   (14.763)      (15.826)                   (18.714)
Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)             -16.354          12.538    45.013**        17.864                    -19.771
                                               (19.293)         (27.143)   (18.930)      (18.479)                   (19.308)
Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                -12.978          -19.379    21.537        -52.121                     3.537
                                               (18.032)         (25.162)   (22.813)      (30.550)                   (13.085)
Predicted Close                                  -9.131          -13.370    -15.657         5.882                     -4.712
                                               (15.023)         (18.063)   (16.480)      (12.718)                   (15.479)
Predicted Loss                                   -8.135          23.743      -7.801        11.252                    -16.947
                                               (16.047)         (17.187)   (16.219)      (19.143)                   (14.345)
Sample Size                                      7,329            8,162      7,518          8,770                     7,726
Controls:
Season, Week, and Days of Week                    Yes              Yes        Yes            Yes                       Yes
Judge Attributes                                   No              No          No            No                        No
Juvenile Attributes                               Yes              Yes        Yes            Yes                       Yes
Game Attributes                                   Yes              Yes        Yes            Yes                       Yes
Offense Fixed Effects                             Yes              Yes        Yes            Yes                       Yes
Judge Fixed Effects                               Yes              Yes        Yes            Yes                       Yes
Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses. See notes to Table 4 and the text for data
and control variable details. *significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                              47
                                            Table 12
      Falsification Test-The Effect of Past-and-Next Weeks’ LSU Football Game Results
                          on Disposition Length Imposed by Judges
Dependent Variable:                                                              Coefficients
Disposition Length                                                            (Standard Errors)
                                                                      (1)            (2)            (3)
Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                                  35.160**         …..           36.387**
                                                                   (16.134)                       (16.343)
Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)                                  -2.875         …..             -2.924
                                                                   (24.641)                       (26.308)
Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                                    -12.544         …..            -12.669
                                                                   (24.345)                       (24.461)
Predicted Close                                                      -1.064         …..             -1.185
                                                                   (16.908)                       (17.380)
Predicted Loss                                                      14.085          …..            14.884
                                                                   (17.202)                       (17.732)
Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)-Following Week                      …..           -1.213          3.259
                                                                                  (16.434)        (17.208)
Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)-Following Week                    …..           -3.060          -6.538
                                                                                  (21.419)        (21.203)
Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)-Following Week                       …..          14.694          10.083
                                                                                  (24.820)        (26.318)
Predicted Close-Following Week                                        …..           0.383           3.469
                                                                                  (17.524)        (17.806)
Predicted Loss-Following Week                                         …..          -14.035         -13.547
                                                                                  (17.277)        (17.334)
Sample Size                                                          6,420         6,420           6,420
The sample is restricted to all juvenile dispositions following Saturday games played in consecutive weeks
during the seasons from 1996 to 2012. Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported
in parentheses. All specifications control for day of the week, week and season effects, (time-variant)
judge, juvenile characteristics and offense and judge fixed effects. There are 161 detailed offense types and
201 judges in the effective sample. See notes to Table 4 and the text for data and control variable details.
*significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. Column (1) is the baseline specification
where disposition lengths assigned by judges in a week are regressed on previous week’s game results. In
column (2) disposition length assigned by judges in a week are regressed on next week’s game results.




                                                     48
                                          Figure 1
                   Distribution of Disposition Length Imposed by Judges
       4000
       3000
   Frequency
     2000
       1000
       0




               0        250         500           750        1000        1250         1500
                                          Disposition Length

All dispositions are during the weekdays following a Saturday game for the seasons from 1996 to
2012.




                                              49
                                   Figure 2
 Realized Score Differential (Opponent Team – LSU) and Pregame Point Spread




The plotted regression has a slope of 0.98 (s.e. = 0.07). The R2 from the regression is 0.49.




                                                50
                                                     WESTERN KENTUCKY
                                                     WEST VIRGINIA
                                                                                                                                                    NOTRE DAME
                                                     WASHINGTON
                                                     VIRGINIA TECH.
                                                     VANDERBILT
                                                     UTAH ST.




                                                                                                                                                                                            Predicted Win denotes games where the point spread for LSU is -4 or less.
                                                     UL-MONROE                                                                                      MISSISSIPPI
                                                     UL-Lafayette
                                                     TULANE
                                                     TROY
                                                     TROY
                                                                                                                                                    KENTUCKY
                                                     TOWSON
                                                     TENNESSEE
                                                     SOUTH CAROLINA


                                                                                             Actual Loss (Upset Loss)
                                                     SAN JOSE ST
                                                     OREGON ST.




                                                                                                                                                                            Opponent Team
                                                                             Opponent Team
                                                                                                                                                    IOWA
                                                     NOTRE DAME
                                                     NORTH TEXAS
Predicted Win




                                                     NORTH CAROLINA
  Figure 3A




                                                                                                    Figure 3B
                                                     NEW MEXICO ST.
                                                     MISSISSIPPI ST.                                                                                GEORGIA
                                                     MISSISSIPPI
                                                     MIDDLE TENNESSEE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        51
                                                     MIAMI-OHIO
                                                     MCNEESE ST
                                                                                                                                                    FLORIDA
                                                     LA TECH.
                                                     KENTUCKY
                                                     IOWA
                                                     IDAHO
                                                     HOUSTON                                                                                        AUBURN
                                                     GEORGIA
                                                     FRESNO ST
                                                     FLORIDA
                                                     EL PASO
                                                     CLEMSON                                                                                        ALABAMA at BIRMINGHAM
                                                     AUBURN
                                                     ARKANSAS ST.
                                                     ARIZONA
                                                     ALABAMA at BIRMINGHAM
                                                                                                                                                    ALABAMA
                                                     ALABAMA
                                                     AKRON
                14   12   6    8    10   4   2   0                                                                      8   6      4        2   0
                          Frequency                                                                                             Frequency
                                                       TEXAS A&M
                                                                                                                                                NOTRE DAME




                                                                                                                                                                              Predicted Close denotes games where point spread for LSU is between -4 and 4.
                                                       TENNESSEE
                                                       SOUTH CAROLINA                                                                           MISSISSIPPI
                                                       OREGON
                                                                                                                                                KENTUCKY
                                                       NOTRE DAME

                                                                                         Actual Loss (Close Loss)
                                                       MISSISSIPPI ST.
                                                                         Opponent Team                                                          HOUSTON




                                                                                                                                                              Opponent Team
Predicted Close




                                                       MISSISSIPPI
  Figure 4A




                                                                                                Figure 4B
                                                       KENTUCKY                                                                                 GEORGIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              52
                                                       HOUSTON
                                                                                                                                                FLORIDA
                                                       GEORGIA
                                                       FLORIDA
                                                                                                                                                AUBURN
                                                       AUBURN
                                                       ARKANSAS                                                                                 ARKANSAS
                                                       ARIZONA ST.
                                                                                                                                                ALABAMA
                                                       ALABAMA
                  14   12   6     8   10   4   2   0                                                                8   6      4        2   0
                            Frequency                                                                                       Frequency
                                                          Figure 5A
                                                        Predicted Loss



        14
        12  10
  Frequency
  6     8
        4
        2
        0


                 ALABAMA




                                     AUBURN




                                                        FLORIDA




                                                                        GEORGIA




                                                                                  MISSISSIPPI




                                                                                                                  MISSISSIPPI ST.




                                                                                                                                                TENNESSEE
                                                                  Opponent Team


                                                     Figure 5B
                                              Actual Win (Upset Win)
        8
        6
  Frequency
     4  2
        0



                           ALABAMA




                                               AUBURN




                                                                        FLORIDA




                                                                                                MISSISSIPPI ST.




                                                                                                                                    TENNESSEE




                                                                  Opponent Team

Predicted Loss denotes games where point spread for LSU is 4 or more.




                                                                   53
                                   Figure 6
Increase in Disposition Length for an LSU Loss vs. a Win as a Function of the
                           Pregame Point Spread

                   75            50
    Increase in Disposition Length
  -25        0         25




                                                                   predicted
                   -50




                                            predicted win            close          predicted loss

                                      -12        -8         -4         0        4         8          12
                                                                 Point Spread

The estimates are obtained from a specification with a third-order polynomial in the
point spread and an interaction between the polynomial and an indicator for LSU loss.
The dashed lines are pointwise 90% confidence intervals.




                                                                 54
                                                                      Appendix Table A1

                    The Effect of Emotional Shocks from LSU Football Games on Disposition Length Imposed by Judges:
                                                         Alternative Estimations
Dependent Variable:                                                      Exclude   Exclude       Include      Include                                     Exclude
Disposition Length                          Poisson        Log of        Katrina      Bowl       Serious    Offenders                                  Weeks with
                                          Regression     Dep. Var.         Years    Games       Offenses   with Crime                                    Docket
                                                                                                              History                                  Congestion
                                               (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)                                        (7)
Loss Predicted Win (Upset Loss)            0.062***       0.063***      34.643**  34.657**      33.075**     33.038**                                   31.952**
                                            (0.023)        (0.023)       (13.488)  (13.746)     (13.925)     (13.325)                                   (13.711)
Loss Predicted Close (Close Loss)            0.012          0.020         17.721      7.696        2.685       5.296                                       2.835
                                            (0.033)        (0.036)       (21.619)  (20.070)     (17.925)     (15.841)                                   (17.759)
Win Predicted Loss (Upset Win)               -0.020         -0.024        -11.135    -9.850      -12.437       -1.630                                    -15.468
                                            (0.039)        (0.037)       (21.262)  (21.456)     (21.328)     (20.399)                                   (21.529)
Predicted Close                              -0.017         -0.021        -12.040   -10.697       -7.683      -10.266                                    -11.745
                                            (0.024)        (0.031)       (13.798)  (13.978)     (13.413)     (11.732)                                   (13.861)
Predicted Loss                               0.013          0.020          1.981      4.869        3.659       -1.962                                     10.292
                                            (0.027)        (0.027)       (15.223)  (14.578)     (14.348)     (14.530)                                   (15.021)
Sample Size                                  8,228          8,228          7,443      7,867        8,260       9,313                                       7,625
Controls:
Season, Week, and Days of Week                Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes                                        Yes
Judge Attributes                               No             No            No         No           No           No                                        No
Juvenile Attributes                           Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes                                        Yes
Game Attributes                               Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes                                        Yes
Offense Fixed Effects                         Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes                                        Yes
Judge Fixed Effects                           Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes                                        Yes
Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses. Pseudo R² is reported in Column 1. See notes to Table 4 and the text for data and
control variable details. *significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                  55
                                 Appendix Table A2
     The Effect of Emotional Shocks from LSU Football Games on Disposition
                  Length Imposed by Judges: Including bye Weeks
    Dependent Variable:                                      Coefficients
    Disposition Length                                    (Standard Errors)
    Loss × Predicted Win (Upset Loss)                         31.780**
                                                              (13.206)
    Loss × Predicted Close (Close Loss)                         1.602
                                                              (18.099)
    Win × Predicted Loss (Upset Win)                           -9.580
                                                              (28.651)
    Predicted Win                                               0.706
                                                              (47.967)
    Predicted Close                                            -6.745
                                                              (45.983)
    Predicted Loss                                              3.716
                                                              (53.663)
    Sample Size                                                 9,234
    Controls:
    Season, Week, and Days of Week                               Yes
    Judge Attributes                                             No
    Juvenile Attributes                                          Yes
    Game Attributes                                              Yes
    Offense Fixed Effects                                        Yes
    Judge Fixed Effects                                          Yes
Standard errors, which are clustered at the judge level, are reported in parentheses. Bye Weeks
is the omitted category. See notes to Table 4 and the text for data and control variable details.




                                               57
