                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MOBILE COLLATERAL VERSUS IMMOBILE COLLATERAL

                                         Gary Gorton
                                         Tyler Muir

                                      Working Paper 22619
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22619


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




Thanks to Adam Ashcraft, Darrell Duffie, Randy Krozner, Andrei Kirilemko, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Philipp Hildebrand, Manmohan Singh, Paul Tucker, Warren Webber and seminar
particpants at the 2015 BIS Annual Conference, the Penn Institute for Economic Research
Workshop on Quantitative Tools for Macroeconmic Policy Analysis, the Stanford Global Cross-
roads Conference for comments. Thanks to Charles Calomiris, Ben Chabot, Michael Fleming,
Ken Garbade, Joe Haubrich, John James, Richard Sylla, Ellis Tallman, Warren Weber and
Rosalind Wiggins for answering questions about data. Thanks to Lei Xie and Bruce Champ
(deceased) for sharing data. Thanks to Toomas Laarits, Rhona Ceppos, Ashley Garand, Leigh-
Anne Clark and Michelle Pavlik for research assistance. Special thanks to the Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland for sharing the data of the late Bruce Champ. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Gary Gorton and Tyler Muir. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Mobile Collateral versus Immobile Collateral
Gary Gorton and Tyler Muir
NBER Working Paper No. 22619
September 2016
JEL No. E02,E51,G01,N1

                                         ABSTRACT

In the face of the Lucas Critique, economic history can be used to evaluate policy. We use the
experience of the U.S. National Banking Era to evaluate the most important bank regulation to
emerge from the financial crisis, the Bank for International Settlement's liquidity coverage ratio
(LCR) which requires that (net) short-term (uninsured) bank debt (e.g. repo) be backed one-for-
one with U.S. Treasuries (or other high quality bonds). The rule is narrow banking. The
experience of the U.S. National Banking Era, which also required that bank short-term debt be
backed by Treasury debt one-for-one, suggests that the LCR is unlikely to reduce financial
fragility and may increase it.


Gary Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu

Tyler Muir
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue, Room 4516
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
tyler.muir@yale.edu
1       Introduction
The financial crisis of 2007-2008 emphasized the importance of bank regulation
for financial stability and macroeconomic fragility. In response to the financial
crisis, many new bank regulations have been implemented. In this paper, we
ask: When is a proposed new bank regulation optimal? How can unintended
consequences of new regulations be assessed? And, how can we answer these
questions in the face of the Lucas (1976) Critique?
    We focus on the most important new bank regulation of the post crisis era, the
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR).1 The rule says, in essence, that all (net) short-
term debt issued by a bank has to be backed dollar-for-dollar with U.S. Treasuries
or similar safe debt, a kind of narrow banking.2,3 The Bank for International
Settlements (2013) labels the LCR as one of the key reforms “to develop a more
resilient banking sector” (p. 1). The LCR is a very significant change and thus
is expected to have some unintended consequences. The key question is whether
this rule will significantly reduce financial fragility, as claimed, or significantly
increase financial fragility. In the face of the Lucas (1976) Critique, we argue
that economic history can be used to evaluate the LCR. The evaluation is not
favorable.
    1
      The LCR is a rule first proposed by the Basel Committee on Banking Super-
vision in December 2010; see BIS (2013).                 At the end of 2013 the Federal Re-
serve System issued is own mandatory LCR with slightly different definitions of
details.      The final rule is 103 pages: https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2014-10-
10/pdf/2014-22520.pdf .             The European Commission also promulgated the LCR:
http://ec.europa.eu/finance/bank/docs/regcapital/acts/delegated/141010 delegated-act-
liquidity-coverage en.pdf
    2
      As far as we can tell, little policy evaluation was done before the LCR was adopted. There
have been numerous more or less ad hoc forecasts of how much collateral the new system will
need given the LCR, but these numbers vary a lot and are subject to the Lucas critique. See
Heller and Vause (2012), Sidanius and Zikes (2012), Fender and Lewrick (2013) and Duffie,
Scheicher and Vuillemey (2014).
    3
      In fact, since the financial crisis, many new regulations aim at returning to a financial
system of immobile collateral. For example, under Dodd-Frank and similar European legislation
collateral must be posted to central clearing parties (CCPs) (regardless of the private party’s
net position), while the CCP does not post collateral to participants. CCPs will only accept
highly liquid, high grade collateral. Variation margin has long been part of the bilateral swap
market, but importantly, initial margin is new and will increase substantially the amount of
collateral required. Not all swaps trades will be cleared through a CCP. For those that are not,
initial and variation margin for each trade must be held by a third party. Further, collateral
posted to banks by clients cannot be rehypothecated.


                                               1
    The Lucas Critique is important and is considered a fundamental principle
of macroeconomics (e.g., Woodford (2003)). Lucas was responding to the macro
econometric practice of the time. Simply put, the critique says that model param-
eters estimated with past data under a previous policy regime are not invariant
to policy changes unless the parameters are “deep” parameters of tastes and
technology. The response was to build models on micro foundations that (at
least it could be claimed) represented such deep parameters. But, the interpre-
tation and application of the critique has many unresolved issues (e.g., estimated
“deep” parameters seem to change over time). These issues however are not our
concern here. Whatever one thinks of current DSGE models, it is clear that they
have little or nothing to say about financial crises or bank regulation. How then
are newly proposed bank regulations to be evaluated? Do they mitigate financial
fragility?
    The financial crisis of 2007-2008 revealed that the financial system had signif-
icantly morphed from a retail insured demand deposit-based banking system into
a wholesale banking system. The wholesale banking system relies on collateral
to back short-term debt, which is the inside money of the wholesale system, i.e.,
sale and repurchase agreements (repo). The collateral consists of U.S. Treasuries
or AAA asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities ABS/MBS. Our view is
that (and we provide evidence for this view below) this system will remain im-
portant in the future. ABS/MBS use bank loans as input; that is the bank loans
which sat on bank balance sheets as immobile collateral become mobile when
securitized, transformed into ABS/MBS.
    In this wholesale-based financial system U.S. Treasury debt plays a partic-
ularly important role; it has a convenience yield. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jørgensen (2012) find that the yield on U.S. Treasuries over 1926-2008 was, on
average, 73 basis points lower than it otherwise would have been, due to the
“moneyness” and safety of U.S. Treasury securities. In other words, U.S. Trea-
suries are important as money. Prior to the financial crisis, there was a scarcity
of safe debt. When there is a scarcity of safe debt, the private response is to
create more privately-produced debt that can act as a substitute (see Krishna-
murthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012, 2015) and Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick
(2012)). Securitization was the private response, production of ABS/MBS. Using

                                         2
ABS/MBS as collateral for repo made the financial system fragile.
    The LCR aims to make Treasury and other safe debt immobile by requiring
that it be used to back short-term bank debt. What will happen under the
LCR? The LCR forces one kind of money – Treasuries—to back another type of
money—short-term debt such as sale and repurchase agreements (repo). And, the
ratio is fixed at one-to-one. If the one-to-one ratio is wrong, and U.S. Treasuries
are valuable in an alternative use, rather than as the backing for short-term
debt, then the amount of short-term debt issued will be too small. And it would
likely, eventually, be produced somewhere else. In other words, it would spur the
development of another shadow banking system.
    Our main focus is methodological as applied to the LCR. We argue that in
the face of the Lucas critique economic history provides some valuable guidance
for policy evaluation. Episodes in the past are often similar to current proposed
policies and can be a laboratory for studying the effects of proposed policies.
History cannot be a perfect guide for policy evaluation and more than a model
can. While it is no doubt the case that not every proposed new policy has a
parallel in previous history, it may well be that there are close enough parallels
to help inform a decision. Think of the historical example as the “model” in
which the policy being considered has already been adopted. How far away is
the historical episode from the policy to be evaluated? This question is the same
when using models to evaluate policy, it’s just implicit.
    Using economic history to evaluate policy has its roots in Fogel’s (1964) study
of railroads in the U.S. One of his aims was to evaluate the “take-off” thesis of
W.W. Rostow (1960), according to which economic growth needed a central in-
dustry, like railroads in the U.S., to achieve “take-off.” Fogel (1964) addressed
this issue by constructing a counterfactual involving the absence of railroads,
replacing them with water transportation along rivers and canals.4 We do not
construct a counterfactual but rather look at a parallel structure in history that
can be studied. Closer to this paper are recent examples that use historical par-
allels to evaluate policy. Bernstein, Hughson and Weidenmier (2015) study the
effects of the establishment of the New York Stock Exchange clearinghouse on
  4
    Recent work on this include Donaldson and Hornbeck (2015) and Swisher (2014). Also
related is Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989).


                                          3
counterparty risk. Foley-Fisher and McLaughlin (2014) study structural differ-
ences between bonds guaranteed by the UK and Irish governments during the
period 1920-1938. The events provide a way to think about sovereign debt that
is jointly guaranteed by multiple governments, e.g., proposed Euro bonds. Blue-
dorn and Haelim (2016) study the effects on Pennsylvania banks of the New York
Clearing House Association’s bailouts of systemically important banks in New
York City. They argue that the bailouts “likely short-circuited a full-scale bank-
ing panic” (p.1). Carlson and Rose (2014) study the run on Continental Illinois
in 1984, during which the government provided an extraordinary guarantee of
all the bank’s liabilities. The authors argue that this example provides insights
into the Orderly Liquidation Authority of the Dodd-Frank Act. Bordo and Sinha
(2015) study the large Fed bond buying program in 1932 to understand current
QE policies.
    We study the LCR, as an important example of this approach. In particular,
the LCR is structurally identical to the U.S. National Banking Era which also
required that banks’ short-term debt (national bank notes) be backed by U.S.
Treasuries.5 We examine the National Banking Era experience to guide our
thinking about the effects of the LCR. Under the National Banking System,
national banks could issue distinct “national bank notes” by depositing eligible
U.S. Treasury bonds with the U.S. Treasury, which would then print the bank’s
notes. Originally, the idea was to create a demand for U.S. Treasuries so as to
finance the U.S. Civil War. But, it was also believed that backing private money
with Treasuries would prevent banking panics. Prior to the National Banking
Era, U.S. banks issued their own distinct notes, backed by state bonds (in Free
Banking states) or backed by portfolios of bank loans (in chartered banking
states). There were systemic banking crises in 1814, 1819, 1837 and 1857. It was
expected that the National Banking System would eliminate panics. Similarly,
the explicit purpose of the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) is to make the financial
system safer.
    This stability did not occur under the National Banking Era. Banking panics
were not prevented, but merely shifted from one form of bank money to another.
  5
    On the National Banking Era see Noyes (1910), Friedman and Schwartz (1963), and Champ
(2011c).


                                           4
During a panic, instead of requesting (gold and silver) cash for private bank notes,
debt holders demanded national bank notes for their demand deposits. There
was another problem with the National Banking System: too little money was
issued. Too little money was issued even though it was apparently profitable to
do so, an apparent riskless arbitrage opportunity. Economists have called this the
”under issuance puzzle” or the “national bank note puzzle,” first noticed by Bell
(1912). The puzzle is that national banks never fully utilized their note-issuing
powers even though it appears that it was profitable to do so. As Kuehlwein
(1992) put it: “. . . through the turn of the century and into the 1920s banks
devoted a significant fraction of their capital to direct loans . . . despite the fact
that national bank notes appeared to be more profitable” (p. 111). Friedman
and Schwartz (1963, p. 23) reached the same conclusion.
    Because the LCR is structurally the same as the National Banking System,
this puzzle is important. In this paper, we show that the one reason that ”risk-
less arbitrage profits” persisted during the National Banking Era was that the
calculations of the arbitrage profit done to date ignored the fact that there was a
convenience yield to Treasuries and a cost to bank capital. Banks held Treasuries
on their balance sheets but, in principle, could have raised capital to buy more
Treasuries. Also, average profit rather than marginal profit was calculated.
    For the National Banking System as a whole, there appears to have been a
shortage of safe debt. Simply put, banks had other important uses for Treasuries
and bank capital was expensive. We show that the “arbitrage profits” are essen-
tially a proxy for the “convenience yield” on Treasuries or the cost of bank capital
or likely both. This suggests that backing one kind of money (National Bank
notes) with another kind of money (Treasuries) may not be such a good idea.
By linking the two forms of money, another form of private-produced money is
likely to appear or grow. This is strongly shown in the data – as the share of
Treasuries to GDP declined over this period, deposits grew. And a shortage
of safe debt is associated with financial instability. This too is consistent with
the historical experience as banking panics occurred frequently throughout the
National Banking Era (1873, 1884, 1890, 1893, 1896, and 1907).
    Combining the two interrelated steps of our argument in one paper is some-
what unusual, but necessary. We have to establish parallels between the two

                                          5
financial systems. We will argue that during the National Banking Era there
was a shortage of U.S. Treasuries, and that it was this shortage that resulted, at
least partially, in the under issuance of national bank notes, which accounts, in
part, for the growth in (uninsured) demand deposits. To establish the parallel,
in order to analyze the LCR, we need to first show that there was, and continues
to be, a shortage of U.S. Treasuries today. So, we first, in Section 2, examine
the changes in the U.S. financial system over the last thirty or so years. We
provide evidence of a scarcity of safe long-term debt prior to the crisis as well
as currently. To do this we study the determinants and extent of repo fails. A
repo “fail” occurs when one party to the transaction does not perform to the
contract at maturity, failing to return the collateral or the cash. We show that
repo fails were increasing because of the scarcity of U.S. Treasuries and Agency
bonds. Previous research, discussed below, shows that when U.S. Treasuries are
scarce, the private sector provides substitutes in the form of asset-backed and
mortgage-backed securities.
    Having established the shortage of Treasuries in the modern financial system,
we turn to the parallel LCR National Banking Era system in Section 3. There
we provide evidence of a scarcity of U.S. Treasury debt during the National
Banking Era and show that this led to growth in other forms of bank debt,
demand deposits, which were vulnerable to runs. We calculate the profitability
of national bank note issuance and then show that even in the 19th and early
20th centuries U.S. Treasuries had a convenience yield. We show that proxies
for the convenience yield are important in explaining the Treasury convenience
yield. Section 4 concludes with implications for the present day and a discussion
of using economic history as a way to analyze proposed new policies.


2     Collateral Mobility and Scarcity
In this section we first briefly look at the transformation of the financial system in
the thirty years prior to the 2007-2008 financial crisis. Then we provide evidence
of the scarcity of safe debt by looking at repo fails.




                                          6
2.1    The Transformation of the Financial System
Two important changes have occurred in the financial system in the last forty
years. First, the system has evolved from one of immobile collateral into a
system of mobile collateral. In other words, instead of bank loans remaining on
bank balance sheets to provide backing for demand deposits, bank loans were
securitized into bonds which could be traded, used as collateral in repo, posted
as collateral for derivatives positions, and rehypothecated, moving to the location
of their highest value use. Second, the demand for U.S. Treasuries and other safe
debt by the rest of the world grew significantly. A result of these changes has
been a shortage of safe debt.
    Figure 1, from Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick (2012), displays the compo-
sition of the privately-produced safe debt in the U.S. as a percentage of total
privately-produced safe debt in the United States, since 1952 (based on Flow
of Funds data). As shown in the figure, there was a very significant transfor-
mation of the U.S. financial system starting roughly in the mid-1970s. Demand
deposits, which were the dominant form of safe debt for roughly the first 25 to
30 years, constituted nearly 80 percent of the total in 1952 and remained high at
70 percent in the late 1970s. But then demand deposits began a steep decline as
the financial architecture changed with the rise of money market mutual funds,
money market instruments (e.g., repo and commercial paper), and with securi-
tization. This transformation reflects the changing demands for different types
of safe debt, as demands from the wholesale market grew enormously relative to
the retail market. The change is the rise of the Shadow Banking System. The
figure suggests that this is a permanent change.
    Also, in the last forty years or so there has been an enormous demand by
foreigners for U.S. Treasury Debt. Bernanke, Bertaut DeMarco, and Kamin
(2011): “. . . a large share of the highly rated securities issued by U.S. residents
from 2003 to 2007 was sold to foreigners—55 percent. This share was even higher
than in the 1998-2002 period—22 percent—even though total net issuance of
apparently safe assets rose from $3.1 trillion in the first period to $4.5 trillion
in the second [period]. (The net issuance of private label AAA-rated asset-
backed securities outstanding, including MBS, rose from $0.7 trillion in the first


                                         7
period to $2 trillion in the second.)” (p. 8). When there is a shortage of public
safe debt, the private sector responds by producing substitutes. With shortages
developing when the economy transformed from a retail-based banking system to
wholesale-based system, two things happened. Commercial banks became much
less profitable and there was a need for privately-produced (mobile) safe debt.
The conjunction of these two forces led to securitization. Gorton and Metrick
(2012b), Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2011), Stein (2010), and others, argue
that one of the main purposes of securitization is to produce safe assets.
    Studies of the private sector issuance of safe debt confirm that issuance re-
sponds to widening of the convenience yield spread. Xie (2012) analyzes all pri-
vate label ABS/MBS issued from 1978 to 2010. His data set is essentially all pri-
vate label ABS/MBS in the market amounting to 20,000 deals, 300,000 tranches
and $11 trillion in issuance. Using daily data Xie finds that more ABS/MBS are
issued when the expected convenience yield is high. This phenomenon does not
happen in other markets for privately-produced debt, like corporate bond mar-
kets. Sunderam (2015) looks at the issuance of asset-backed commercial paper
(ABCP) at the weekly frequency. He finds, among other things, that issuance
of ABCP also responds to a shortage of T-bills as evidenced by the convenience
yield.
    Betaut, Tabova and Wong (2014) examine the supply and demand of safe
debt since the financial crisis of 2007-2008 and find that the scarcity of safe debt
is a continuing problem. They show that post-crisis, the (high grade) foreign
financial sector has produced and supplied safe debt to meet U.S. demand for
safe assets. And, a large portion of this is in the form of foreign financial wholesale
certificates of deposit. In particular, high-grade dollar-denominated debt from
Australia and Canada is now 40% of U.S. foreign portfolio of high-grade dollar-
denominated bonds, whereas pre-crisis this share was 8% pre-crisis. They also
find “a strong negative correlation between the foreign share of the U.S. financial
bond portfolio and measures of U.S. safe assets availability; providing evidence
on the importance of foreign-issued financial sector debt as a substitute when
U.S. issued “safe” assets are scarce.”
    The evidence reviewed so far is very suggestive. We next turn to supplying
direct evidence of a shortage of safe debt.

                                          8
2.2     Evidence of the Scarcity of Treasuries: Repo Fails
Many authors have discussed the shortage of safe debt prior to the financial crisis,
e.g., Caballero (2010), Gourinchas and Jeanne (2012), Caballero and Farhi (2014)
usually relating it to the global savings glut. But, it has proven difficult to provide
evidence for this shortage. In this subsection we provide some evidence for this
shortage, which was driving the growth of privately-produced mobile collateral.
    There is said to be a “repo fail” if one side to the repo transaction does not
abide by the contract at maturity, failing to deliver the collateral back (called a
“failure to deliver”) or failing to repay the loan (called a “failure to receive”).
See Fleming and Garbade (2005, 2002) on fails. Repo fails can provide indirect
evidence on scarcity and mobility. If collateral is scarce, then it can become
more mobile via rehypothecation (re-use) chains, making it more difficult to find
a bond to return to the borrower, i.e. a fail. There is no direct evidence on this,
but we provide a variety of indirect evidence.
    We examine data from the New York Federal Reserve Bank on primary deal-
ers’ fails.6 The primary dealers are only a subset of all firms involved in the
bilateral repo market, as we will see below. But, still it encompasses many large
financial firms. The New York Federal Reserve Bank collects data on only three
asset classes used as collateral for repo: U.S. Treasuries, Agency bonds, and
Agency MBS.7
    Repo fails by asset class are shown in the three panels of Figure 2. From
Figure 2 it is apparent that repo fails were increasing prior to the financial crisis.
It is apparent from the figure that the period from January 2000 until January
2010 is more turbulent than the period before and the period after. The turbu-
lence is not just the financial crisis. This is confirmed by Table 1 Panel A which
shows the mean dollar amount of fails (in $ millions) in the 1990s compared to
the period 2000-2007; also shown are the standard deviation of fails. We formally
test for difference between subperiods below.8
  6
     “Primary dealers” are financial firms that are trading counterparties if the New York
Fed in its implementation of monetary policy. There are currently 22 primary dealers; see
http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/pridealers current.html .
   7
     “Agency” refers to Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac or Ginnie Mae, government-sponsored enter-
prises that securitize and guarantee certain types of residential mortgages.
   8
     The data collected by the New York Fed is very limited. To get some sense of the nar-


                                            9
    Aside from operational issues that explain repo fails, there are two other pos-
sibilities. First, there is the possibility that a counterparty strategically defaults
to retain the bonds or retain the cash, at least for a short period of time. Sec-
ondly, there can be multiple fails due to rehypothecation (the re-use of collateral)
chains, i.e., several transactions are sequentially based on the same collateral. As
explained by Fleming and Garbade (2002): “ . . . a seller may be unable to
deliver securities because of a failure to receive the same securities in settlement
of an unrelated purchase. This can lead to a ‘daisy chain’ of cumulatively addi-
tive fails: A’s failure to deliver bonds to B causes B to fail on a sale of the same
bonds to C, causing C to fail on a similar sale to D, and so on” (p. 43). Also, see
Singh (2014). We do not have the data, however, to distinguish between fails due
to rehypothecation chains from other fails. We cannot distinguish between these
possibilities, but the tests below strongly suggest that increasingly fails were not
operational errors.
    Collateral is mobile if it is in a form that can be traded and posted as collateral
in repo or derivatives transactions. Rehypothecation is another form of collateral
mobility. What is the extent of rehypothecation? There is some survey data from
the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA). ISDA has an annual
survey of its members that usually asks about the extent of rehypothecation using
collateral received in OTC derivative transactions, in terms of the percentage of
institutions that report that they do rehypothecate collateral. In 2001, the first
survey, 70 percent of the respondents reported that they “. . . actively re-use (or
‘rehypothecate’) incoming collateral assets in order to satisfy their own outgoing
collateral obligations” (p. 3). Over the years the percentage rises to 96 percent
for large firms in 2011. In 2014, ISDA for the first time asked about which bonds
rowness of the primary dealer group, we can look at data from the Depository Trust and
Clearing Corporation (DTCC) on fails. DTCC has hundreds of members that use DTCC
for clearing and settlement. See the DTCC membership list: http://www.dtcc.com/client-
center/dtc-directories.aspx In 2011 DTCC settled $1.7 quadrillion in security value. DTCC
also has a large repo program. DTCC fails data is for the value of Treasury and Agency fails,
that is the amounts that were not delivered to fulfill a contract. The DTCC data covers all
fails of Treasuries and Agencies, not just repo fails. However, if there is a scarcity of safe debt,
then there are likely fails in trades as well as repo. The DTCC series is not as long as the NY
Fed’s, but it shows the larger universe of players. DTCC data show that there are many more
fails, suggesting that the size of the fails problem is an order of magnitude larger than the NY
Fed data shows. Also, see Gorton and Metrick (2015).


                                                10
were actually used for rehypothecation. Table 1 Panel C shows the results. In
2014 ISDA estimated that total collateral used in non-cleared OTC derivatives
to be $3.7 trillion. It would appear that rehypothecation is sizeable. This does
not address the question of the length of rehypothecation chains. Singh (2011)
estimates that prior to the financial crisis, collateral velocity was three. Also see
Singh and Aitken (2010).
    This is not the only evidence on scarcity and mobility. The bilateral repo
market was expanding significantly beyond the primary dealers in the 2000s. In
the New York Fed data, if one dealer fails to deliver to another dealer, then the
first dealer records a “fail to deliver” of $N, and the counterparty primary dealer
reports a “fail to receive” of $N. So, fails and receives should be equal, unless the
primary dealers are trading with firms that are not primary dealers.
    To examine whether repo was expanding beyond the primary dealers we look
at the difference between receive and fail by asset class. If all the fails are between
primary dealers, then this number will be zero. So, if this number is positive, then
it means that the party failing to deliver was not a primary dealer, the primary
dealer records a “fail to receive”. Figure 3 shows failure to receive minus failure
to deliver by asset class. Again it is apparent that this number was near zero
prior to 2000, meaning that all fails were with another primary dealer. But, after
2000 and prior to the crisis, Receive minus Deliver is clearly not zero. In this
period there are significant fails by non-primary dealer counterparties, suggesting
that the bilateral repo market had grown significantly, consistent with collateral
being mobile and scarce. (Also see Gorton and Metrick (2015)).
    This is confirmed in Table 1 Panel B, where it is clear that failure to receive mi-
nus failure to deliver increasingly differs from zero in the period 2000-2007, prior
to the crisis. Moreover, note the sign difference between Treasuries and MBS
during 2000-2007. For Treasuries receive minus fail is very large in 2000-2007,
again meaning that non-primary dealers are not delivering Treasuries according
to their repo contracts. But, in the case of MBS, the number is very nega-
tive, meaning that primary dealers are failing to deliver to non-primary dealer
counterparties. This is also apparent in the figure.9
   9
    The fails data on Agency MBS market is very different, likely because the repo fails number
includes fails in the “to be announced” (TBA) market, although the data do not allow us to


                                              11
2.3     Fails and the Demand for Liquidity
We now turn to some formal evidence that collateral became increasingly mobile.
We start the analysis by testing to see if there are significant breakpoints in the
panel of fails (receive and deliver) data. To do this we follow Bai (2010). Bai
(2010) shows how to find breakpoints in panels of data where a breakpoint is
in the mean and/or the variance. Assuming a common breakpoint in a panel
of data is more restrictive than assuming random breakpoints in the individual
different series in the panel, but the method can be used on an individual series
as well.
    The method can be used to find other breakpoints subsequent to the first.
The first breakpoint divides the panel into two sub-panels, on each side of the
first breakpoint. To find the second breakpoint apply the procedure to each of
the two subseries, on the two sides of the first breakpoint. The second breakpoint
is the one that gives the larger reduction in the sum of squared residuals, when
comparing the break found in each of the two subseries.
    We examine a panel of four series: fail to deliver and fail to receive for Trea-
suries and for Agencies. We omit MBS for reasons discussed above. The sample
period of weekly data runs from July 1991 to September 2014. The breakpoints
are shown in Table 2. The table shows the 95% confidence intervals in the last
two columns in terms of dates. From the figures above it is clear that fails are
increasing, starting in the early 2000s. Consistent with this the first breakpoint
is September 12, 2001, just after September 11, 2001. This is the start of a differ-
ent regime and it extends until, not surprisingly, the second break chronologically
just after Lehman. The third breakpoint is February 9, 2009.
    Why were fails increasing? We will examine the proposition that fails in-
creased as the demand for liquidity increased. We follow Xie (2012) in measuring
decompose the fails. (See Government Securities Dealers Reports (2015), Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System). TBA contracts are forward contracts for the purchase of “to
be announced” agency MBS. In this market, the MBS to be traded are not specified initially.
Rather, the parties agree on six general parameters of the MBS (date, issuer, interest rate,
maturity, face amount, price). The contracts involve a delayed delivery, typically an interval
of several weeks. The TBA market is very large. Average daily fails in this market between
December 31, 2009 and December 29, 2010, as reported by primary dealers, was $83.3 billion
in fails to deliver and $73.8 billion in fails to receive (see Treasury Market Practices Group
(TMPG) (2011)). On the TBA market, see Vickery and Wright (2013).


                                             12
the convenience yield by the spread between the rate on general collateral (GC)
repo and the rate on the Treasury used as collateral for the repo. The maturity
is one month. In GC repo, the lenders will accept any of a variety of Treasuries
as collateral, i.e., it is general collateral rather than specific collateral.
     The basic idea we explore is whether an increase in the GC repo spread,
i.e., an increase in the convenience yield, is associated with an increase in repo
fails. In other words, if there is an increase in the demand for liquidity, then this
spread will widen. A widening of the spread corresponds to an increased scarcity
of Treasuries and possibly other safe collateral as well as Agency bonds.
     We use differences-in-differences in seemingly-unrelated regression on the panel
of the Treasuries and Agency bonds, where fails are normalized by fails in 2013.
We indicate the three breaks discussed above. The first period is September 12,
2001 going until September 23, 2008 and the second is September 24, 2008 until
February 10, 2009, followed by February 11, 2009 onwards. This means that
there are four periods: prior to 2001, break 1, break 2 and break 3. We will look
at specifications with and without lags. We also include the change in the one
month T-bill rate since the level of the interest rate effects the incentive to fail.
In a repo fail the implicit penalty is the interest that could have been earned
elsewhere, so in a low interest rate environment the penalty is low.10
     The regression results for fails to receive are shown in Table 3. The table for
fails to deliver is in the on-line Appendix. In both cases the interaction between
the GC repo spread and regime 1 is significant. Changes in the convenience
yield or the demand for liquidity appear to have driven repo fails in the period
prior to the financial crisis and during the crisis. The first regime corresponds
to the period of the scarcity of safe debt while the second regime corresponds
to the flight to quality. This is true for both fails to receive and fails to deliver.
The change in the one month T-bill rate is also significant, suggesting that the
incentive to fail is related to the level of the interest rate. Finally, the three
dummy variables for the three break regimes are not significant. This may be
due to a combination of factors. The break points may be driven by the variance,
  10
    For this reason the Treasury Market Practices Group introduced a “dynamic fails charge” to
provide an incentive for timely settlement. See Garbade, Keane, Logan Stokes and Wolgemuth
(2010).



                                             13
and the interaction terms may be absorbing this effect.11


2.4     Summary
The evidence for collateral mobility is indirect because there are no data or
limited data on rehypothecation, trading, and collateral posting for derivative
positions and for clearing and settlement. Nevertheless, the size of the securiti-
zation market prior to the crisis and the evidence above, indicate the system of
mobile collateral that had developed.


3      An Immobile Collateral System
Bolles (1902) described the U.S. National Bank Act as “ . . . the most important
measure ever passed by any government on the subject of banking.” The National
Bank Acts were passed during the U.S. Civil War; the first Act was passed in
1863 and this law was amended in 1864. The Act created a new national bank-
ing system. The Act was intended to create a demand for U.S. Treasury bonds
because without the income tax it was the only way to finance the North in the
war. The Acts established a new category of banks, national banks, which were
to coexist with state chartered banks. National banks could issue bank-specific
national bank notes by depositing eligible U.S. Treasury bonds with the U.S.
Treasury.12 In this section we examine the U.S. National Banking Era. In sub-
section 3.1 we provide a very brief background on the banking system in the era,
1863-1914. In subsection 3.2 we introduce the “bank note paradox”. We show the
  11
      In the on-line Appendix we examine the breakpoints for the absolute value of fails to deliver
minus fails to receive in the Treasury and Agency MBS repo markets. This is the variable that
measures the growth of the repo market beyond the primary dealers. The results in the on-
line Appendix show the seemingly unrelated panel regression results for the absolute value of
fails to deliver minus fails to receive in the Treasury and Agency MBS repo markets. Not
surprisingly this difference in the repo market is not driven by demands for liquidity. Instead
the market is growing for other structural reasons, e.g., the rise of large money managers, and
foreign investors (see Gorton and Metrick (2015)).
   12
      Eligible bonds were U.S. Treasury government registered bonds bearing interest in coupons
of 5% or more to the amount of at least one-third of the bank’s capital stock and not less than
$30,000. The Act of July 12, 1870 eliminated the requirement that bonds bear interest of 5%
or more. After that date eligible bonds were “of any description of bonds of the U.S. bearing
interest in cash.”


                                                14
“arbitrage profits” that allegedly existed. The analysis of the profitability of note
issuance and its relation to the convenience yield on Treasuries is in subsection
3.3. Subsection 3.4 summarizes the results of this section.


3.1    The U.S. National Banking System
During the U.S. National Banking Era banks were required to back their privately-
produced money in the form of bank-specific national bank notes with U.S. Trea-
sury bonds. One kind of money was required to back another kind of money—
narrow banking. So, there was a collateral constraint on the issuance of money
by banks. As with repo today, the interest on the bonds deposited at the US
Treasury went to the banks. With national bank notes backed by U.S. Treasuries
there was for the first time in the U.S. a uniform currency. Prior to the Acts,
banks issued individual private bank notes which traded at discounts to face
value when traded at a distance from the issuing bank. There were hundreds
of different banks’ notes, making transacting difficult. Initially, national bank
note issuance was limited to 100 percent of a bank’s paid-in capital, but this
was changed to 90 percent by the act of March 3, 1865. Also, note issuance was
limited to 90 percent of the lower of par or market value. This was changed to
100 percent by an act in 1900. See Noyes (1910), Friedman and Schwartz (1963),
and Champ (2011c) for more information on the National Banking Era.


3.2    The Bank Note Issuance Puzzle
The National Banking Era has been puzzling for economists for well over a cen-
tury. The puzzle is that there appears to have been high, allegedly sometimes
infinite, profits from issuing national bank notes—riskless arbitrage profits—but
this capacity to issue notes was never fully utilized. Friedman and Schwartz
(1963, p. 23): “. . . despite the failure to use fully the possibilities of note
issue, the published market prices of government bonds bearing the circulation
privilege were apparently always low enough to make note issue profitable . . .
The fraction of the maximum issued fluctuated with the profitability of issue, but
the fraction was throughout lower than might have been expected. We have no
explanation for this puzzle.” They go on to write: “Either bankers did not rec-

                                         15
ognize a profitable course of action simply because the net return was expressed
as a percentage of the wrong base, which is hard to accept, or we have overlooked
some costs of bank note issue that appeared large to them, which seems must
more probable” (p. 24).13
    Phillip Cagan (1963, 1965) determined whether it was profitable for banks to
issue notes by examining the following formula:

                              rb p−τ α min(p,1)
                          (
                                p−α min(p,1)
                                                   if   p > α min(p, 1)
                     r=
                              ∞                   if    p = α min(p.1)
where: r is the annual rate of return on the issuance of national bank notes; p
is the price of the bond held to back the notes (dollars), assuming a par value
of one; rb is the annualized yield to maturity on the bond held as backing; α
is the fraction of the value of a given deposit of bonds that could be issued as
notes; and τ is the annual expense in dollars of issuing α min(p, 1) in notes. The
term α min(p, 1) refers to the amount of notes that are returned to the issuing
bank by the U.S. Treasury from the deposit of a bond with price p. The variable
τ includes the tax rate on note issuance, which was $0.01 for $1 prior to 1900
and $0.005 on 2% coupon rate bonds after 1900). Also, miscellaneous costs are
included here. For example, Cagan used an estimate of these costs of 0.00625
per one-dollar deposit in government bonds.14
    Champ (2011b) gives the following example. Consider a bank in 1890 (i.e,
α=0.9) that purchased a bond for $1.10, with yield to maturity of 4 percent.
Then, the total cost of note issuance is τ = 0.01 + 0.00625
                                                       0.09
                                                            ≈ 0.01694. So, in this
case,. the rate of profit for issuing notes backed by this bond is:

                         (0.04)(1.10) − (0.01694)(0.9)
                    r≈                                 ≈ 14.375%
                                   1.10 − 0.9
       Cagan (1963) found very high profits rates for the 1870s, 20-30%. More
  13
     Champ (2011b) also cites these Friedman and Schwartz passages. Friedman and Schwartz’s
mention of “the wrong base” refers to mistaken calculations by the contemporary Comptroller
of the Currency.
  14
     The Comptroller used $62.50 for the costs associated with notes issued based on $100,000
of bonds deposited. These costs included the cost of redemption, $45; express charges, $3;
engraving plates for the notes, $7.50; and agents’ fees, $7. See Champ (2011b).



                                                  16
importantly, Cagan and Goodhart (1965) found profit rates of infinity in the
early 1900s. An infinite rate of profit occurs when α = 1 after 1900 and the bond
is selling below par. In that case, the notes the bank could issue based on using
that bond as collateral would exactly equal the price paid for the bond, so no
capital could be used and the bank could earn infinite profits.
    Cagan’s (1965) formula for calculating the arbitrage profits on note issuance
assumes that the notes issued on a bond are used to pay for that very bond.
James (1976), however, points out that as a practical matter the bank would
see an increase in deposits and would then have a choice of lending out the new
deposits directly, or purchasing bonds with the new deposits and then using the
bonds as collateral for notes; 90 percent of the bond value would be the amount
of notes that could then be lent out (until 1900 when it became 100%). James
(1976) argues that if local lending rates are high, it would be more profitable
to directly lend the new deposits and avoid losing the interest difference on the
market price and 90 percent of the par value. Suppose that the yield on the bond
is 3 percent and that the costs of note issue is 1 percent (which James takes as a
plausible cost). James use the following condition for the bank to be indifferent
between these two alternatives; the local loan rate, r, would have to solve:
    3% + 0.9r − 1% = r =⇒ 20%.(1)
    So, if rates were higher than 20 percent, the bank would not issue notes and
would just lend directly, ignoring diversification and the price of risk.
    James (1976) argues that local loan opportunities, as reflected in local loan
rates, can explain why note issuance varied across the United States, in partic-
ular Southern and Western banks issued few notes in excess of the minimum.
He regresses the percentage of bonds held in excess of bonds held for circulation
above the minimum required on a measure on the difference in a local interest
rate and r from equation (1) above. He finds effects of lending rates: “a per-
centage point decline in local interest rates leading to an increase of more than
5 percentage points in the proportion of notes issued . . . “ (p. 366). Calomiris
and Mason (2008) refined James’ work extensively by studying the cross section
of national banks in 1880, 1890, and 1900. They focus on the propensity of banks
to issue notes and find that this propensity goes down as the banks have higher
loans to total assets ratios (where Treasuries on deposit with the government

                                       17
are not counted in total assets).15 A higher loans to total assets ratio suggests
more lending opportunities and hence lower note issuance, which is what they
find. They conclude that lending opportunities varied across the country and
this accounts for some of under issuance.
    Note that when the Monetary Reform Act of 1900 was passed, national banks
received notes equal to the value of the bonds deposited with the Treasury. In
that case, the formula does not apply and there is no choice between direct
and indirect lending. But, further, the bank does not face the choice of lending
directly or depositing bonds with the Treasury and lending the notes unless it is
very costly to issue equity. As long as there are arbitrage profits on note issuance
as Cagan calculated, then banks should take advantage of it unless it is too costly
to issue equity. So, the existence of arbitrage profits suggests that either (1) local
lending rates were high prior to 1900; (2) the convenience yield was very high;
or (3) equity issuance was very costly, and these are not mutually exclusive.
    Subsequently, our focus is on the convenience yield of Treasuries and on bank
capital. We observe that banks hold Treasuries on their balance sheets, presum-
ably for risk management reasons. The ratio of Treasuries on the balance sheet
to loans and discounts varied from a high of 3.9 percent to a low of 8 bps. In
fact, when the arbitrage profits on note issuance were high, banks did respond by
reducing their on balance sheet Treasury holdings. Suppose that out of a new de-
posit of one dollar the bank wants to hold 10 cents of Treasuries on balance sheet.
The benefit to the bank from doing this is the “convenience yield,” estimated
by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), over the period 1926-2008, to
be 73 basis points. Suppose that whether lending directly or with notes, the
bank holds 10 percent of the new deposit dollar on balance sheet in the form of
Treasuries. So, 0.1*0.73 is earned in either case. Taking this into consideration
the indifference condition, ignoring reserve requirements, becomes:
    3% + 0.9(1 − 0.1)r − 1% = (1 − 0.1)r ⇒ 22.22%.
    The loan rate rises because less is lent out.
    Another explanation for the persistence of the arbitrage opportunity concerns
  15
    Banks had to hold a minimum amount of Treasuries with the government as a percentage
of paid in capital and the banks issued notes against this minimum. Calomiris and Mason
(2008), the define the “propensity to issue” of a bank as: (Actual Notes – Minimum Required
Issuance)/(Maximum Permissible Notes – Minimum Required Issuance).

                                            18
costs of issuance, in particular there may be costs of note redemptions (on this
there are a number of papers; see the citations in Calomiris and Mason (2008)).
Calomiris and Mason (2008) are skeptical of this argument because of the low
volume of redemptions, once worn out notes and the notes of insolvent banks are
subtracted.
    In this paper, we do not dispute any of the previous explanations, and our
explanation is not mutually exclusive. We argue that the persistence of the
arbitrage opportunity can be partially explained by the convenience yield on
Treasuries and limits to arbitrage in the form of expensive bank capital. The issue
of a convenience yield seems very relevant since banks held Treasuries on their
balance sheets when they could have simply deposited them with the Treasury.
And there is no choice between loan opportunities and profitable note issuance
if banks can simply issue new equity. Neither of these two factors have been
examined before. Since we do not observe the convenience yield (which also may
have varied regionally) or the cost of bank equity, we can only look at the indirect
measure of the arbitrage profits as calculated by Cagan. We have a limited goal:
to show that the arbitrage profits are, indeed, related to the convenience yield
(and bank capital, but we have no measures or proxies for bank capital).
    One way for new bank equity to enter the system is via bank entry, a point
raised by Hetherington (1990). Hetherington (1990) points out that while note
circulation fell 50 percent from $360 million in 1882 to $171 million in 1891, the
number of national banks doubled. Hetherington (1990) assigns major impor-
tance to two regulatory changes during the National Banking Era. The Act of
July, 23 1882 caused note issuance to decline. The act reduced the minimum
required bond holdings to 25 percent of capital with a ceiling of $50,000. Be-
cause bonds were at a premium, banks made large capital gains by selling bonds
and retiring notes. The lower minimum also made it easier for banks to enter.
Most of the entry occurred in the South, the Midwest and the Pacific regions.
James (1976) argues that the rate of returns on loans was very high in the South
and West, explaining the low issuance of national bank notes in these regions.
Calomiris and Mason (2008) find that entrants had a low propensity to issue
notes. Existing banks, particularly the very large banks in the East could have
raised capital. But, Calomiris and Mason (2008) say that “banks seemed loath

                                        19
to increase capital in order to boost note issuance. . . “ (p. 346).
    Finally, another important issue concerns the fact that the above profit cal-
culations are not marginal calculations, but average profits. We will argue that
this distinction is particularly important for the post-1900 period.
    Figure 5 shows our calculation of the profit series. We used Champ’s more
accurate representation of the costs of note issuance than the Comptroller of the
Currency.16 We also filled in all the bond prices that were missing from a Bruce
Champ spreadsheet (provided to us by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland).
We also made further adjustments discussed below.
    Why didn’t banks take advantage of this arbitrage opportunity?17 After all,
banks held U.S. Treasury bonds on their balance sheets (i.e., not including Trea-
suries held to back their notes). See Figure 4.Or, banks could have raised capital
and used this to buy bonds for collateral for notes. Prior explanations do not
mention that there may be a convenience yield associated with U.S. Treasuries.
This is, however, suggested by the work of Duffee (1996) and Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) who look at data over the period 1926-2008, and
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2013) who analyze the period 1914-2011.
Figure 4, showing that national banks held U.S. Treasuries on their balance
sheets (i.e., the ratio of U.S. government bonds not on deposit at the Treasury
to bank loans and discounts) suggests, by revealed preference, that there was a
convenience yield associated with Treasuries during the National Banking Era.
    At the time, bankers also recognized the convenience yield on Treasuries. For
example, The Financier, April 7, 1902, Volume LXXIX (The Financier Com-
pany): “. . . banks have always regarded high class bonds as an offset, so
to speak, for risks incurred in discounts yielding a higher rate of interest. In
this connection we cannot do better than to quote from a very valuable paper
read by A.M. Peabody, of St. Paul, before the St. Paul Bank Clerks’ Associa-
tion, in which this feature is brought prominently forward. After explaining the
  16
     Based on a spreadsheet of Bruce Champ, provided by the Federal Reserve Bank if Cleve-
land.
  17
     There is a large literature on the underissuance puzzle that we hae not discussed, e.g. Bell
(1912), Cagan (1965), Goodhart (1965), Cagan and Schwartz (1991), Duggar and Rost (1969),
Champ, Wallace and Weber (1992), and Wallace and Zhu (2004). None of these explanation
are mutually exclusive with those we have discussed.



                                               20
classification of such investments, Mr. Peabody says: ’They have ever proved
themselves the safeguards for banks under pressure of financial panics in times
of great stringency, and when it would be impossible to borrow money on any
form of security, railroad bonds with government bonds, are alone available as
security for money’ (p. 1258). And, The Bond Buyers’ Dictionary (1907): “. . .
it is possible to say that there is a better market in moments of extreme panic for
the Government issues than there is for even the best class railroad bonds. There
will not be by any means [be] the same volume of liquidation. For every dollar
of Government bonds thrown into a panic market there will be $100 of railroad
bonds. . . . Government bonds are undoubtedly the safest of all securities. . .
“ (p. 73).
     But, even if banks wanted to keep these Treasuries on their balance sheets,
why didn’t they raise bank capital to buy Treasuries to back note issuance. That
they did not suggests that bank capital was costly or that banks could not find
the bonds. We will argue that bankers did not take advantage of opportunity
to issue more national bank notes because it was not profitable to do so. We
will show that the implicit profit from not issuing notes is driven by measures of
convenience yield.
     We first return to the calculation of the profit rate from note issuance. As
mentioned above, we filled in the missing bonds in Champ’s original spreadsheet
used for calculating the profit rate to note issuance.18 We next eliminated bonds
that would have been called in the next six months, since then the notes backed
by these bonds would have to have been returned, or new bonds would have to
have been purchased.19
     However, there is another issue, namely that it is the marginal profit rates
that are relevant not the average rate of profit. This is important because in the
early 1900s, and possibly before that. U.S. government bonds were hard to find.
And, even when banks could find bonds, they had to reverse repo in the bonds
  18
     The missing bond prices/amounts were mostly during 1875-1879 plus one bond maturing
in 1896. This did not affect the potentially infinite profits, but just added more observations
in the earlier period.
  19
     Eliminating these bonds removed some spikes in the profit series, one of which was during
the period of high profits (1907). But otherwise it has no significant effect on the post-1902
series.



                                              21
n at a high cost. Contemporary observers continually wrote about this shortage
of safe debt. For example, Morris (1912): “Various reasons have been assigned
for the decline in circulation which culminated in 1891, the most probable being
the growing scarcity of U.S. bonds and their relatively high premium. It is also
alleged that improved banking facilities, allowing a more extensive use of checks,
reduced the demand for currency” (p. 492). Morris dates the start of the problem
as 1891. It is also interesting that Morris points out that the cost of note issuance
caused a further development of demand deposits, the shadow banking system
of its time.
    Borrowing bonds was costly. Francis B. Sears, vice president of the National
Shawmut Bank of Boston, Mass. (1907-08): “There are two classes of banks—
those outside of the large cities, that can get bonds only by buying them, and a
few banks in a few large cities that can borrow them. I would like to add that
insurance companies and savings banks are large bondholders, and undoubtedly
arrangements can be made with them to get bonds for some large banks. The
rate is 1 12 to 2 percent for borrowing bonds in that way” (p. 91). Bankers Mag-
azine (March 1908): “Bond borrowings by the national banks have become an
important feature of banking in recent years. Where a bank wishes to increase
its circulation, or to procure public deposits, and does not happen to have the
bonds which must be pledged with the Treasury, and finding the market price of
bonds too high to make the transaction profitable if the bonds must be bought,
resort is had to borrowing. Bond dealers, savings banks or private holders may
have ‘Governments’ which they are willing to lend to national banks for a con-
sideration” (p. 321).20 The Rand-McNally Bankers’ Monthly (September, 1902)
quoting “a banker”: “There is not much profit in issuing circulation on govern-
ment bonds, but some of the larger banks are willing to take out notes, if they
can borrow bonds for that purpose from their friends—not being disposed to buy
them for temporary use. . . . The real trouble is to find the bonds. Many of
them are held by institutions and estates, who cannot legally loan the bonds to
National Banks, and as their prices are too high to justify any large purchases
of bonds by banks for the purpose of taking out circulation. . .”(p. 157-158).
  20
     Government deposits in national banks had to be backed by bonds also, but there was a
slightly larger list of eligible bonds for this purpose.


                                           22
Gannon (1908), speaking of Treasury bonds: “. . . such bonds are not easy to
buy in quantity, and the greater part of the recent expansion, some $80,000,000
since the panic [of 1907], was accomplished by borrowing bonds”(p. 338)
    The situation was summarized by The Financial Encyclopedia (1911, p. 119):

     When the banks borrow, either to secure banknote circulation or
     Government deposits, they make private arrangements with the ac-
     tual owners of the bonds, including insurance companies, for the use
     of these securities. The rates banks pay vary, but in general lenders of
     bonds secure a very substantial profit from this employment of them,
     in addition to the interest which the bonds themselves carry.
     Borrowed bonds were first itemized separately in the national banks’
     returns under the Comptroller’s call of November 25, 1902. At that
     time the total ‘borrowed bonds’ reported by national banks of the
     whole country were $39,254,256 of which New York banks were cred-
     ited with $21,199,000. In the return of December 3, 1907, the banks
     of the United States reported bonds of $166,073,021, more than half,
     or $88,274,330, being held by the forty national banks of this [New
     York] city. These are by far the largest holdings ever reported by New
     York banks.
     When a bank borrows Government, municipal, or other bonds, from
     an insurance company, for instance, which are pledged as security for
     public (Treasury) deposits, it either gives the lender a check for the
     face value, with a contract stipulating to buy back the bonds at a
     certain price, or the bank gives the lender other collateral as security
     for the loan.
     In the case of life insurance companies, the collateral offered in ex-
     change for the bonds has often represented bonds in which the lending
     corporations are allowed to invest, but which were not in the so-called
     ‘savings bank list,’ and for that reason were not eligible as security for
     public deposits. While one or two of the life companies have never
     consented to lend their bonds, many others, as well as various fire
     insurance companies, have done so, on the theory that it was a good

                                        23
       business transaction, since it yielded them 1 or 1 12 % in addition to
       the regular interest return.

    The scarcity of bonds meant that the marginal cost of conducting the “arbi-
trage” was higher than the average cost. While the Comptroller started publish-
ing data on bank bond borrowings in 1902, it seems that this problem started
earlier. At a meeting of the American Economic Association held in Cleveland,
Ohio in December 1897, it was voted to appoint a committee of five economists
to consider and report on currency reform in the United States.21 They turned
in a report in December 1898. One point they made was this:“Now it is common-
place that our bank circulation is not a very profitable one.” See The Bankers’
Magazine, February 1899, p.221.
    Note issuance profit series that are the average rate of profit are misleading.
To adjust the profit calculations to reflect the scarcity and associated high cost
of reversing in bonds, we set α in the above calculation of the profit rate to 0.99
instead of 1. Now, there are no instances of infinite profits. We discuss below
why this does not greatly affect regression results. Figure 5 shows the series of
profit rates in this case.
    There is also the issue of the cost of bank capital. This cost is hard to quan-
tify, as it is today. Bank stock during this period was illiquid, trading on the
curb market. And there is some evidence that it was held in blocks by insiders.
See Gorton (2013). There is no data on bank stock issuance. Contemporaries
described the return to bank stock as low, partly due to double liability.22 For
example, Frank Mortimer, cashier of the First National Bank, Berkeley. Ca.; in
an address delivered before the San Francisco Chapter of the American Institute
of Banking, American Institute of Banking Bulletin “When one takes into consid-
eration the risk involved, the capital invested, and the double liability attached
to stockholders in national banks, the profit from an investment in bank stock
is small, indeed, when compared to the profit accruing from other lines of busi-
ness.” (p. 236; reprinted in the Journal of the American Bankers Association,
  21
     The economists were a very distinguished group: F.M. Tayor, University of Michigan; F.W.
Taussig, Harvard; J.W. Jenks, Cornell; Sidney Sherwood, Johns Hopkins; and David Kinley,
University of Illinois.
  22
     On double liability see Macey and Miller (1992) and Grossman (2001).


                                             24
vol. 6, July 1913-June 1914.).


3.3    The Convenience Yield on Treasuries and the Cost of
       Bank Capital
In this section we turn to an analysis of the rate of profit on note issuance.
We show that the rate of profit on note issuance is highly related to the conve-
nience yield on Treasuries. We measure convenience yield in two complementary
ways. First, we use the supply of Treasuries divided by GDP. Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) show that this measure strongly drives the conve-
nience yield on Treasuries from 1926-present. When the supply of those assets
is low, that is safe assets are relatively scarce, then the convenience yield for
safe assets increases. Therefore, Treasury supply should be negatively related
to the convenience yield. We take two measures of Treasury supply: (US gov-
ernment debt)/GDP (as in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)), and
(available Treasuries)/GDP, where available Treasuries excludes those already
held to back bank note issuance and thus captures the remaining supply. Sec-
ond, we also measure the convenience yield as the spread between high grade
municipal bonds from New England and Treasuries. Municipal bond yields are
from Banking and Monetary Statistics (1976).
    Table 4 gives the results of a regression of issuance profits on these measures of
the convenience yield from 1880-1913. The results match our intuition. The profit
measure is high exactly when the convenience yield to Treasuries is large. We find
that a 1% increase in the muni spread is associated with a 15% increase in average
profit. As demand for Treasuries increases, the apparent profits also increase. As
the supply of available Treasuries decreases, profits also increase. Both the supply
variables and the muni spread are highly significant independently. However, we
would suspect that they likely measure similar economic forces though each is
measured with noise. Consistent with this, when we include both the supply of
Treasuries and muni spread together the coefficients on each decrease in absolute
value though they remain statistically significant. This suggests that both are
imperfect but overlapping measures of the convenience yield.
    We show the results when we use the average profit series as well as the log


                                         25
average profit series. Recall that profit is given by rbp−α  p−τ α min(p,1)
                                                                 min(p,1)
                                                                            . A possible
concern is that the profit series is highly non-linear due to the denominator
becoming small later in the sample. To mitigate this concern, we also report the
results using log profits, which largely alleviates the strong non-linearity in the
denominator (see Figure 5 which plots profits on a log scale). Our results do not
change drastically with the log transformation, highlighting that non-linearities
in the latter half of the sample aren’t driving the result. In unreported results
we also obtain the same basic findings for alternative values of α. Finally, in the
Appendix, we show the results when including dummies for pre and post 1900,
as the issue with the choice of α is only relevant after 1900. The results, given in
Appendix Table 6, show broadly the same pattern in both periods with similar
signs, though magnitudes are larger after 1900.
    All variables in this regression are persistent which can potentially confound
inference. We deal with this in several ways. First, in our main specifications
we estimate standard errors using Newey-West with 10 year lags (specifically,
we use 10 lags for annual data and 40 lags for quarterly data). Second, we
run GLS assuming the error term follows an AR(1). This suggests transforming
both our x and y variables by 1 − ρL where ρ is the error auto-correlation and
L is a lag operator. We find ρ by running OLS as in specification (4) in the
Table and computing the sample auto-correlation of the residuals. This does
not substantially change the point estimates or inference in terms of what is
statically significant. As mentioned by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2012), however, coefficients do decrease somewhat in absolute value. A likely
reason is that these are noisy measures of convenience yield and measurement
error will become more pronounced in the transformed data. This follows from
the fact that when x is persistent the variance of x will be dominated by low
frequency components. In contrast, in the transformed data measurement error
likely accounts for more of the variance of the right hand side variable, resulting
in a larger degree of attenuation bias.
    Finally, while the results appear fairly strong, we also acknowledge that we are
working with a fairly small subsample of data which is a limitation of our analysis.
Higher frequency data (e.g., monthly data on debt/GDP) won’t be particularly
helpful here in overcoming the fairly small sample because the variables are highly

                                          26
persistent.
    We hypothesize that a third variable – the cost of capital for banks – likely
plays a role in explaining the profits on note issuance as well. If the cost of raising
capital for banks is high, then banks would find it costly to take advance of note
issuance and may leave a puzzlingly large profit on the table. For this conjecture,
we can only offer suggestive evidence from Figure 5 which plots the profit series
along with NBER recession bars. It is likely that the cost of raising capital
for banks increases during recessions, and especially at the onset of recessions,
and these are times when we do in fact see increases in the profit series. Thus,
there is some suggestive evidence of the cost of capital for banks being positively
associated with the profits on note issuance as well.
    Taken together, our results indicate that the profits to note issuance fluctuate
with the convenience yield on Treasuries, and our evidence is consistent with the
idea that profits are related to the cost of bank capital.


3.4    The Rise of Demand Deposits
When Treasuries have a convenience yield, and short-term bank debt must be
backed by Treasuries, there is a tradeoff between the two types of money. More
short-term debt means fewer Treasuries for alternative uses. This tradeoff is com-
mon to the two systems. We saw this in the National Banking Era. The tradeoff
is evident in the data. Noyes (1910): “A heavy decrease in the outstanding public
debt would naturally, at some point, cause a reduction in the bank-note circu-
lation, independently of other influences. A large increase in the government
debt would necessarily cause an increase in the supply of bank notes” (p. 4).
Noyes then traces this out over the National Banking Era. It is the same state-
ment that was formalized by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012, 2015)
for the modern era. The convenience yield is negatively related to Treasuries
(divided by GDP) outstanding.
    One way out of this tradeoff, if it is binding, is to privately produce another
kind of debt. In the recent period this was ABS and MBS, which could be used
in place of Treasuries to back repo, ABCP, and MMF. In the National Banking
Era, it was demand deposits using portfolios of loans as the backing. During the


                                          27
National Banking Era, Treasuries outstanding to GDP fell secularly (see Figure
4, panel C). And, from the start of the National Banking System, the ratio of
bank notes to demand deposits fell, from just over 60 percent in the early part
of 1865 to 14 percent by 1909, as shown in Figure 6. Demand deposits were
privately-produced safe debt or money, the shadow banking system of its time.
So, while the immobile collateral system ended bank runs on bank notes, there
were bank runs on demand deposits, another form of bank money. The biggest
problem of the National Banking Era was that there were banking panics.
    It is difficult to prove causally that demand deposits grew relative to bank
notes because of collateral requirements. However, the growth in deposits does
line up remarkably well with the decline in Treasury supply and hence the supply
of safe assets that could be used to back notes. This accords with the evidence
in Krishnamurthy Vissing-Jorgensen (2012b) that the supply of Treasury crowds
out privately produced bank debt. The ratio of national bank notes to demand
deposits fell from over 60% to less than 20% over the period and this ratio co-
moves strikingly with the debt to GDP ratio as shown in Figure 6. The correlation
of the ratio of notes to deposits with the supply of Treasuries to GDP is 0.96.
As the supply of Treasuries falls over this period, deposits grow.
    We provide several robustness checks for this result. A potential concern is
just that deposits happened to be trending upwards over this time while US
debt to GDP is secularly falling. We address this in two ways. First, we run
these regressions in changes rather than in levels. Using one year changes the
correlation falls to 0.22, using two year changes it increases to 0.58 and using three
year changes it becomes 0.69. By using changes, we remove the secular time trend
in both series. However, when using shorter horizon changes the results are likely
much more affected by measurement error and we are also making an implicit
assumption about how quickly deposit growth endogenously responds to scarcity
of Treasuries. Thus, more moderate or longer horizons may give more reasonable
estimates, though our results indicate that the positive correlation remains for
changes rather than levels.
    Next, the trend in deposits that we show might be simply a global trend –
deposits might be rising in all countries for reasons outside of US policy. To
address this, we compute deposits to GDP across 14 developed economies used

                                         28
in Schularick and Taylor (2014). We then regress the ratio of deposits to GDP
in the United States on the equal weighted average of the deposits to GDP ratio
in all other countries. The coefficient is 1.7, showing that the US had deposits
grow much faster over this time period than in other countries. This makes it
more plausible that the increase in deposits was due to US specific factors rather
than simply a global trend. Taken together, the data suggests that the scarcity
of Treasuries played an important role in the growth of deposits over this period.


4    Conclusion
The Lucas critique seems to be largely ignored by bank regulators making new
policy for the simple reason that the requisite general equilibrium models do not
exist. Proposed new policies can, however, be evaluated with economic history.
Economic history provides a laboratory to study large, important, policy changes,
like the LCR. When examining the National Banking Era to evaluate the LCR
we find a negative experience that does not bode well for the LCR.
    Of course, the National Banking System is not exactly like the LCR. There
are obvious differences. But, like the National Banking Era, the logic of the LCR
is that if short-term debt is backed by Treasuries, then bank runs will be avoided.
Fundamentally the two systems enforce a correspondence between two types of
debt instruments, each with a convenience yield–narrow banking. The input for
making one kind of money, bank notes or money market instruments, is required
to be Treasuries. Such a system is fragile because by forcing two kinds of money
together it is likely that there will be a shortage of one kind of money, leading
to its private production elsewhere, which creates fragility in the system.
    If there were enough Treasuries (high-quality liquid assets) to meet the global
demand for safe debt and to back short-term bank debt, then the LCR and
related immobile collateral requirements would not be a problem. One potential
argument is that in the National Banking Era the supply of Treasuries was low
(debt to GDP was in the range of 10-30%) so that scarcity was more of an
issue in that period then it is today where the supply of government debt is
much larger. However, this ignores that the demand for safe US government
debt now is also global, which can add to issues of scarcity. The likelihood

                                        29
of such a satiation of the global economy with Treasuries today seems remote.
Gorton, Lewellen and Metrick (2012) show that the sum of U.S. government debt
outstanding and privately-produced safe debt outstanding has been 32 percent
of total assets in the U.S. since 1952. They show further that there has never
remotely been enough U.S. Treasuries to make up the 32 percent and given the
debt burden of issuing enough to accomplish that, there is never likely to be
enough. Furthermore, Treasuries outstanding is a function of fiscal policy not a
function of the demands for collateral.
    Demand deposits were conceptually misunderstood during the National Bank-
ing Era, although it was clear that demand deposits were the issue in banking
panics. This highlights that the system of immobile collateral in the National
Banking Era was not successful in mitigating panics and that it likely contributed
to the growth of other forms of bank debt.




                                       30
References
Bai, Jushan (2010), “Common Breaks in Means and Variances for Panel Data,”
Journal of Econometrics 157, 78-92.

Baltimore Plan (1894), American Banking Association, Proceedings.

Bank for International Settlements (BIS), Bank Commitee on Banking Supervi-
sion (2013), “Basel III: The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Liquidity Risk Moni-
toring Tools.”

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank for International Settlements
(2011), “Basel III Framework for Liquidity–Frequently Asked Questions.”

Bell, Spurgeon (1912), “Profit on National Bank Notes,” American Economic
Review 2, p. 38-60.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2007), “Global Imbalances: Recent Developments and
Prospects,” speech delivered at the Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, Germany,
September 11.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2005), “The Global Savings Glut and the U.S. Current Ac-
count Deficit,” speech delivered at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association
of Economists, Richmond, Va., March 10.

Bernanke, Ben S., Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco and Steve Kamin
(2011), “International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United
States, 2003-2007,” Banque de France Financial Stability Review (February), 13–
26.

Bernstein, Asaf, Eric Hughson and Marc Weidenmier (2015), Counterparty Risk
and the Establishment of the New York Stock Exchange,” working paper.

Bertaut, Carol, L.P. DeMarco, S. Kamin and R. Tryon (2012), “ABS Inflows
to the United States ant the Global Financial Crisis,” Journal of International
Economics 88, 219-234.



                                       31
Bertaut, Carol, Alexandra Tabova and Vivian Wong (2014), “The Replacement
of Safe Assets: Evidence from the U.S. Bond Portfolio,” Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion papers, No. 1123.

Bluedorn, John and Haelim Park (2016), “Stopping Contagion with Bailouts:
Microevidence from Pennsylvania Bank Networks during the Panic of 1884,”
Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976), Banking and Monetary
Statistics.

Bolles, Albert (1902), “Responsibility of the National Bank in the Present Crisis,”
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 20, 1-18.

Bond Buyers’ Dictionary, The (1907), edited by S.A. Nelson, (S.A. Nelson &
Co.; New York).

Bordo, Michael and Arunima Sinha (2015), “A Lesson from the Great Depression
that the Fed Might have Learned: A Comparison of the 1932 Open Market
Purchases with Quantitative Easing,” working paper.

Caballero, Ricardo (2010), “The ’Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis,”
NBER Working Paper 15636.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Emmanuel Farhi (2014), “The Safety Trap,” NBER
Working Paper No. 20652.

Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2009), “Global Imbalances and
Financial Fragility,” American Economic Review: papers & Proceedings 99, 584-
588.

Cagan, Phillip (1963), “The First Fifty Years of the National Banking System,”
in Banking and Monetary Studies, edited by Deane Carson, 15-42 (Richard D.
Irwin; Homewood, IL).

Cagan, Phillip (1965), Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of
Money, 1875-1960 (NBER; New York).


                                        32
Cagan, Phillip and Anna J. Schwartz (1991), “The National Bank Note Puzzle
Reinterpreted,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 23, 293-307

Calomiris, Charles and Joseph Mason (2008), “Resolving the Puzzle of the Un-
derissuance of National Bank Notes,” Explorations in Economic History 45, 327-
355.

Carlisle, John (1894), Report of the Committee on Banking and Currency To-
gether with Hearings, House of Representatives, 8149, 53rd Congress, 3rd Ses-
sion.

Carlson, Mark and Jonathan Rose (2014), ”Can a Bank Run Be Stopped? Gov-
ernment Guarantees and the Run on Continental Illinois,” Federal Reserve Board,
working paper.

Champ, Bruce (2011a), “The National Banking System: The Empirical Evi-
dence,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Working Paper 07-19R.

Champ, Bruce (2011b), “The National Banking System: The National Bank
Note Puzzle,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Working Paper 07-22R.

Champ, Bruce (2011c), “The National Banking System: A Brief History,” Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Working Paper 07-23R.

Champ, Bruce, Neil Wallace, and Warren Weber (1992), “Resolving the National
Bank Note Paradox,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review
(Spring), 13-21.

Donaldson, Dave and Richard Hornbeck (2015), “Railroads and American Eco-
nomic Growth: A ‘Market Access’ Approach,” University of Chicago Booth work-
ing paper.

Duffee, Gregory (1996), “Idiosyncratic Variations of Tresury Bills,” Journal of
Finance 51, 527-551.

Duffie, Darrell, Martin Scheicher and Guillaume Vuillemey (2014), “Central
Clearing and Collateral Demand,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcom-
ing.

                                      33
Duggar, Jan Warren and Ronald Rost (1969), “National Bank Note Redemption
and Treasury Cash,” Journal of Economic History 29, 512-520.

Dunbar, Charles (1887), “Deposits as Currency,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
1, 401-419.

Eckels, James (1894a), Report of the Committee on Banking and Currency To-
gether with Hearings, House of Representatives 8149, 53rd Congress, 3rd Session.

Eckels, James (1894b), Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency, 3rd
Session, 53rd Congress, Dec. 3, Government Printing Office, Washington DC.

Fender, Ingo and Ulf Lewrick (2013), “Mind the Gap? Sources and Implica-
tions of Supply-Demand Imbalances in Collateral Asset Markets,” BIS Quarterly
Review, September 2013, 67-81.

Fisher, Willard (1895), “Money and Credit paper in the Modern Market,” Jour-
nal of Political Economy 3, 391-413.

Fleming, Michael and Kenneth Garbade (2002), “When the Back Office Moved to
the Front Burner: Settlement Fails in the Treasury Market after 9/11,” FRBNY
Economic Policy Review (November), 35-57.

Fogel, Robert (1964), Railroads and American Economic Growth (Johns Hopkins
University Press).

Foley-Fisher, Nathan and Jonathan McLaughlin (2014), “Sovereign Debt Guar-
antees and Default: Lessons from the UK and Ireland, 1920-1938,” Federal Re-
serve Board, working paper.

Friedman, Milton and Anna Scwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United
States (Princeton University Press).

Garbade, Kenneth and Michael Fleming (2005), “Explaining Settlement Fails,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance,
vol. 11, no. 9 (September).



                                      34
Garbade, Kenneth, Frank Keaane, Lorie Logan, Amanda Stokes and Jennifer
Wolgemuth (2010), “The Introduction of the TMPG Fails Charge for U.S. Trea-
sury Securities,” FRBNY Economic Policy Review (October), 45-71.

Goodhart, Charles A. E. (1965), “Profit on National Bank Notes, 1900-1913,”
Journal of Political Economy 73, 516-522.

Gorton, Gary (2013), “The Development of Opacity in U.S. Banking,” Yale Jour-
nal of Regulation, forthcoming.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2015), ”Who Ran on Repo,” Yale working
paper.

Gorton, Gary, Stefan Lewellen, and Andrew Metrick (2012), “The Safe-Asset
Share,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 102, 101-106.

Grossman, Richard (2001), “Double Liability and Bank Risk Taking,” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 33(2), 143-159.

Hachem, Kinda Cheryl and Zheng Michael Song (2015), “The Rise of China’s
Shadow Banking System,” University of Chicago, working paper.

Hammond, Bray (1957), Banks and Politics in America from the Revolution to
the Civil War (Princeton University Press).

Heller, Daniel and Nicholas Vause (2012), “Collateral Requirements for Manda-
tory Central Clearing of Over-the-Counter Derivatives,” BIS Working Papers No.
373.

Indianapolis Monetary Commission (1920), Report of the Monetary Commission
of the Indianapolis Convention (Hollenbeck Press; Indianapolis).

James, John A. (1976), “The Conundrum of the Low Issue of National Bank
Notes,” Journal of Political Economy 84, 359-368.

Kinley, David (1910), The Use of Credit Instruments in Payments in the United
States (National Monetary Commission; Washington D.C.).



                                     35
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2012a), “The Aggregate
Demand for Treasury Debt,” Journal of Political Economy 120, 233-267.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), “Short-term Debt
and Financial Crisis: What can we learn from U.S. Treasury Supply,” Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming..

Kuehlwein, Michael (1992), “The National Bank Note Controversy Reexamined,”
Journal of Money Credit and Banking 24, 111-126.

Laughlin, Lawrence (1920), Banking Progress (Charles Scribners; New York).

Lucas, Robert (1976), “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” in K.
Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds., The Philips Curve and Labor Markets, Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 1 (Elsevier; New York), 19-46.

Macaulay, Frederick (1958), The Movements of Interest Rates, Bond Yields and
Stock Prices in the United States Since 1856 (National Bureau of Economic
Research; New York, NY).

Macey, Jonathan and Geoffrey Miller (1992), “Double Liability of Bank Share-
holders: History and Implications,” Wake Forest Law Review 27, 31-62.

Maggiori, Matteo (2013), “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing,
and Reserve Currencies,” Harvard University, working paper.

Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1989), “Industrialization
and the Big Push,” Journal of Political Economy 97, 1003-1026.

Noyes, Alexander (1910), A History of the National Bank Currency, National
Monetary Commission (Government Printing Office; Washington D.C.

Rostow, Walt Whitman (1960), The Stages of Economic Growth (Cambridge
University Press).

Sidanius, Che and Filip Zikes (2012), “OTC Derivatives Reform and Collateral
Demand Impact,” Bank of England, Financial Stability Paper No. 18.



                                      36
Singh, Manmohan (2011), “Velocity of Pledged Collateral,” IMF Working Paper
WP/11/256.

Singh, Manmohan (2014),, Collateral and Financial Plumbing (Risk Books).

Swisher, Scott (2014), “Reassessing Railroads and Growth: Accounting for
Transport Network Externality,” University of Wisconsin working paper.

Singh, Manmohan and James Aitken (2010), “The (sizeable) Role of Rehypoth-
ecation in the Shadow Banking System,” IMF Working Paper WP/10/172.

Taylor, F. M. (1898), “The Final Report of the Indianapolis Monetary Commis-
sion,” Journal of Political Economy 6, 293-322.

Treasury Market Practices Group (2011), “Understanding Settlement Fails in
Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities.”

Vickery, James and Joshua Wright (2013), “TBA Trading and Liquidity in the
Agency MBS Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy
Review (May), 1-18.

Wallace, Neil and Tao Zhu (2007), “Float on a Note,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 54, 229-246.

West, Robert Craig (1974), Banking Reform and the Federal Reserve, 1863-1923
(Cornell University Press; Ithaca, NY and London).

Wicker, Elmus (2005), The Great Debate in Banking Reform: Nelson Aldrich
and the Origins of the Fed (Ohio State University Press; Columbus, OH).

Wicker, Elmus (1966), Federal Reserve Monetary Policy 1917-1933 (Random
House:New York).

Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundation of a Theory of Mon-
etary Policy (Princeton University Press).


5    Tables and Figures

                                     37
Table 1: We present summary statistics on fails and rehypothecation. Sources:
Panels A & B, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Panel C, ISDA.

                                 Panel A: Fails, $ Millions
                      Fail to Receive                                 Fail to Deliver
                1990-99        2000-07                        1990-99         2000-07
 Mean            31,676        154,600                         11,812         122,363
 Std Dev         3,771          6,372                          4,105          163,564


                   Panel B: Receive fails minus deliver fails, $ Millions
                Treasuries                   Agencies                         MBS
           1990-99 2000-07              1990-99 2000-07                 1990-99 2000-07
 Mean      5,169     16,624             -123      338                   207     -8,073
 Std Dev   3,947     18,268             739       3,696                 2,615   22,283


  Panel C: Amount of collateral received eligible vs actually rehypothecated (12/31/2013)
                                               Treasuries                      Other
     Total Received ($ Millions)                179,366                       123,915
     Eligible for Rehypothecation                 85%                          55%
       Actually Rehypothecated                    55%                          30%




                                      38
Table 2: We report breakpoints for our fails data panel for both failures to receive
and deliver along with 95% confidence intervals. The methodology for finding
breaks in panels follows Bai (2010).

                      Panel A: Treasury and Agency Bonds
                       Break Date      Lower Bound     Upper Bound
     First Break       12-Sep-01       2-May-01        16-Jan-02
     Second Break      24-Sep-08       11-Jun-08       31-Dec-08
     Third Break       11-Feb-09       14-Jan-09       4-Mar-09

                             Panel B: Agency MBS
                       Break Date      Lower Bound           Upper Bound
     First Break       16-Oct-02       18-Sep-02             6-Nov-02
     Second Break      16-Sep-09       26-Aug-09             30-Sep-09
     Third Break       28-Dec-11       23-Nov-11             25-Jan-12




                                        39
Table 3: We run seemingly unrelated regressions of Treasury and Agency fails to
receive.
                                  ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec
 GC Repo-1m T-bill                 6.963∗∗∗       0.695        7.303∗∗∗       0.640        7.509∗∗∗       0.620
                                    (5.57)        (0.41)        (5.78)        (0.38)        (5.91)        (0.36)

 L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                           2.609∗        0.818         2.951∗        0.648
                                                                (2.07)        (0.48)        (2.31)        (0.38)

 L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                                                       2.495∗        0.316
                                                                                            (1.96)        (0.19)

 GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                     13.35∗∗∗                    13.96∗∗∗                    13.35∗∗∗
                                                  (5.14)                      (5.26)                      (5.03)

 L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                               2.492                       1.894
                                                                              (0.95)                      (0.71)

 L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                                                           -2.164
                                                                                                          (-0.82)

 GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                     39.57∗∗∗                    45.66∗∗∗                    44.08∗∗∗
                                                  (7.36)                      (8.46)                      (8.20)

 L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                              33.27∗∗∗                    37.98∗∗∗
                                                                              (6.55)                      (7.46)

 L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                                                          32.26∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (6.43)

 GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                      -1.485                      -1.878                      -1.185
                                                  (-0.13)                     (-0.16)                     (-0.10)

 L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                               4.103                       4.818
                                                                              (0.36)                      (0.41)

 L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                                                           3.120
                                                                                                          (0.27)

 Break 1 (9/2001-9/2008)                          -8.852                      -8.269                      -6.430
                                                  (-0.23)                     (-0.21)                     (-0.17)

 Break 2 (9/2008-2/2009)                          75.43                       153.1                       193.5
                                                  (0.57)                      (1.16)                      (1.48)

 Break 3 (2/2009)                                 11.00                       9.994                       7.266
                                                  (0.26)                      (0.24)                      (0.17)

 D. 1m T-Bill                                    -13.08∗∗∗                   -11.39∗∗∗                   -9.288∗∗∗
                                                  (-6.41)                     (-5.53)                     (-4.48)

 Constant                           0.879         -11.81        1.104         -10.05        1.092         -7.817
                                    (0.05)        (-0.48)       (0.07)        (-0.41)       (0.06)        (-0.32)
 Observations                        2398          2398          2386          2386          2374          2374
 R2                                 0.013          0.055        0.015          0.076        0.016          0.095
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                                40
Table 4: We run regressions of profits on two measures of the convenience yield:
Treasury supply and the Municipal bond - Treasury spread. We measure Trea-
sury supply as either debt / GDP or Treasuries available / GDP. Treasury supply
variables are annual which reduces the number of observations. The muni spread
is quarterly. T-stats are Newey-West with 10 lags for annual regressions and
40 lags for quarterly regressions. The column “GLS” assumes errors follow an
AR(1) and hence transforms the x and y variables by 1 − ρL where ρ is the
autocorrelation of the error term in (4) using OLS and L is a lag operator.

             Profit on Convenience Yield, 1880-1913
                       y t = a + b × xt + εt

                       Panel A: y =profit
                                                           GLS
                      (1)       (2)       (3)    (4)       (5)
    ln(Debt/GDP)      -43.4
                      [-2.05]
    ln(Avail/GDP)               -31.8            -24.4     -19.3
                                [-3.51]          [-4.03]   [-4.33]
    Muni spread                           54.5   14.9      18.3
                                          [3.06] [3.59]    [3.20]

    AdjR2             0.28      0.65      0.50   0.76      0.61
    N                 34        34        137    34        34

                     Panel B: y = ln(profit)
                                                           GLS
                      (1)       (2)       (3)    (4)       (5)
    ln(Debt/GDP)      -1.78
                      [-2.35]
    ln(Avail/GDP)               -1.18            -1.03     -0.81
                                [-4.85]          [-6.81]   [-5.49]
    Muni spread                           1.81   0.44      0.38
                                          [3.83] [4.49]    [2.05]

    AdjR2             0.36      0.67      0.48   0.74      0.54
    N                 34        34        137    34        34




                                          41
Figure 1: The safe asset share from 1952-2012. Source: Gorton, Lewellen, Met-
rick (2012).
         100%	  
          90%	  
          80%	  
          70%	  
          60%	  
          50%	  
          40%	  
          30%	  
          20%	  
          10%	  
            0%	  
                     1952	  
                     1954	  
                     1956	  
                     1958	  
                     1960	  
                     1962	  
                     1964	  
                     1966	  
                     1968	  
                     1970	  
                     1972	  
                     1974	  
                     1976	  
                     1978	  
                     1980	  
                     1982	  
                     1984	  
                     1986	  
                     1988	  
                     1990	  
                     1992	  
                     1994	  
                     1996	  
                     1998	  
                     2000	  
                     2002	  
                     2004	  
                     2006	  
                     2008	  
                     2010	  



                     Deposits	                     Money-­‐like	  debt	  
                     MBS/ABS	  Debt	              Corporate	  Bonds	  and	  Loans	  
                     Other	  LiabiliFes	  




                                               42
                                                          Figure 2: Fails by type.

                               Panel	  A:	  Primary	  Dealer	  Treasury	  Fails	  
                       3,000,000	  
                       2,500,000	  
                       2,000,000	  
                       1,500,000	  
$	  Millions	  




                       1,000,000	  
                         500,000	  
                                        0	  
                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                              4/ 	  

                                    	  
                            7/ 90

                            7/ 92

                            7/ 94

                            7/ 96

                            7/ 98

                            7/ 00

                            7/ 02

                            7/ 04

                            7/ 06

                            7/ 08

                            7/ 10

                            7/ 12

                                  14
                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                19

                                20

                                20

                                20

                                20

                                20

                                20

                                20

                                20
                              4/
                            7/




                                                 Total	  Treasury	  Receive	       Total	  Treasury	  Deliver	  


                                            Panel	  B:	  Primary	  Dealer	  Agency	  Fails	  
                       300,000	  
                       250,000	  
                       200,000	  
   $	  Millions	  




                       150,000	  
                       100,000	  
                         50,000	  
                                0	  
                          7/ 90	  

                          7/ 92	  

                          7/ 94	  

                          7/ 96	  

                          7/ 98	  

                          7/ 00	  

                          7/ 02	  

                          7/ 04	  

                          7/ 06	  

                          7/ 08	  

                          7/ 10	  

                          7/ 12	  

                                  	  
                                14
                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              19

                              20

                              20

                              20

                              20

                              20

                              20

                              20

                              20
                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/

                            4/
                          7/




                                                           Agency	  Receive	       Agency	  Deliver	  


                                                Panel	  C:	  Primary	  Dealer	  MBS	  Fails	  
                       1,400,000	  
                       1,200,000	  
                       1,000,000	  
  $	  Millions	  




                         800,000	  
                         600,000	  
                         400,000	  
                         200,000	  
                                  0	  
                           7/ 90	  




                           7/ 98	  

                           7/ 00	  




                           7/ 08	  

                           7/ 10	  
                           7/ 92	  

                           7/ 94	  

                           7/ 96	  




                           7/ 02	  

                           7/ 04	  

                           7/ 06	  




                           7/ 12	  

                                    	  
                                  14
                                19




                                19

                                20




                                20

                                20
                               19

                               19

                               19




                               20

                               20

                               20




                               20

                               20
                             4/




                             4/

                             4/




                             4/

                             4/
                             4/

                             4/

                             4/




                             4/

                             4/

                             4/




                             4/

                             4/
                           7/




                                                                MBS	  Receive	     MBS	  Deliver	  




                                                                               43
Figure 3: Difference between fail to receive and failure to deliver by type.

                                       Panel	  A:	  U.S.	  Primary	  Dealers'	  Repo	  Fails:	  US	  
                                             Treasuries	  Receive	  minus	  Deliver	  
                             250,000	  

                             200,000	  

                             150,000	  
        $	  Millions	  




                             100,000	  

                               50,000	  

                                        0	  

                             -­‐50,000	  

                            -­‐100,000	  
                                7/ 90	  

                                7/ 92	  

                                7/ 94	  

                                7/ 96	  

                                7/ 98	  

                                7/ 00	  

                                7/ 02	  

                                7/ 04	  

                                7/ 06	  

                                7/ 08	  

                                7/ 10	  

                                7/ 12	  

                                        	  
                                      14
                                    19

                                    19

                                    19

                                    19

                                    19

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20
                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/
                                7/




                                                Panel	  B:	  U.S.	  Primary	  Dealers'	  Repo	  Fails:	  
                                                    Agencies	  Receive	  minus	  Deliver	  
                               40,000	  
                               30,000	  
                               20,000	  
                               10,000	  
        $	  Millions	  




                                    0	  
                            -­‐10,000	  
                            -­‐20,000	  
                            -­‐30,000	  
                            -­‐40,000	  
                            -­‐50,000	  
                            -­‐60,000	  
                              7/ 90	  

                              7/ 92	  

                              7/ 94	  

                              7/ 96	  

                              7/ 98	  

                              7/ 00	  

                              7/ 02	  

                              7/ 04	  

                              7/ 06	  

                              7/ 08	  

                              7/ 10	  

                              7/ 12	  

                                      	  
                                    14
                                  19

                                  19

                                  19

                                  19

                                  19

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20
                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/

                                4/
                              7/




                                     Panel	  C:	  U.S.	  Primary	  Dealers'	  Repo	  Fails:	  MBS	  
                                                       Receive	  minus	  Deliver	  
                             100,000	  

                               50,000	  

                                        0	  
        $	  Millions	  




                             -­‐50,000	  

                            -­‐100,000	  

                            -­‐150,000	  

                            -­‐200,000	  
                                7/ 90	  

                                7/ 92	  

                                7/ 94	  

                                7/ 96	  

                                7/ 98	  

                                7/ 00	  

                                7/ 02	  

                                7/ 04	  

                                7/ 06	  

                                7/ 08	  

                                7/ 10	  

                                7/ 12	  

                                        	  
                                      14
                                    19

                                    19

                                    19

                                    19

                                    19

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20

                                    20
                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/

                                  4/
                                7/




                                                                             44
                0.0	  
                          5.0	  
                                    10.0	  
                                               15.0	  
                                                          20.0	  
                                                                     25.0	  
                                                                                30.0	  
                                                                                           35.0	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30%	  




                                                                                                                                        0.00%	  
                                                                                                                                                    1.00%	  
                                                                                                                                                                2.00%	  
                                                                                                                                                                            3.00%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                        4.00%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                    5.00%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                6.00%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7.00%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8.00%	  
     18
       70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1874-­‐01-­‐01	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                government debt.
     18 	                                                                                                                  1/22/1870	  
       72
     18 	                                                                                                                  10/2/1871	                                                                                                                                                                                    1875-­‐06-­‐01	  
       74                                                                                                                   4/25/1873	                                                                                                                                                                                    1876-­‐11-­‐01	  
     18 	  
       76                                                                                                                  12/31/1874	                                                                                                                                                                                    1878-­‐04-­‐01	  
     18 	                                                                                                                  6/30/1876	  
       78                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1879-­‐09-­‐01	  
     18 	                                                                                                                  3/15/1878	                                                                                                                                                                                    1881-­‐02-­‐01	  
       80
     18 	                                                                                                                  10/2/1879	                                                                                                                                                                                    1882-­‐07-­‐01	  
       82                                                                                                                    5/6/1881	  
     18 	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1883-­‐12-­‐01	  
       84                                                                                                                  12/30/1882	                                                                                                                                                                                    1885-­‐05-­‐01	  
     18 	                                                                                                                  6/20/1884	  
       86                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1886-­‐10-­‐01	  
     18 	                                                                                                                   3/1/1886	  
       88                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1888-­‐04-­‐01	  
     18 	                                                                                                                  10/5/1887	  
       90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1889-­‐09-­‐01	  
                                                                                                                            5/13/1889	  
     18 	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1891-­‐03-­‐01	  




45
       92                                                                                                                  12/19/1890	  
     18 	                                                                                                                  7/12/1892	                                                                                                                                                                                    1892-­‐08-­‐01	  
       94
     18 	                                                                                                                  2/28/1894	                                                                                                                                                                                    1894-­‐03-­‐01	  
       96                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1895-­‐08-­‐01	  
                                                                                                                            9/28/1895	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Debt	  Outstanding	  




                                                                                                      US	  Debt/GDP	  
     18 	  
       98                                                                                                                   5/14/1897	                                                                                                                                                                                    1897-­‐01-­‐01	  
     19 	  
       00                                                                                                                   12/1/1898	                                                                                                                                                                                    1898-­‐06-­‐01	  
     19 	  
       02                                                                                                                   6/29/1900	                                                                                                                                                                                    1899-­‐11-­‐01	  
     19 	                                                                                                                  2/25/1902	                                                                                                                                                                                    1901-­‐04-­‐01	  
       04
     19 	                                                                                                                   9/9/1903	                                                                                                                                                                                    1902-­‐09-­‐01	  
       06                                                                                                                   3/14/1905	                                                                                                                                                                                    1904-­‐02-­‐01	  
     19 	  
       08                                                                                                                  11/12/1906	                                                                                                                                                                                    1905-­‐07-­‐01	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ra1o	  of	  U.S.	  Bonds	  on	  Hand	  to	  Loans	  and	  Discounts	  



     19 	                                                                                                                  7/15/1908	                                                                                                                                                                                    1906-­‐12-­‐01	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Treasuries	  Held	  to	  Back	  Notes	  as	  a	  Percentage	  of	  Total	  U.S.	  




       10
     19 	                                                                                                                  1/31/1910	  
       12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1908-­‐05-­‐01	  
         	                                                                                                                  9/1/1911	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1909-­‐10-­‐01	  
                                                                                                                             4/4/1913	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                total Debt/GDP outstanding for the US and gives a sense of the total supply of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Panel B plots the fraction of bonds on hand to loans and discounts. Panel C plots
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                informative about how aggressively banks were taking advantage of note issuance.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 4: Panel A plots the fraction of Treasuries held to back notes and hence is
   Figure 5: Profit series, plotted in standard (top) and log scale (bottom).

                     1	                                                                                                                              140	  
                  0.9	  
                                                                                                                                                      120	  
                  0.8	  
                  0.7	                                                                                                                               100	  

                  0.6	  
                                                                                                                                                      80	  
                  0.5	  
                                                                                                                                                      60	  
                  0.4	  
                  0.3	                                                                                                                               40	  
                  0.2	  
                                                                                                                                                      20	  
                  0.1	  
                     0	                                                                                                                            0	  
                      1875	   1878	   1881	   1884	   1887	   1890	   1893	   1896	   1899	   1902	   1905	   1908	   1911	   1914	  
                                                                           Recession	        Proﬁt	  

                     1	                                                                                                                              1000	  
                  0.9	  
                  0.8	  
                  0.7	  
                                                                                                                                                      100	  
                  0.6	  
                  0.5	  
                  0.4	  
                                                                                                                                                      10	  
                  0.3	  
                  0.2	  
                  0.1	  
                     0	                                                                                                                            1	  
                      1875	   1878	   1881	   1884	   1887	   1890	   1893	   1896	   1899	   1902	   1905	   1908	   1911	   1914	  
                                                                           Recession	        Proﬁt	  




Figure 6: Ratio of notes to deposits. This figure plots the ratio of notes to de-
posits against US government debt to GDP. It shows that declines in government
supply of Treasuries are strongly associated with increases in deposits.

             60                                                                                                                                                  35

             50                                                                                                                                                  30

                                                                                                                                                                 25
             40
                                                                                                                                                                 20
             30
                                                                                                                                                                 15
             20
                                                                                                                                                                 10
             10                                                                                                                                                  5

              0                                                                                                                                                  0
                   1864
                   1866
                   1868
                   1870
                   1872
                   1874
                   1876
                   1878
                   1880
                   1882
                   1884
                   1886
                   1888
                   1890
                   1892

                   1896
                   1898
                   1900
                   1902
                   1904
                   1906
                   1908
                   1910
                   1912
                   1894




                   1914




                                                           Ratio Notes/Deposits                             Debt / GDP




                                                                                    46
Appendices
ONLINE APPENDIX

Table 5: We report breakpoints for our fails data panel for the absolute value
of the difference between fails to receive and fails to deliver along with 95%
confidence intervals. The methodology for finding breaks in panels follows Bai
(2010).
                    Panel A: All securities, |receive − deliver|
                        Break Date Lower Bound Upper Bound
           First Break    12-Sep-01         25-Jul-01       24-Oct-01
        Second Break      19-Aug-09           1-Jul-09      30-Sep-09
         Third Break       1-Feb-12        23-Nov-11         4-Apr-12

                Panel B: Treasury+Agency, |receive − deliver|
                       Break Date Lower Bound Upper Bound
         First Break      6-Dec-00   31-May-00         6-Jun-01
       Second Break      24-Sep-08    25-Jun-08       17-Dec-08
        Third Break      11-Feb-09    17-Dec-08        1-Apr-09

                     Panel C: MBS, |receive − deliver|
                      Break Date Lower Bound Upper Bound
         First Break   19-Jun-02      1-May-02          31-Jul-02
       Second Break    19-Aug-09        1-Jul-09       30-Sep-09
        Third Break     1-Feb-12       9-Nov-11        18-Apr-12




                                     47
Table 6: We recalculate our univariate profit regressions when splitting the sam-
ple before and after 1900. This deals with issues of “infinite” profits and our
choice of α after 1900.

                Profit on Convenience Yield in Subsamples:
           yt = a1 + a2 × 1t>1900 + b1 × xt + b2 × xt × 1t>1900 + εt

                                     y =profit       y = ln(profit)
                                  (1)     (2)        (1)     (2)
   ln(Avail/GDP)                  -2.39              -0.28
                                  [-1.84]            [-1.82]
   ln(Avail/GDP) ×1t>1900         -37.73             -0.95
                                  [-7.29]            [-6.15]
   Muni spread                            5.34               0.60
                                          [3.10]             [2.88]
   Muni spread ×1t>1900                   56.05              1.16
                                          [4.40]             [5.23]

   AdjR2                          0.90    0.77       0.92     0.83
   N                              34      137        34       137




                                         48
Table 7: We run seemingly unrelated regressions of Treasury and Agency fails to
deliver.
                                  ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del
 GC Repo-1m T-bill                 6.727∗∗∗       0.598        7.002∗∗∗       0.552        7.207∗∗∗       0.562
                                    (5.43)        (0.35)        (5.58)        (0.33)        (5.72)        (0.33)

 L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                           2.118         0.770         2.448         0.607
                                                                (1.69)        (0.45)        (1.93)        (0.36)

 L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                                                       2.417         0.406
                                                                                            (1.92)        (0.24)

 GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                     12.97∗∗∗                    13.54∗∗∗                    12.96∗∗∗
                                                  (5.02)                      (5.11)                      (4.88)

 L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                               2.172                       1.673
                                                                              (0.83)                      (0.62)

 L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                                                           -1.971
                                                                                                          (-0.75)

 GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                     35.82∗∗∗                    40.87∗∗∗                    39.41∗∗∗
                                                  (6.69)                      (7.57)                      (7.32)

 L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                              27.47∗∗∗                    31.77∗∗∗
                                                                              (5.42)                      (6.24)

 L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                                                          29.20∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (5.81)

 GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                      -0.421                      -0.979                      -0.152
                                                  (-0.04)                     (-0.08)                     (-0.01)

 L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                               2.129                       2.970
                                                                              (0.19)                      (0.25)

 L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                                                           3.371
                                                                                                          (0.29)

 Break 1 (9/2001-9/2008)                          -6.809                      -6.450                      -4.782
                                                  (-0.18)                     (-0.17)                     (-0.12)

 Break 2 (9/2008-2/2009)                          62.38                       126.5                       163.3
                                                  (0.47)                      (0.96)                      (1.25)

 Break 3 (2/2009)                                 10.22                       9.742                       6.906
                                                  (0.24)                      (0.23)                      (0.16)

 D. 1m T-Bill                                    -11.20∗∗∗                   -9.827∗∗∗                   -7.917∗∗∗
                                                  (-5.52)                     (-4.77)                     (-3.81)

 Constant                           0.966         -10.30        1.273         -8.808        1.145         -6.793
                                    (0.06)        (-0.42)       (0.08)        (-0.36)       (0.07)        (-0.28)
 Observations                        2398          2398          2386          2386          2374          2374
 R2                                 0.012          0.047        0.013          0.062        0.015          0.077
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                                49
Table 8: We run seemingly unrelated regressions of Treasury and Agency fails to
deliver.
                                   ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R
  GC Repo-1m T-bill                -0.0555    -0.0353    -0.0555    -0.0274    -0.0457    0.00581
                                   (-0.25)    (-0.12)    (-0.25)    (-0.09)    (-0.20)     (0.02)

  L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                    0.0254    -0.0181     0.0472    -0.0198
                                                          (0.11)    (-0.06)     (0.21)    (-0.07)

  L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                                          0.185      0.186
                                                                                (0.82)     (0.63)

  GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                  0.118                 0.327                 0.307
                                               (0.27)                (0.71)                (0.66)

  L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                     0.606                 0.726
                                                                     (1.34)                (1.55)

  L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                                           0.184
                                                                                           (0.40)

  GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                  0.351                -0.00556              -0.0348
                                               (0.38)                (-0.01)              (-0.04)

  L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                    -1.920∗               -1.933∗
                                                                    (-2.19)               (-2.18)

  L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                                          -0.280
                                                                                          (-0.32)

  GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                  0.957                 0.618                 0.464
                                               (0.48)                (0.30)                (0.22)

  L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                    -0.840                -1.049
                                                                    (-0.43)               (-0.52)

  L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                                          -0.260
                                                                                          (-0.13)

  Break 1 (9/2001-9/2008)                     89.87∗∗∗              89.50∗∗∗              89.39∗∗∗
                                               (13.55)               (13.47)               (13.40)

  Break 2 (9/2008-2/2009)                     268.3∗∗∗              263.4∗∗∗              263.2∗∗∗
                                               (11.88)               (11.61)               (11.56)

  Break 3 (2/2009)                            21.07∗∗               21.40∗∗               21.69∗∗
                                               (2.92)                (2.95)                (2.97)

  D. 1m T-Bill                                -0.373                -0.544                -0.555
                                              (-1.07)               (-1.53)               (-1.54)

  Constant                         74.67∗∗∗   37.40∗∗∗   74.91∗∗∗   37.34∗∗∗   75.11∗∗∗   37.37∗∗∗
                                    (24.98)    (8.81)     (24.95)    (8.77)     (24.89)    (8.73)
  Observations                       2398       2398       2386       2386       2374       2374
  R2                                 0.000     0.114       0.000     0.117       0.000     0.117
  t statistics in parentheses
  ∗
    p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                                50
   Table 9: We run seemingly unrelated regressions of MBS fails to receive.
                                 ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec   ∆ Fails Rec
GC Repo-1m T-bill                  1.435         0.164         1.004         0.170         0.942         0.164
                                   (0.49)        (0.04)        (0.34)        (0.04)        (0.32)        (0.04)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                           -4.289        -1.542        -4.208        -1.459
                                                               (-1.45)       (-0.38)       (-1.40)       (-0.35)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                                                       -0.0987       0.0279
                                                                                           (-0.03)       (0.01)

GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                      3.966                       2.980                       2.937
                                                 (0.63)                      (0.46)                      (0.45)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                               -1.898                      -2.733
                                                                             (-0.30)                     (-0.42)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                                                           -2.440
                                                                                                         (-0.38)

GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                      -3.017                      -5.401                      -5.440
                                                 (-0.23)                     (-0.41)                     (-0.41)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                               -12.09                      -12.12
                                                                             (-0.98)                     (-0.98)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                                                           0.613
                                                                                                         (0.05)

GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                      41.66                       49.92                       46.84
                                                 (1.47)                      (1.72)                      (1.59)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                               -67.00∗                     -59.98∗
                                                                             (-2.43)                     (-2.11)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                                                           45.72
                                                                                                         (1.62)

Break 1 (10/2002-9/2009)                         -4.295                      -3.771                      -2.076
                                                 (-0.05)                     (-0.04)                     (-0.02)

Break 2 (9/2009-12/2011)                         -95.63                      -124.5                      -122.9
                                                 (-0.30)                     (-0.39)                     (-0.38)

Break 3 (12/2011)                                22.72                       -10.63                      -2.786
                                                 (0.22)                      (-0.10)                     (-0.03)

D. 1m T-Bill                                     -5.830                      -5.987                      -6.050
                                                 (-1.18)                     (-1.20)                     (-1.20)

Constant                           5.197         -3.454        -1.352        -3.557        -1.865        -4.992
                                   (0.13)        (-0.06)       (-0.03)       (-0.06)       (-0.05)       (-0.08)
Observations                        1199          1199          1193          1193          1187          1187
R2                                 0.000          0.003         0.002         0.012         0.002         0.013
t statistics in parentheses
∗
  p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                               51
  Table 10: We run seemingly unrelated regressions of MBS fails to deliver.
                                 ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del   ∆ Fails Del
GC Repo-1m T-bill                  1.589         0.167         1.217         0.167         1.128         0.141
                                   (0.49)        (0.04)        (0.37)        (0.04)        (0.35)        (0.03)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                           -4.018        -1.389        -3.961        -1.305
                                                               (-1.24)       (-0.31)       (-1.21)       (-0.29)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                                                       -0.363        -0.120
                                                                                           (-0.11)       (-0.03)

GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                      4.087                       3.201                       3.229
                                                 (0.60)                      (0.46)                      (0.46)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                               -1.654                      -2.484
                                                                             (-0.24)                     (-0.35)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                                                           -2.325
                                                                                                         (-0.33)

GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                      -2.498                      -4.512                      -4.395
                                                 (-0.18)                     (-0.32)                     (-0.31)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                               -10.19                      -10.62
                                                                             (-0.76)                     (-0.78)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                                                           -2.041
                                                                                                         (-0.15)

GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                      46.19                       56.22                       52.77
                                                 (1.49)                      (1.77)                      (1.64)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                               -75.50∗                     -66.92∗
                                                                             (-2.51)                     (-2.15)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                                                           47.62
                                                                                                         (1.54)

Break 1 (10/2002-9/2009)                         -4.009                      -3.488                      -2.276
                                                 (-0.04)                     (-0.03)                     (-0.02)

Break 2 (9/2009-12/2011)                         -94.27                      -118.5                      -120.7
                                                 (-0.27)                     (-0.34)                     (-0.35)

Break 3 (12/2011)                                27.20                       -11.20                      -3.703
                                                 (0.24)                      (-0.10)                     (-0.03)

D. 1m T-Bill                                     -5.665                      -5.727                      -5.981
                                                 (-1.05)                     (-1.05)                     (-1.08)

Constant                           6.074         -3.539        -1.453        -3.551        -1.983        -4.840
                                   (0.14)        (-0.05)       (-0.03)       (-0.05)       (-0.05)       (-0.07)
Observations                        1199          1199          1193          1193          1187          1187
R2                                 0.000          0.003         0.002         0.011         0.001         0.012
t statistics in parentheses
∗
  p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                               52
 Table 11: We run seemingly unrelated regressions of MBS fails to deliver.
                                 ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R      ∆ D-R
GC Repo-1m T-bill                0.127      0.0590     0.129      0.0633     0.132      0.0517
                                 (0.33)     (0.12)     (0.34)     (0.13)     (0.34)     (0.11)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                   -0.114     -0.0153    -0.0794    -0.00277
                                                       (-0.30)    (-0.03)    (-0.20)     (-0.01)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill                                                          0.0672    -0.0434
                                                                              (0.17)    (-0.09)

GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                  0.0152                0.112                 0.118
                                             (0.02)                (0.15)                (0.16)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                     0.242                 0.246
                                                                   (0.33)                (0.32)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 1                                                           0.103
                                                                                         (0.14)

GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                 -0.0356               -0.428                -0.444
                                            (-0.02)               (-0.28)               (-0.29)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                    -2.164                -2.104
                                                                  (-1.50)               (-1.45)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 2                                                           0.587
                                                                                         (0.41)

GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                 -0.615                -0.463                -0.750
                                            (-0.19)               (-0.14)               (-0.22)

L1.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                    -6.530∗               -5.844
                                                                  (-2.03)               (-1.76)

L2.GC Repo-1m T-bill x Break 3                                                           2.303
                                                                                         (0.70)

Break 1 (10/2002-9/2009)                    111.3∗∗∗              111.1∗∗∗              111.4∗∗∗
                                             (10.20)               (10.17)               (10.17)

Break 2 (9/2009-12/2011)                    75.43∗                 70.27                 71.15
                                            (2.03)                 (1.88)                (1.90)

Break 3 (12/2011)                           188.8∗∗∗              187.5∗∗∗              188.7∗∗∗
                                             (15.92)               (15.72)               (15.70)

D. 1m T-Bill                                 0.289                 0.154                 0.181
                                             (0.50)                (0.26)                (0.31)

Constant                         108.6∗∗∗   29.24∗∗∗   108.1∗∗∗   29.19∗∗∗   107.8∗∗∗   28.97∗∗∗
                                  (21.15)    (4.18)     (21.01)    (4.17)     (20.90)    (4.12)
Observations                       1199       1199       1193       1193       1187       1187
R2                                 0.000     0.188       0.000     0.190       0.000     0.191
t statistics in parentheses
∗
  p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001




                                              53
