                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DESIGNING ONLINE MARKETPLACES:
                        TRUST AND REPUTATION MECHANISMS

                                        Michael Luca

                                     Working Paper 22616
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22616


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




Kaye Kirschner, Janet Lu, and Patrick Rooney provided excellent research assistance. I am
grateful to Shane Greenstein, Joshua Lerner, Yasin Ozcan, Scott Stern, and participants at the
NBER Innovation Policy and Economics workshop. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Michael Luca. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Designing Online Marketplaces: Trust and Reputation Mechanisms
Michael Luca
NBER Working Paper No. 22616
September 2016
JEL No. D47,D8,J15

                                         ABSTRACT

Online marketplaces have proliferated over the past decade, creating new markets where none
existed. By reducing transaction costs, online marketplaces facilitate transactions that otherwise
would not have occurred and enable easier entry of small sellers. One central challenge faced by
designers of online marketplaces is how to build enough trust to facilitate transactions between
strangers. This paper provides an economist’s toolkit for designing online marketplaces, focusing
on trust and reputation mechanisms.


Michael Luca
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
mluca@hbs.edu
1 Introduction

       Over the past decade, there has been a proliferation of online marketplaces,

ranging from eBay and Amazon to Uber and Airbnb. These online markets cannot exist

without trust. Buyers need to trust that sellers are accurately describing products or

services and fulfilling transactions as promised. Sellers need to trust that buyers will pay,

and in the case of services and rentals, will abide by the agreed-upon terms of service.

Trust between buyers and sellers is enabled by reputation systems and design choices

made by online marketplaces.

       This paper surveys the design choices and mechanisms that online marketplaces

use to build trust and facilitate transactions. I focus on two central decisions faced by a

marketplace. First, online marketplaces design review systems, which allow buyers and

sellers to review each other and the product or service being transacted. Second,

marketplaces choose what information buyers and sellers should have about each other

when deciding whether to transact, and how much flexibility market participants should

have in choosing who they will transact with. I highlight challenges and tradeoffs faced

by online marketplaces in these design choices.

       Historically, reviews have formed the backbone of reputation systems in the

online marketplace. Sellers (and the products and services they are offering) on online

platforms are rated and reviewed by buyers, and buyers can use this information to

choose whom to interact with. Likewise, sellers on some platforms can review buyers.

Reviews allow buyers and sellers to make sure they are transacting with someone deemed

trustworthy enough to participate in the transaction. Reviews also create incentives for

quality, as behavior of buyers and sellers is made more public. Despite the benefits of
creating online reputation systems, several design challenges have been documented in

the context of reviews. First, on platforms with reciprocal reviewing (i.e., where buyers

and sellers review each other), users can have strategic incentives to manipulate reviews

(Bolton et al. 2013, Fradkin et al. 2015). Second, reviews can suffer from selection bias

(Hu et al. 2009, Masterov et al. 2015), as the people leaving reviews may differ from

those who do not. Third, reviews may be distorted by promotional content in which

businesses attempt to leave reviews for themselves (Mayzlin, Dover, and Chevalier 2014;

Luca and Zervas 2015). Moreover, even if all reviews represent a user’s true experience,

some users may be more informative than others (Dai et al. 2015). Section 3 provides an

overview of these issues, as well as potential design solutions for these challenges.

   In first-generation platforms such as eBay, reviews – along with pictures and

descriptions of the product – were the main information sources available to buyers at the

time of purchase. Buyers and sellers typically did not see each other’s name or picture –

names were exchanged after the purchase was made. Over time, platforms have become

considerably less anonymous. For example, Airbnb is an online platform for people to list

and find short-term lodging; it attempts to build trust by allowing would-be renters to

present personal profiles and post pictures of themselves. Hosts can then accept or reject

guests based on their pictures and profiles. This design choice is now the norm on many

platforms – indeed, it represents a broader trend of platforms’ providing more

information to market participants – not only about products and services, but about the

people buying and selling them. This also demonstrates the large degree of flexibility that

online marketplaces have in their market-design choices (much more than is typically

found in traditional markets).
     The design choice of allowing hosts to reject guests on the basis of profile elements

such as name, picture, and number of Facebook friends is a double-edged sword. On the

one hand, it has the potential to make market participants feel more comfortable with

each other, in part by reducing social distance. However, this design choice also

facilitates discrimination – for example, African-American guests (and hosts) are

discriminated against on Airbnb (Edelman and Luca 2014; Edelman, Luca, and Svirsky

2016). This is part of a broader trend of discrimination that has been documented in

online marketplaces including eBay (Nunley et al., 2011), Craigslist (Doleac and Stein,

2013), and Prosper (Pope and Sydnor, 2011). In labor market contexts, there is extensive

evidence of discrimination against minority job applicants (Bertrand and Mullainathan

2004). Online labor markets such as Upwork are designed in a way that makes it easy for

discrimination to manifest in online contexts as well. For example, Ghani et al. (2014)

find that employers of Indian ethnicity are more likely to hire workers from India.

     Overall, these findings highlight the promise and peril of online marketplaces. The

existence of new online markets creates value for society, enabled by trust and reputation

mechanisms. However, the same design choices allow for unintended consequences such

as discrimination. In this paper, I document the evolution of new online markets, focusing

on the design choices pertaining to trust and reputation. I highlight the key features of

reputation systems and the problems that can arise. I then survey the evidence on

discrimination in online markets and consider potential solutions that can be implemented

by platforms.
2 The Rise of Online Marketplaces

       The founding of Amazon and eBay in 1994 and 1995, respectively, ushered in the

first generation of online marketplaces. These platforms were remarkable in their ability

to facilitate transactions between strangers. Someone in upstate New York could order a

used book from a stranger in southern California and trust that it would arrive in a few

days. These platforms facilitated transactions that would not otherwise occur, supported

in part by reputation systems. At the same time, buyers and sellers generally did not

provide pictures or names until after a purchase was made. Both platforms had review

systems to facilitate transactions.

       In the 20 years since, a variety of more specialized platforms such as Airbnb,

Uber, and Upwork have emerged, creating new markets and pushing a growing

proportion of the economy onto the Internet. To give context for how quickly the industry

is growing: Airbnb was founded in 2008 and is now valued at $26 billion. It currently has

more than 2 million listings, which is more than the largest hotel chain. Similarly

remarkable is the statistic that there are now more Uber drivers –affiliated vehicles than

traditional taxis in New York City. As of 2015, Uber is valued at roughly $50 billion.

Relative to first-generation platforms, these marketplaces have less anonymity – pictures

and names are fast becoming the norm – but still have the reputation systems that were

staples of earlier platforms. Table 1 provides a sample of marketplaces that are active as

of 2016. Table 2 provides data on a subsample of those.

3 Reputation Systems

       In this section, I highlight the main challenges – and potential solutions – to

building a robust reputation in an online marketplace, focusing on the role of user
reviews and drawing on Luca (2015). Broadly speaking, there are two main mechanisms

that a platform can use to improve the quality of its review system, taking into account

the types of biases that commonly arise. First, it can improve the incentives to leave high

quality reviews. Second, taking the reviews as given, it can aggregate the reviews in a

way to increase their informational content (Dai et al. 2015). I then look beyond reviews

for other tools to facilitate trust.

3.1 Reciprocal Reviewing

        The process of reciprocal reviewing (i.e., of buyers and sellers reviewing each

other) is valuable because it builds trust on both sides of the market. However, this can

also create incentives for upward-biased reporting if reviewers fear retaliation. For

example, when Airbnb’s policy allowed renters’ reviews to be posted before hosts’ (as

was previously the case), guests might have been hesitant to leave bad reviews out of

concern that hosts would retaliate.

        To circumvent this problem, platforms such as Airbnb have moved to a system

sometimes referred to as “simultaneous reveal”: they do not display reviews until both

sides have left a review (or until the time to review has expired). Simultaneous revelation

of reviews reduces the strategic problems associated with reciprocal reviewing (Bolton et

al. 2013, Fradkin et al. 2015). However, even in a simultaneous-reveal system, strategic

incentives persist. For example, buyers may be reluctant to provide negative feedback if

they suspect that it would discourage other sellers from transacting with them.

        One potential solution to the problems created by reciprocal reviewing would be

to allow users to leave anonymous ratings (in situations where this is feasible), which

could allow users to be more honest without fearing direct or indirect retaliation. To
increase anonymity, platforms might consider showing only aggregated feedback. While

this reduces the total amount of information being provided to users, it may increase the

quality of that information. A second solution would be to have private ratings that are

provided from a user to the platform, but not shared publicly. This would again reduce

fear of retaliation on the part of users, while allowing the platform to use the information.

The platform could use this private feedback in a variety of ways, such as updating its

sorting algorithms, or using it to address concerns directly with the user being reviewed.

3.2 Self-Selection

       Because reviews in online marketplaces are voluntary, they can suffer from

selection bias, in that reviews are left by users who chose both to purchase the product or

service and to leave a review online. In particular, users may be more likely to leave a

review after an especially positive or negative experience. Indeed, Hu et al. (2009) find

that reviews on Amazon tend to exhibit an asymmetric bimodal (J-shaped) distribution,

with more positive than negative reviews. They argue that experiences for many products

are more likely to resemble a normal distribution, and hence the J-shape suggests that

people are more likely to leave reviews after extreme experiences. Masterov et al. (2015)

find consistent evidence from eBay, where buyers are more likely to leave a review after

a good experience.

       There are a variety of tools that online marketplaces can use to improve this

selection problem, ranging from sending repeated email notifications encouraging people

to report their experiences to paying people who leave reviews. Alternatively, to the

extent that platforms know who is leaving a review, they can incorporate this information
into the reputation score – for example, penalizing sellers who receive low rates of

feedback.

3.3 Promotional Content

       Another potential bias in online reviews occurs when people or businesses

surreptitiously leave reviews about themselves or competitors. Promotional content is

driven, at least in part, due to changing economic incentives for a business (Mayzlin,

Dover, and Chevalier 2014, Luca and Zervas 2015). It is more prevalent among

independent businesses, when there is nearby competition, and when there is a negative

shock to a business’s reputation. One mechanism for reducing promotional reviews is to

verify whether a transaction has occurred. While this may help to reduce fake or

promotional reviews, it may also prevent legitimate reviews by increasing the barriers to

contributing content.

       Beyond verification of transactions, there are several other potential approaches to

reducing promotional content: spam can be identified through algorithms that mine

review text and characteristics (e.g., Ott et al. 2011, Akoglu et al. 2013). Platforms can

also give more weight to reviewers who are less likely to be contributing promotional or

fake content – for example, reviewers with longer transaction histories could receive

more weight.

3.4 Social Distance

       Social distance has the potential to affect a variety of other behaviors, such as

generosity (Hoffman et al. et al. 1996) and reciprocity (Charness et al. et al. 2007) – even

in one-shot games. With pictures and profiles becoming an increasingly common design

choice, online marketplaces are beginning to shrink the social distance between buyers
and sellers. One might expect this to lead to higher ratings. This could be good if it makes

users more comfortable with each other, but may distort reviews to the extent that higher

ratings reflect a reluctance to leave negative feedback after a bad experience. The level of

social distance can be a choice variable for platforms.

3.5 Beyond Reviews

       Online marketplaces can supplement reviews through other trust-building

mechanisms. The marketplace itself can do more to screen or authenticate information

about buyers and sellers. For example, Airbnb could conduct interviews of renters and

hosts, or they could run background checks. For example, Care.com, a marketplace for

childcare providers, has incorporated a greater degree of platform-driven screening.

Platforms can also provide insurance – and clear liability rules – for situations where

something does go wrong.

4 Discrimination in Online Marketplaces

       Another area in which online platforms can fall short is in their potential to allow

discrimination. In the early days of electronic commerce, economists hypothesized that

online platforms might decrease the amount of discrimination in commercial transactions.

For example, consider a customer looking to purchase a car. This is a market where

prices are negotiated separately for each buyer, and the final price paid is opaque – and

this is also a market where racial discrimination is prevalent (Ayres and Siegelman 1995).

However, when a purchase is initiated through an online platform, Morton et al. (2003)

find no difference in outcomes on the basis of race. Similarly, eBay has less scope for

discrimination because indicators of race and gender are generally not very salient on the

platform. On other platforms, such as Amazon and Expedia, sellers essentially pre-
commit to accepting all buyers regardless of race or ethnicity. Marketplaces have the

potential to facilitate transactions while reducing discrimination.

       Over time, though, the design of online platforms has changed, moving toward

systems with less anonymity and fuller user profiles, coupled with more flexibility on the

part of sellers and buyers to do business based on these attributes. For example, Expedia

effectively prevents a hotel from rejecting a guest based on perceived race, ethnicity, or

almost any other factor. But if the same hotel lists a room on Airbnb, it could reject a

guest based on these or other factors. This highlights the fact that, while the Internet has

the potential to reduce discrimination, this benefit depends on the design choices made by

platforms.

       In part because online platforms have evolved in this way, the conditions that

made online markets potential havens free from discrimination are not prevalent on all

platforms. To see the contrast between the prominent norms of online and offline

markets, suppose that a senior executive at a hotel chain were to propose the following

change to its reservation policy:

     Let’s start encouraging guests to upload their pictures, and let’s allow branch

     managers to reject guests if they don’t like the way they look. Potential guests

     would continue to make reservations through the website as before, but they would

     be nudged to upload pictures and links to Facebook pages or LinkedIn accounts.

     Branch managers would then have 24 hours to decide whether the guest looked

     sufficiently trustworthy. If the guest looked trustworthy, he or she would be

     accepted for a reservation. If not, the guest would be rejected. Managers would like
     the policy because they could accept the guests that they are most comfortable with.

     We’d also save money because the most costly guests would go elsewhere.

     Of course, this idea sounds unrealistic. While it is conceivable that a branch

manager could distinguish some of the trustworthy guests from the bad on the basis of

looks or name, the adoption of screening on this basis is fraught with risk. In particular,

what sorts of pictures and names should a manager screen for? The Civil Rights Act of

1964 prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, or national origin.

While the manager could certainly look for subtler cues, incorporating appearance in the

reservations process would likely be too risky to justify any benefit the hotel might

receive. Yet this design choice is the emerging norm in online marketplaces for short-

term housing – and in many other marketplaces.

     Discrimination has now been documented in a variety of online marketplaces. Table

3 summarizes the evidence on discrimination across different online marketplaces. This

section documents the evidence, as well as design features that might facilitate

discrimination.


4.1 Housing rental markets

     Most searches for accommodations – both short term and long term – now begin

online. For long-term apartment leases, platforms including Craigslist, Zillow, and many

of their competitors provide rental information. In these markets, the platform typically

provides the initial connection between potential landlords and lessees (and often charges

a fee for advertising), but does not facilitate actual payment or charge fees based on

transacted leases.
      In short-term rentals on marketplaces such as Airbnb and HomeAway, the market

looks very different. Transactions are often agreed upon from afar, and the platform does

facilitate payment. On Airbnb, prospective hosts and guests provide information not just

about their listings and preferences, but also about themselves – often posting photos,

providing their name, etc. All of these factors are provided before a host decides whether

to accept or reject a guest.

      My collaborators and I find that these design choices matter – African-American

guests (and hosts) are discriminated against on Airbnb in a way that would be infeasible

under different design choices (Edelman and Luca 2014, Edelman, Luca, and Svirsky

2016). Looking at listings in New York City, Edelman and Luca (2014) find that African-

American hosts earn about 12% less than White hosts for similar listings. Edelman, Luca,

and Svirsky (2016) implement a field experiment across five cities, varying only the race

of the person requesting to stay with a host. African-American guests are roughly 15%

less likely to be accepted relative to White guests, holding all else constant.


4.2 Labor markets

         Looking at the online labor market Upwork (which was called oDesk at the time),

Ghani et al. (2014) find that relative to other employers, employers of Indian descent are

more likely to hire Indian nationals.[1] Given the design of Upwork, which provides

pictures of employees during the recruiting process, one might expect other forms of

discrimination to be prevalent as well. Figure 2 presents results from a search for

potential employees on Upwork. A variety of more specialized labor markets have arisen

in the digital age as well, ranging from Topcoder (specializing in programmers) to Uber

[1]
  There is extensive evidence of discrimination in offline labor markets, which is beyond the scope of this
chapter. See, for example, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) and Lang and Lehman (2011).
and Lyft (specializing in drivers). As of 2015, roughly 0.5% of all U.S. workers provided

contract services through online marketplaces (Katz and Krueger 2016).

           The rapid growth of online labor markets has the potential to increase or decrease

discrimination. For example, consider the taxi industry, an industry in which men are

historically overrepresented. As of 2014, there were more females on Uber relative to the

traditional taxi industry (Hall and Krueger 2015). New data from a survey done by the

Benenson Strategy Group shows that these numbers are far from static – in fact, there has

been a 30% increase in female Uber drivers in the past year alone.[2]

           Online labor markets have a unique opportunity to prevent discrimination using

various tools, some of which we discuss in the next section.


4.3 Credit markets

           Credit and funding markets are rapidly changing as peer-to-peer lending and

crowdfunding platforms are on the rise. On peer-to-peer lending platforms such as

Prosper.com, would-be borrowers post profiles and an amount they are looking to

borrow. Would-be lenders select among borrowers that they would like to fund. Looking

at Prosper, Pope and Snydor (2011) find that loan listings for Black borrowers are 25-

35% less likely to get funded than loan listings for White borrowers with similar credit

scores. However, Black borrowers are also more likely to default on a loan through

Prosper, leading the authors to conclude that this is statistical discrimination. In their

context, reducing discrimination would also reduce efficiency, unless the platform were

to supplement listings with further information to predict default rates.




[2]
      Benenson Strategy Group: “Uber: The Driver Roadmap 2.0.”
4.4 Other markets
       Other markets face discrimination challenges as well. For example, Doleac and

Stein (2013) implement a field experiment on Craigslist in which they sell used iPods. In

the posted pictures, they vary the hand that is holding the iPod. They find that the demand

for the iPod is lower when the hand holding it is African-American. Looking at sales of

baseball cards on eBay using a similar design, Ayres et al. find that cards held by

African-American sellers earn roughly 20% less. Nunley et al. (2011) also find

discrimination on eBay, but note that the extent of discrimination also depends on the

amount of competition. In their design, the name of the seller is varied (as opposed to the

picture). Relative to platforms such as Airbnb and Upwork, both eBay and Craigslist

have less of a norm for sellers to post personal pictures of themselves. Hence, while

discrimination can exist on eBay and Craigslist, these platforms are doing less to

facilitate it than are platforms that encourage (and in some cases require) users to publicly

post information that signals their race, gender, or other personal information.


4.5 Debiasing marketplaces

   There are many market design solutions that online platforms could implement in

order to reduce discrimination. Moreover, there is variation in the choices that platforms

make in this area that can influence the extent of discrimination. In this section, I lay out

potential ways to reduce discrimination in an online marketplace. This is not intended to

be a comprehensive list, but rather to highlight the fact that there are a variety of market

design solutions that could be implemented by a well-intentioned marketplace.
4.5.1 Optimal information provision

       Until recently, most musicians within major symphony orchestras were male.

Over time, gender equality has increased. Goldin and Rouse (2001) find that roughly

25% of the change in composition was driven by one simple change – blind auditions.

Historically, when a musician would audition for the orchestra, he or she would be both

heard and watched by the evaluating committee. Over time, there has been a shift in

norms toward blind auditions; now, there is typically a screen between the musician and

the evaluating committee. This makes factors such as looks, race, and gender less salient,

allowing the committee to focus on the quality of the music.

       This highlights the fact that while information is necessary to make markets

function, more information is not always better. Providing information about factors such

as race and gender can facilitate discrimination; removing this information can moderate

discrimination effects.

       In offline settings, it is often difficult to blind transactions. For example, it would

be challenging for an interviewer to put a screen up in front of a candidate that she is

interviewing. One of the unique features about online marketplaces is that they provide

an opportunity to decide when and where virtual screens should be placed. In the context

of Airbnb, it would be a trivial exercise to remove identifying information about guests

and hosts. For example, they could limit pictures, names, and racial identifiers of hosts

until after a transaction is completed. Similarly, they could remove elements of guest

profiles that provided race information until after the host had accepted a reservation

request.

       In practice, there is considerable variation in the amount and timing of

information that is provided to buyers and sellers in online marketplaces. For example,
Airbnb and HomeAway (a main competitor of Airbnb) take different approaches to

information provision. Complete guest profiles (many of which have pictures – in our

sample, we saw roughly 40% had pictures) are more the norm on Airbnb. Figures 1 and 3

display typical guest profiles on Airbnb, highlighting the differential prevalence of

pictures and social profiles across the two platforms. Differences also become apparent

when looking at the search process. When searching on Airbnb, results show the pictures

of hosts alongside pictures of listings on the main results page. In contrast, HomeAway

shows only the pictures of listings; users need to click on a listing before seeing host

information. Figures 4 and 5 provide sample results for each platform.

       An online platform could choose not to provide any identifying characteristics of

buyers and sellers until after the transaction is completed. For example, both eBay and

Amazon function successfully with little information to identify personal characteristics

such as race and gender and rely mostly on user ratings.


4.5.2 Increasing salience of diversity goals

   An alternative (and potentially complementary) approach would be to make the

objective of increasing diversity more top-of-mind for users. For example, Airbnb could

require hosts to check an acknowledgment box that says, “Airbnb prohibits

discriminatory behavior” each time that a host chooses whether to accept or reject a

guest. Similar to the way that priming ethics can induce ethical behavior (Shu et al.

2014), this might prime users to think more carefully about the possibility that bias is

creeping into their decisions.


4.5.3 Automating the transaction process
   Another approach to reducing discrimination on online platforms is to further

automate the transaction process. For example, Uber riders do not see the picture or name

of the driver until after the ride is booked. While in principle, riders could cancel a ride

and look for a new driver, this design choice can greatly reduce the scope for

discrimination. Similarly, Airbnb has a feature called “instant book,” in which hosts can

opt to automatically accept qualified guests. By removing the ability to reject guests on

the basis of features such as name and picture, this virtually eliminates the potential to

discriminate. Yet instant booking is currently only used by a small fraction of Airbnb

hosts. If online platforms were to move toward further automation of booking, this could

help to reduce discrimination in a variety of online contexts.

5 Conclusion

       The evolution of trust on the Internet and development of principles for

developing reputation systems have allowed online marketplaces to thrive. Early work

suggested that the arms-length nature of online transactions would reduce the amount of

discrimination we see. And in some cases, platforms likely are bringing us closer to the

bias-free ideal. For example, Ayres et al. (2005) find evidence of racial bias in the context

of tipping taxi drivers. Because it disallows tipping and instead provides market prices,

Uber’s design choice eliminates inequality among driver wages.

       But the amount of discrimination in an online marketplace is a choice variable,

determined by the design features that the marketplace selects. Ultimately, the decisions

made by platforms will depend on ethical considerations, legal considerations,

operational    considerations,   competition    considerations,    and    public    relations

considerations. This paper has provided insight into the design principles underlying
robust reputation systems, and a toolkit for helping to reducing discrimination in the

digital age.
References

Ayres, Ian, and Peter Siegelman, 1995. “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining
for a New Car,” American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 3, 304–321.

Ayres, Ian, Frederick Vars, and Nasser Zakariya, 2005. “To Insure Prejudice: Racial
Disparities in Taxicab Tipping,” Yale Law Journal, Vol. 114, No. 7, 1613-1674.

Becker, Gary, 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. The University of Chicago Press.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004. “Are Emily and Greg More
Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A field experiment on labor market
discrimination,” American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 4, 991–1013.

Bolton, Gary, Ben Greiner, and Axel Ockenfels, 2013. “Engineering Trust: Reciprocity in
the Production of Reputation Information,” Management Science, Vol. 59, No. 2, 265-
285.

Charness, Gary, Eman Haruvy, and Doron Sonsino, 2007. “Social Distance and
Reciprocity: An Internet Experiment,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
Vol. 63, No. 1, 88-103.

Che, Yeon-Koo, and Johannes Hörner, 2014. “Optimal Design for Social Learning,”
Working Paper.

Cullen, Zoe and Chiara Farronato, 2014. “Outsourcing Tasks Online: Matching Supply
and Demand on Peer-to-Peer Internet Platforms,” Working paper.

Dai, Weijia, Ginger Jin, Jungmin Lee, & Michael Luca, 2014. “Optimal Aggregation of
Consumer Ratings: An Application to Yelp.com,” NBER Working Paper.

Dobrescu, Loretti, Michael Luca, and Alberto Motta, 2013. “What makes a critic tick?
Connected authors and the determinants of book reviews,” Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization Vol. 96, 85-103.

Doleac, Jennifer and Luke Stein, 2013. “The Visible Hand: Race and Online Market
Outcomes,” The Economic Journal, Vol. 123, No. 572, F469-F492.

Edelman, Benjamin, Michael Luca, and Daniel Svirsky, 2016. “Racial Discrimination in
the Sharing Economy: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Harvard Business School
Working Paper, No. 16-069.

Edelman, Benjamin and Michael Luca, 2014. “Digital Discrimination: The Case of
Airbnb.com,” Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 14-054.
Edelman, Benjamin, and Michael Luca. 2011. “Airbnb (A).” Harvard Business School Case No.
912-019.

Einav, Liran, Chiara Farronato, and Jonathan Levin. “Peer-to-peer Markets,” Forthcoming in the
Annual Review of Economics.

Fradkin, Andrey, Elena Grewal, David Holtz, and Matthew Pearson. 2015. “Bias and Reciprocity
in Online Reviews: Evidence from Field Experiments on Airbnb.com.” In Proceedings of the
Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC ’15), 641. New York, NY:
Association for Computing Machinery. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2764468.2764528

Ghani, Ejaz, William Kerr, and Christopher Stanton. 2014. “Diasporas and Outsourcing:
Evidence from oDesk and India.” Management Science 60(7): 1677–97.

Hall, Jonathan, and Alan Kruger. 2015. “An Analysis of the Labor Market for Uber’s Driver-
Partners in the United States.” Working Paper.

Hoffman, Elizabeth, Kevin McCabe, and Vernon Smith. 1996. “Social Distance and Other-
Regarding Behavior in Dictator Games.” American Economic Review 86(3): 653–60.

Horton, John. “The Effects of Algorithmic Labor Market Recommendations: Evidence from a
Field Experiment.” Forthcoming in the Journal of Labor Economics.

Katz, Lawrence, and Alan Krueger. 2016. “The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work
Arrangements in the United States, 1995–2015.” Working Paper.

Luca, Michael. 2015. “User-generated Content and Social Media.” Handbook of Media
Economics.

Luca, Michael, and Georgios Zervas. 2015. “Fake It till You Make It: Reputation, Competition,
and Yelp Review Fraud.” Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 14-006.

Masterov, Dimitriy, Uwe Meyer, and Steven Tadelis. 2015. “Canary in the e-Commerce Coal
Mine: Detecting and Predicting Poor Experiences Using Buyer-to-Seller Messages.”
Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation.

Pope, Devin, and Justin Sydnor. 2011. “What’s in a Picture? Evidence of Discrimination from
Prosper.com.” Journal of Human Resources 46(1): 53–92.

Resnick, Paul, Richard Zeckhauser, John Swanson, and Kate Lockwood. 2006. “The Value of
Reputation on eBay: A Controlled Experiment.” Experimental Economics 9(2): 79–101.
Scott Morton, Fiona, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Jorge Silva-Risso, 2003. “Consumer
Information and Discrimination: Does the Internet Affect the Pricing of New Cars to
Women and Minorities?” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, Vol. 1, No. 1, 65-92.

Todisco, Michael, 2015. “Share and Share Alike? Considering Racial Discrimination in
the Nascent Room-Sharing Economy,” Stanford Law Review Online, No. 67, 121–129.
Figure 1: Sample guests on Airbnb
Figure 2: Applicants on Upwork
Figure 3: Sample guests on HomeAway
Figure 4: Sample search result on Airbnb
Figure 5: Sample search result on HomeAway
Tables

Table 1: Sample Markets with Online Marketplaces

Market                    Sample Platforms

Short-term Housing        Airbnb, HomeAway, Couchsurfing

Labor                     TaskRabbit, Upwork, MechanicalTurk

Pet sitting               Dogvacay, rover, fetch!

Home Services             HouseCall, Handy

Senior and Child Care     Care.com

Food Delivery             Grubhub, Postmates, Eat24
                          Prosper, Lending Club, Kickstarter,
Funding
                          Indiegogo
                          Tinder, OkCupid, CoffeeMeetsBagel,
Dating
                          Match
Handmade Goods            Etsy, CustomMade

Fashion                   Renttherunway, Rocksbox, LeTote
Car Rentals               Getaround, car2go

Car Rides                 Uber, Lyft, PickupPal, BlaBlaCar
 Table 2: Sample Online Marketplaces

                             Valuation         Revenue
                Year                                                  User Base
Marketplace                  $ Billions       $ Millions
               Founded                                                 Millions
                            (as of 2015)     (as of 2015)
                                                                          304
  Amazon         1994           250            107,010
                                                              (active customer accounts)
                                                                          162
   eBay          1995           69              6,103
                                                                    (active buyers)
                                                                           60
 Craigslist      1995            3               381
                                                                (monthly users in U.S.)
                                                                           13
 Priceline       1997           62              9,220
                                                                (unique monthly users)
                                                                           24
   Etsy          2005            2               273
                                                                    (active buyers)
                                                                           60
  Airbnb         2008           26               900
                                                                  (cumulative guests)
                                                                            8
   Uber          2009           50              2,000
                                                                  (cumulative riders)



 Table 3: Discrimination in Online Marketplaces

  Airbnb       African-American guests 15% less likely to be accepted.
  eBay         Bids 20% lower for identifiably African-American sellers.
  Craigslist   Buyers less likely to contact identifiably African-American sellers.
  Upwork       Employers of Indian ethnicity more likely to hire workers from
               India.
  Prosper      Loan listings for Black borrowers are 25-35% less likely to get
               funded than loan listings for White borrowers with similar credit
               scores.
