                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE PERILS OF HIGH-POWERED INCENTIVES:
                    EVIDENCE FROM COLOMBIA'S FALSE POSITIVES

                                       Daron Acemoglu
                                      Leopoldo Fergusson
                                      James A. Robinson
                                        Dario Romero
                                        Juan F. Vargas

                                      Working Paper 22617
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22617


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016


Previously circulated as "The Perils of Top-down State Building: Evidence from Colombia's
False Positives." We thank Alberto Alesina, Jennifer Alix-Garcia, Melissa Dell, Quoc-Anh Do,
Oendrila Dube, Georgy Egorov, Joan Esteban, Raquel Fernández, Patrick Francois, Jeffry
Frieden, Scott Gehlbach, Avner Greif, Daniel Hidalgo, Kim Hill, Ruixue Jia, Kai Konrad, Eliana
La Ferrara, Horacio Larreguy, Chappel Lawson, Stelios Michalopoulos, Karl Ove Moene,
Torsten Persson, Debraj Ray, Marta Reynal-Querol, Thomas Romer, Ben Schneider, Guido
Tabellini, Felipe Valencia, Nico Voigtländer, Fabrizio Zilibotti and seminar participants at
CIFAR's Institutions, Organizations and Growth Program, George Mason University, Harvard-
MIT Positive Political Economy Seminar, Harvard's Economic History Workshop, ICESI,
Munich Lectures in Economics, Third Conference on Advances on the Political Economy of
Conflict and Redistribution (Max Plank, ESO, WZB), Universidad de los Andes, Universidad del
Rosario, the University of Wisconsin LACIS Lunchtime Lecture, the 8th Annual Petralia Applied
Economics Workshop, and the NBER Summer Institute Workshop in Political Economy.
Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges financial support from the ARO. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Daron Acemoglu, Leopoldo Fergusson, James A. Robinson, Dario Romero, and Juan
F. Vargas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Perils of High-Powered Incentives: Evidence from Colombia's False Positives
Daron Acemoglu, Leopoldo Fergusson, James A. Robinson, Dario Romero, and Juan F. Vargas
NBER Working Paper No. 22617
September 2016
JEL No. D02,D73,D74,D82,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

High-powered incentives for the military and security services have become a common
counterinsurgency strategy over the last several decades. We investigate the use of such
incentives for members of the Colombian army in the long-running civil war against left-wing
guerillas, and show that it produced several perverse side effects. Innocent civilians were killed
and misrepresented as guerillas (a phenomenon known in Colombia as ‘false positives’).
Exploiting the fact that Colombian colonels have stronger career concerns and should be more
responsive to such incentives, we show that there were significantly more false positives during
the period of high-powered incentives in municipalities where a higher share of brigades were
commanded by colonels and in those where checks coming from civilian judicial institutions
were weaker. We further find that in municipalities with a higher share of colonels, the period of
high-powered incentives coincided with a worsening of local judicial institutions and no
discernible improvement in the overall security situation.

Daron Acemoglu                                  Dario Romero
Department of Economics, E52-446                Columbia University
MIT                                             420 West 118th
77 Massachusetts Avenue                         New York, NY 10027
Cambridge, MA 02139                             dr2879@columbia.edu
and CIFAR
and also NBER                                   Juan F. Vargas
daron@mit.edu                                   Universidad del Rosario
                                                Department of Economics
Leopoldo Fergusson                              Cl 12C No 4 - 69, Bogotá, Colombia
Universidad de los Andes                        and Research Department,
Department of Economics                         CAF-Development Bank of Latin America
Cra 1 No 18A - 12                               jvargas@caf.com
Bogotá, Colombia
lfergusson@uniandes.edu.co

James A. Robinson
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
and NBER
jamesrobinson@uchicago.edu
1        Introduction
Though the classic theory of moral hazard emphasizes the importance of providing sufficient rewards
for “success” or “good performance”, it has long been recognized that high-powered incentives can
distort the type of effort exerted or encourage various unproductive activities to improve indicators
of performance (e.g., Holmström and Milgrom, 1991, Baker, 1992, Dixit, 1997). Several empirical
studies have documented this distortionary facet of high-powered incentives in teaching, managerial
behavior and bureaucracies (e.g., Levitt and Jacob, 2003, Aviv, 2014, Baker, Gibbons and Murphy,
1994, Oyer, 1998, Miller and Babiarz, 2014, Fisman and Wang, 2017).1 In this paper, we study the
implications of providing high-powered incentives for the military and security services under weak
institutional controls.
        Several governments, including in South Africa, the Philippines, Brazil, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Mexico and Peru, as well as the US military in Vietnam and more recently in Afghanistan, have
turned to high-powered incentives as a counterinsurgency strategy.2 In all of these settings, a
consequence, and often the root cause, of the insurgency was a weak institutional environment, which
at the same time created impunity for the military now facing stronger incentives. For example,
the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission revealed that in its confrontation with
the African National Congress, the country’s main counterinsurgency force, the Civil Cooperation
Bureau (CCB),

             “used cash as an incentive to ‘produce’. Thus, like other hit-squad or counterin-
          surgency units such as Koevoet and C10, CCB members were provided with a positive
          inducement to undertake actions which could, and often did, result in a gross violation
          of another individual’s rights” (p. 142).

In Guatemala’s long civil war against left-wing insurgents,

             “The competition to advance in the hierarchy induced agents and officials to indulge
          more in repression, which created a perverse system in which distain for life became the
          most important quality to gain promotion.” (Oficina de Derechos Humanos del Arzobis-
          pado de Guatemala, 1998)3 .

At the moment in the Philippines cash incentives are being explicitly used routinely to encourage
police officers to kill drug offenders, and the Amnesty International (2017, p.29) quotes a police
officer’s description of current practices as “There are different types of benefits [for these operations].
We always get paid by the encounter. That’s the word we use, ‘encounter.’ The amount ranges
    1
     For example, following Sears’ pay-for-performance program for its auto mechanics, owners of intact cars were
misled by mechanics into authorizing unnecessary repairs. Another well-publicized case is extensive teacher gaming
and cheating in response to the higher-powered teacher incentives introduced by George Bush’s No Child Left Behind
policy (Levitt and Jacob, 2003, of Aviv, 2014).
   2
     See Truth and Reconciliation Commission of South Africa (1998) for South Africa, Amnesty International (2017)
for the Philippines, Barbassa (2015) for Brazil, Lohmuller (2015) for El Salvador and Mexico, Oficina de Derechos
Humanos del Arzobispado de Guatemala (1998) for Guatemala.
   3
     Authors’ translation from Spanish. All other Spanish texts quoted below are also our translation.


                                                        1
from 8,000 pesos (US $161) to 15,000 pesos (US $302). ... The ones we really go after are pushers.
There are categories [of pushers]—different levels based on their notoriety. Higher levels are paid
more. ... That amount is per head. So if the operation is against four people, that’s 32,000 pesos
(US $644). The PNP incentive isn’t announced. ... We’re paid in cash, secretly, by headquarters.
The payment is [split by] the unit. ... There’s no incentive for arresting. We’re not paid anything.”
       Developed country governments are not immune from the temptation to use high-powered incen-
tives to motivate their military. During its long war in Vietnam, the US military explicitly targeted
“body count” as the central measure of success for its personnel, and body counts soon became a
quota to be met for promotion (Gibson, 2000, Turse, 2013). Gibson, for example, describes the
situation as:

            “Producing a high body count was crucial for promotion in the officer corps. Many
         high-level officers established ‘production quotas’ for their units, and systems of ‘debit’
         and ‘credit’ to calculate exactly how effectively subordinate units and middle-management
         personnel performed.” (p. 112)

Turse (2013, pp 44-45) quotes officers and soldiers who served in Vietnam describing this as: “Your
success was measured by your body count. It came down through the channels”; “It was all about
body count. Our commanders just wanted by the count”; “Get the body count. Get the body
count. Get the body count. It was prevalent everywhere. I think it was the mind-set of the officer
corps from the top down”; and “In our unit, guys who got confirmed kills would get a three-day
in-country R and R [rest and recreation]. Those guys got sent to the beach at Vung Tau”, and
also describes other incentives including “medals, badges, extra food, extra beer, permission to wear
non-regulation year, and light duty at base camp”. As a result of these incentives, again in the words
of a soldier, “our mission was not to win territory or seize positions, but simply to kill... Victory was
a high body count... This led to such practices as counting civilians as Viet Cong. ‘If it’s dead and
Vietnamese, it’s VC’ was a rule of thumb in the bush.“ (Stulberg and Salomone, 2013, p. 112). Nor
is it the case that current US military practice is immune to focusing on body count as the measure
of success or source of incentive; a similar strategy has been used in the recent counterinsurgency
efforts in Afghanistan as well (e.g., Thompson, 2009).
       A notable example that institutionalized high-powered incentives for the armed forces is Colom-
bia’s recent strategy of intensifying the military campaign against left-wing guerillas. Following
his election as president in 2002, Álvaro Uribe expanded the size of the military and strengthened
their incentives to fight the guerillas. A major consequence of these higher-powered incentives was
a surge in ‘false positives’ — the murder of civilians falsely portrayed by the army to be guerilla
combatants (Figure 1).4 False positives had long existed in Colombia, but increased massively
   4
    The phenomenon is more technically known as ‘homicides of protected persons’, and is also sometimes referred
to as extrajudicial executions. The euphemism ‘false positives’ was introduced by the political magazine Cambio in
September 2007. False positives and some of their causes have been extensively discussed by the press and some
non-governmental organizations, such as the Centro de Investigación y Educación Popular (CINEP) whose data we
draw on, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the United Nations (Alston, 2010) and Human



                                                        2
following President Uribe’s counterinsurgency strategy, and started declining only after media reve-
lations of the extent of civilian killings in 2008. According to the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights, during this period as many as 5,000 innocent civilians may have been executed. Figure 2
shows the distribution of false positives across Colombia, revealing that the practice was widespread
throughout the country, and not just driven by a few rogue military units.
    The Colombian setting shares with the other ones mentioned above not only the possibility of
extreme costs (in the form of the murder of innocent civilians) from high-powered incentives, but
also the weak checks on the unintended consequences of high-powered incentives for the military.
Unlawful behavior by soldiers can be checked either by the military hierarchy or by other branches
of the government (such as the judiciary). The weakness of the Colombian state made both types
of checks highly imperfect. Officers (in particular, as we argue below colonels) with powerful career
concerns exploited the high-powered incentives for their own gains, while the judiciary was unable
to act as a check on the military.
    To clarify how judicial institutions can affect the extent of unintended consequences from high-
powered incentives for the military, we start with a simple extension of Holmström and Milgrom’s
(1991) multi-tasking framework. In our model, agents (army members) can exert good effort, which
produces ‘true positives’ (real non-state armed actors killed) and helps establish the state’s monopoly
of violence, and bad effort, which produces false positives. The extent to which false positives can
be portrayed as true positives is determined by the weakness of local judicial institutions. We
establish a number of comparative statics which guide our empirical work. First, more powerful
incentives for military personnel to kill guerillas will not just increase such killings but also fuel false
positives. Second, this perverse effect will be more pronounced for brigades led by colonels because
they have more powerful career concerns (the promotion from colonel to general is a difficult step in
the Colombian army). Third, it will also be more pronounced in municipalities where local judicial
institutions are weak and less able to investigate and hold accountable military units and their
commanders. Crucially, judicial institutions impact false positives but not necessarily true positives.
We show that this asymmetry is present in our data, which bolsters our interpretation that what
we are documenting is not just unavoidable collateral damage from a successful counterinsurgency
strategy, but systematic bad effort by military units directed towards killing civilians and portraying
them as guerilla combatants. Finally, with limited risk aversion and noise in performance measures,
the state’s agents obtain sufficiently high returns from exerting bad effort that their overall utility
is higher when the quality of judicial institutions is lower; under such circumstances, if they are
sufficiently powerful, they may take actions to further weaken the local judiciary. This last prediction
underscores another difference of our conceptual structure from other examples of multi-tasking: in
an environment with already weak institutions, excessively high-powered incentives for the military
can further erode the quality of institutions.
    To study the unintended consequences from high-powered incentives empirically and investigate
Rights Watch (2015).
  Figure 2 shows both incidents producing false positives and the number of people killed in these events. In this and
the next figure, we plot a two-period moving average of the raw numbers for ease of inspection.



                                                          3
the aforementioned theoretical predictions, we build a municipality-level panel dataset on the inci-
dence of false positives, the rank of brigade commanders, and the quality of local judicial institutions
from 2000 to 2010. Though measuring false positives is challenging, we believe that the data avail-
able to us are fairly reliable. These data come from the meticulous efforts of a Colombian Jesuit
NGO, based on direct reports from the ground, including from the clergy, and detailed analysis
of various national and local news sources. These data are unlikely to suffer from the systematic
biases of estimates from official sources and victim associations. We identify the introduction of pay
for performance with Uribe’s flagship “Democratic Security” initiative and associated policies and
directives aimed at rewarding army members for killing guerilla combatants, which were in effect
between 2003 and 2008. Our empirical strategy is to estimate the impact of the interaction between
the share of brigades commanded by colonels and the quality of (initial) local judicial institutions
with higher-powered incentives for the military on true and false positives.
   The results are consistent with the implications outlined above. In the time series, we see a
pronounced increase in false positives during the period of higher-powered incentives (Figure 1).
True positives, in contrast, start increasing sharply several years before the onset of high-powered
incentives, in part because of the collapse of the peace process initiated by Uribe’s predecessor,
President Pastrana, and then decline during the period of high-powered incentives, partly because
the guerilla withdrew to remoter areas during this period (Figure 3). The contrast between the
time-series behaviors of true and false positives already suggests that the increase in false positives
is not just a natural facet of collateral damage. We then show that this increase is more pronounced
in municipalities where the share of brigades led by colonels is greater and local judicial institutions
are weaker. Though these estimates do not correspond to causal effects and we cannot rule out
alternative, time-varying factors accounting for these patterns, reassuringly we see no pre-trends in
either false positives or true positives in these areas, suggesting that these municipalities were not on
different trends before the era of high-powered incentives. Confirming this, the results are also very
similar when municipality-specific linear trends are included in the regressions. We further find that
after 2008, these differential cross-municipality trends disappear, which is consistent with greater
public scrutiny bringing the incentives to generate false positives to an abrupt end (a pattern that
is also visible in the time series shown in Figure 1). Finally, the empirical evidence also points to a
deterioration in the quality of judicial institutions in areas with a high share of brigades commanded
by colonels, and to no discernible improvement security situation (that is, no declines in attacks by
either the guerrilla or the paramilitaries).
   As already anticipated, our bottom-line conclusion that high-powered incentives without a strong
accountability system can backfire coheres with a large principal-agent literature. Holmström and
Milgrom (1991) and Baker (1992) were the first to emphasize and model the dark side of high-
powered (pay-for-performance) incentives. There are many examples of significant distortions from
multi-tasking type considerations in the organizational economics literature. Summarizing this
evidence, Prendergast concludes: “One of the first rules of pay for performance is that you never
offer pay for performance in circumstances where a person both diagnoses and cures the problem”
(2011, p. 127). Unfortunately, as we will see, this is more or less exactly what happened in the

                                                   4
Colombian case. Relative to the aforementioned empirical literature on the unintended consequences
of high-powered incentives, we not only provide evidence for multi-tasking type behavior in a novel
and arguably more consequential setting, but we also suggest and provide evidence for the effect of
institutional restrictions on this type of behavior.
       Though a number of recent papers (e.g., Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan, 2012, Finan, Olken and Pande,
2015, and Dal Bó, Finan and Rossi 2013) find that strengthening incentives for public servants is
generally effective in developing countries, this work typically focuses on environments where other
accountability or monitoring mechanisms are not entirely absent, as they were for security forces
in Colombia. When they were largely absent as in Banerjee, Duflo and Glennerster’s (2008) study
of nurses in the Indian public health care system, such incentive schemes were ineffective and did
backfire. Dixit (1997) explicitly argued that these potential costs of high-powered incentives in an
environment of low accountability are the reason why bureaucracies do not utilize them (see also
Acemoglu, Kremer and Mian, 2008). It is thus not surprising that the implications of high-powered
incentives for the military parallel their failed applications in other fields.5
       Our paper is related to a small literature documenting the effectiveness of “winning hearts and
minds” in the context of counterinsurgency, including Berman, Shapiro and Felter (2011), Crost,
Felter and Johnston (2014) and Beath, Fotini and Enikolopov (2016), and to several recent papers
documenting that counterinsurgency strategies centering on military dominance, such as bombing,
have had counter-productive effects (e.g., Kalyvas, Kocher and Pepinsky, 2011, Lyall, 2014, Dell and
Querubı́n, 2016).6
       To our knowledge there has been no empirical study of the false positives in Colombia, though
Cárdenas and Villa (2013) develop a principal-agent model where the government, acting as princi-
pal, offers bonuses, a probability of auditing and a sanction for cheating to military units in exchange
for their reported killings. They interpret President Uribe’s flagship Democratic Security policy as
one which privileged bonuses and disregarded sanctions or auditing, and thus increased cheating
(false positives) by military units. While this interpretation is in line with ours, their paper neither
develops the basic comparative static predictions that guide our empirical work nor presents any
empirical evidence.
       We start in the next section with a brief discussion of the Colombian context. Section 3 presents
our motivating model. Section 4 describes our data. Section 5 presents our empirical strategy
and results, and Section 6 concludes. The Appendix contains further case study evidence on the
presence of false positives in Colombia and the nature of incentives facing military personnel, proofs
of additional results from the theory section, and further empirical results.
   5
      Highlighting another potential downside of military impunity in weak institutional environments, Galiani, Rossi
and Schargrodsky (2011) find that people drafted at random into the Argentine army are subsequently more likely to
become criminals.
    6
      Ager, Bursztyn and Voth (2016) also document the consequences of military incentives, in the form of status
competition between fighter pilots, with negative unintended consequences including a higher death reate for low-
skilled incentivized peers.




                                                         5
2     The Colombian Context
Colombia has a long history of civil war and non-state armed groups. The conflict with the two
largest guerilla groups, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia — FARC) and Ejército de Liberación Nacional (National Liberation Arny —
ELN) dominated the 2002 presidential electoral campaign won by Álvaro Uribe. Voters were particu-
larly disillusioned with previous failed peace processes. President Uribe’s flagship policy, Polı́tica de
Seguridad Democrática or Democratic Security Policy, included a major run-up in military expendi-
ture to fight the guerillas, and also simultaneously sought to control paramilitary groups united under
an umbrella organization (called Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia, United Self-Defense Forces of
Colombia — AUC). The AUC demobilized between 2003 and 2007, following a peace process with
the government (though splinter paramilitary groups including former AUC fronts are still active in
the country).
    The Democratic Security program was accompanied by incentives to increase effort to fight the
illegal armed groups. We first offer a summary of the introduction and removal of the set of incentives
which, we argue, helped exacerbate the problem of false positives. We then discuss the evidence for
false positives.

2.1    High-Powered Incentives in the Colombian Military
Uribe’s Democratic Security program coincided with the issue of a specific set of documents and
informal regulations introducing incentives in the fight against illegal armed groups. Some of these
are now public. The secret Army Directive 29 of November 17 2005, later leaked by the press
and exhibited in Figure 4, is particularly relevant. The directive put in place a reward schedule
for killing and capturing members of illegal groups, seizing weapons, and sharing information with
the following important features. First, military personnel was not explicitly excluded from the
possibility of getting the rewards. Second, even though there was a fixed amount to be distributed
as rewards for killing or capturing guerilla leaders, there was no limit in the available pool for lower
ranked guerillas.7 Third, the operation that led to the reward did not need to be authorized ex ante
by a superior officer. And finally, posterior intelligence could be used to justify the killings. In sum,
strong incentives were introduced, but there were only weak controls on the implementation of the
directive.
    Another case in point is the Presidential Decree 1400 of May 5 2006 (exhibited in Figure 5), called
BOINA (the Spanish acronym for Bonuses for Operations of National Importance, and literally
meaning ‘beret’). This decree was explicitly targeted at members of the armed forces and the
now-extinct Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad (DAS) — Colombia’s former intelligence
agency.8 The decree, revoked in May 14, 2007, rewarded army members or DAS functionaries
   7
     For instance, the directive approved only up to fifteen total rewards for illegal armed groups’ top leadership. For
the lower-ranked commanders and foot soldiers, while the payment per member was lower, there were no limits on the
number of monetary rewards that could be awarded.
   8
     The agency was closed in the midst of a number of scandals during Uribe’s presidency, involving illegal wiretapping
of members of the opposition, selling classified information to members or armed groups, drug traffickers and foreign


                                                           6
with up to 12 times their monthly salary for participating in successful operations of “national
importance” against the insurgency. These bonuses, reserved for very high-ranking individuals and
signed off by the President, also fit into the general policy of providing high-powered incentives in
the fight against the guerillas.
    As we document further in the Appendix, while the formal directives were in effect starting at
least by 2005, informal incentives were ratcheted up soon after Uribe came to power (in August
2002). These incentives were partly in terms of money or vacations, and partly, in the form of
promotions and careers. The report by Human Rights Watch (2015) describes the introduction
of incentives after 2002 which “rewarded combat killings with vacation time, promotions, medals,
training courses, and congratulations from superiors, among other prizes” (p. 29). They quote as
well a leaked 2009 memo from the US Embassy in Bogotá, which suggested that General Mario
Montoya “initiated the practice” (p. 68) of false positives when he commanded the 4th brigade in
2002 and 2003. Montoya became the head of the army between February 2006 and November 2008.
Indeed, Human Rights Watch begins its report by stating

           “Between 2002 and 2008, army brigades across Colombia regularly executed civilians.
        Under pressure from superiors to show ‘positive’ results and boost body counts in their
        war against guerillas, soldiers and officers abducted victims or lured them to remote
        locations under false pretenses . . . killed them, placed weapons on their lifeless bodies,
        and then reported them as enemy combatants killed in action.” (p. 1).

    UN Commissioner Alston also observes that the pressure to “show results” and rewards for doing
so is cited by experts, even within the military, as one of the causes of false positives. A soldier
explained a killing by his unit would be rewarded with 15 days of vacation. “When important
holidays approached, he stated, soldiers would attempt to ‘earn’ vacation time” (Alston, 2010, p.
11). Another soldier, who witnessed as many as 25 false positive cases occurring in 2007 and 2008,
refers to Directive 29 of 2005, and notes that to claim the monetary rewards it promised for killings
and war material, army members would kill civilians and “plant” weapons on them (many of which
had been seized in operations and kept unregistered for later use in these operations, or bought
illegally). He also mentions the case of one involved officer (Sergeant Consuegra) who was rewarded
with a trip to the United States to take a course on Human Rights, and later returned to continue
with these operations.9 (We present more specific examples of this in the Appendix). Alston further
notes

           “There were incentives: an informal incentive system for soldiers to kill, and a formal
        one for civilians who provided information leading to the capture or killing of guerillas.
        The ... system lacked oversight and accountability” (p. 2).
governments, elimination of judicial antecedents of paramilitaries, and even an assault on a senator (see Verdad
Abierta, 2011).
   9
     “Me dijeron que están ofreciendo $50 millones por mı́”, El Espectador, April 9, 2016.             Available
at: http://www.elespectador.com/entrevista-de-cecilia-orozco/me-dijeron-estan-ofreciendo-50-millones
-mi-articulo-626269 (last accessed May 12, 2016).


                                                       7
       These provisions and other directives creating high-powered incentives for military personnel
were ended after 2008 due to mass media attention following the abduction and murder by the army
of 22 men in Soacha, a suburb of Bogotá. For example, the aforementioned directive 29 was modified
by directives 02 of 2008 and 01 of 2009. After 2008, the government also took disciplinary action,
ousting high-ranking officials involved in possible false positives. It also created a specialized unit
in the Office of the Attorney General (Fiscalı́a) to investigate these crimes.
       Based on all of this evidence, we suppose in our empirical work that high powered incentives
were in effect from the beginning of 2003 until the end of 2008. In some of our specifications, we
parameterize the power of these incentives as increasing gradually between 2003 and the end of
2008. This choice of timing is consistent with the emphasis in the case study literature and the
time-series patterns of false positives already depicted in Figure 1, which also superimposes our
parameterization of these incentives on top of the time-series variation.

2.2      Career Concerns of Colombian Colonels
Following President Uribe’s election, the Colombian military experienced an unprecedented expan-
sion, nearly tripling from about 160,000 soldiers in 2002 to about 430,000 at the end of the decade.
This growth also implied the creation of new military brigades, while the rank composition of the
military command could not change as rapidly (it takes time to become a high-ranking official).
This phenomenon, which experts in Colombia called escasez de cuadros (cadre scarcity), forced the
army to appoint colonels to command brigades, a position previously reserved for generals. Colonels
leading brigades, unlike generals, were up for promotion and unlike lower ranked officers, were in
charge of important military units whose results were tied to their personal success. Therefore,
high-powered incentives are more likely to have an effect on their behavior. Though some generals
were also influenced by high-powered incentives and may have been motivated, among other things,
by a desire to be promoted to a higher-ranked generalship, the stakes for colonels were clearly much
higher, mainly because promotion to the rank of general is generally viewed as a very difficult step
in the Colombian army.
       At the beginning of 2014, 4,262 members of the Armed Forces were under investigation for
their responsibility in false positives cases. Almost 10% of them (401) were army officers, “mainly
colonels, majors, captains and lieutenants” with no mention of generals involved.10 The Human
Rights Watch (2015) report cites just 16 active or retired generals under investigation, and while
this may partly reflect more impunity towards higher-ranking officials, it also reflects the differential
incentives faced by colonels as opposed to generals.
       The case study evidence, which we discuss more in the Appendix, supports the notion that
colonels had greater incentives to encourage and reward false positives. For instance, in his testimony,
Captain Antonio Rozo Valbuena, former commander of the GAULA special operations unit working
in the department of Córdoba, asked the judges to investigate a general who committed scores of
  10
    “4.262 militares investigados por falsos positivos”, El Espectador, February 19, 2014. Available at: http://www
.elespectador.com/noticias/judicial/4262-militares-investigados-falsos-positivos-articulo-476121 (last
accessed September 20, 2014).


                                                        8
false positives in the brigade under his command while he was a colonel. According to Captain
Rozo Valbuena, the only objective of the official was to gather enough “statistics” to be able to be
promoted to general.11 While Colombian justice has been slow to prosecute involved officers, the case
against General Torres Escalante, the first to be issued an arrest warrant, is particularly revealing.
One of his soldiers claims that Torres Escalante, then a colonel commanding Brigade XVI, knew
about false positives in his unit and explicitly emphasized killings over capture (“you talk to me about
killings”, he is quoted as saying). He also directly approved rewards with confidential funds for the
killing of civilians.12 The General Attorney Office argued in this and other similar cases that “killings
were not isolated murders by foot soldiers or low-rank individuals, but responded to a directive from
the top ranks privileging deaths as operational results over captures or demobilizations.”13
    But perhaps the most telling case on the potentially different behavior of colonels and generals
is that of Brigade XI. Colonel Borja confessed to committing 57 false positives as commander of
a special joint forces unit of this brigade, which was at the time commanded by Colonel Peña
Forero. After General Jorge Arturo Salgado took over the control of this brigade in November
2017, he started an investigation of the very large number of killings that had been reported. He
uncovered the “criminal machine” of Colonel Borja and fired him after confirming irregularities in
the reports of rebels killed in combat. In Borja’s confession, he refers to Colonel Peña’s concerns
about the standing of his brigade relative to others by number of rebels killed, wishing to top the
list. Borja also emphasized that those not making a killing quota were forced out or moved away,
and that Colonel Peña set killing goals and advised his subordinates on how to claim rewards for
false positives. Tellingly, after the arrival of General Salgado reported killings fell from 181 to 60
per year.14

2.3    Evidence on False Positives
It is important to underscore that the data we use on false positives indeed correspond to killings
of civilians. This issue is discussed in detail in the UN and Human Rights Watch reports, and was
also extensively covered in the Colombian press. Figure 6, for example, depicts some of the evidence
gathered by judicial authorities allowing them to establish that alleged guerilla killings were, in
fact, false positives. The figure contains images published by Semana (the main Colombian political
magazine) in 2010.15 Corpses were, somewhat carelessly, set up simulating combats. The image in
  11
     “Confesiones siniestras”, Agencia Prensa Rural, October 10, 2011. Available at: http://prensarural.org/spip/
spip.php?article6588 (last accessed August 15, 2014).
  12
     “Un testigo clave contra el general Torres Escalante, investigado por falsos positivos”, El Espectador, March
30, 2016, Available at http://www.elespectador.com/noticias/judicial/un-testigo-clave-contra-el-general
-torres-escalante-inv-articulo-624660? (last accessed May 12, 2016).
  13
     “Se entregó el general Torres Escalante por ‘falsos positivos”’, El Espectador, March 28, 2016, Avail-
able at http://www.elespectador.com/noticias/judicial/se-entrego-el-general-torres-escalante-falsos
-positivos-articulo-624164 (last accessed May 12, 2016).
  14
     “El general que frenó los falsos positivos en Sucre”, El Espectador, April 16, 2016, Available at http://www
.elespectador.com/noticias/judicial/el-general-freno-los-falsos-positivos-sucre-articulo-627510 (last
accessed May 12, 2016).
  15
     Semana, “Los casos olvidados de los falsos positivos”, July 17, 2010, http://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/
los-casos-olvidados-falsos-positivos/119416-3.



                                                        9
the top left reveals that the victim’s fingers were artificially placed on the trigger, and subsequent
forensic tests revealed that the weapon was not fired. The second picture, to the right, shows three
grenades dangerously placed on a victim’s pockets, where they could easily explode in the midst of
combat. In the bottom left image, the victim is wearing the right boot on the left foot, and vice
versa. Finally, in the bottom right image, the magazine is stored inside the boot, which would have
been extremely uncomfortable during combat.


3         A Model of Intentional and Unintentional False Positives
In this section we present a simple theoretical framework which will guide our empirical work.

3.1        Setup and Assumptions
Consider the following simple extension of Holmström and Milgrom’s (1991) model of multi-tasking.
We take the incentive scheme as given, and focus on the implications for the agent’s behavior. The
agent can exert good effort aT , which produces true positives exp(qT ), where

                                                    qT = aT + εT ,                                                    (1)

and εT ∼ N (0, σT2 ). False positives can be produced intentionally or accidentally, and are given by
exp(qF ), where
                                          qF = χ(aT + εT ) + (aF + εF ),                                              (2)

χ > 0, and εF ∼ N (0, σF2 ) and independent of εT .16 The first term in equation (2) corresponds
to unintentional “collateral damage” that arises when, striving to produce true positives, the agent
nonetheless generates false positives; it thus naturally scales with good effort, aT . The second term
incorporates bad effort aF , intentionally producing false positives. For tractability, as with true
positives, we assume that the performance measure, qF , is a linear function of effort with additive
normal noise. Notice that as χ tends to zero, all false positives come from bad effort, whereas for
large values of χ, false positives largely reflect collateral damage.17
         The observed performance measure for the agent is

                                                   q̂T = qT + αqF ,
    16
      Throughout, since observed true positives, exp(qT ), and false positives, exp(qF ), are respectively monotonic in qT
and qF , with some abuse of terminology, we refer to either set of objects as true or false positives.
   17
      Just as intentional effort directed at true positives produces false positives, one could allow effort directed at
false positives to accidentally generate true positives (killings of real guerilla members) when trying to produce false
positives. This does not change the essence of the results that follow. Moreover, it is not as relevant in our empirical
application for at least two reasons. First, when killing civilians to present them as guerilla members the army typically
targeted individuals known not to be guerilla members (petty criminals, the homeless, the mentally ill and others at
the margin of society). Second, even if they killed a guerilla member or collaborator, the fact that they did it via “bad
effort” (that is, killing him outside of combat and disguising him as killed in combat) is a false positive — both legally
and from the viewpoint of corrupting the system by killing people in search of personal rewards.




                                                           10
where α ∈ [0, 1] captures the extent to which the agent may successfully misrepresent false positives,
and corresponds to an inverse measure of the quality of local judicial institutions.18
       The agent has constant absolute risk aversion preferences over his reward w net of effort costs
Ψ(aT , aF ),
                             u(w − Ψ(aT , aF )) = E[ − exp(−η (w − Ψ(aT , aF )))],
                                                                                            1      2
where η is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion (CARA), and Ψ(aT , aF ) =              2 (cT aT   + cF a2F ) +
δaT aF .19 When δ = Ψ00aT aF (aT , aF ) > 0, there is effort substitution: more bad effort increases the
cost of good effort. Conversely, when δ < 0, the two types of efforts are technological complements,
and more effort in one dimension reduces the cost of effort in the other.
       The reward to the agent is the sum of a flat component (e.g., base salary) τ and a linear incentive
scheme as a function of the performance measure q̂T , so that

                                                    w = τ + πsq̂T .

Here s corresponds to the power of the incentives facing the agent (as a function of the performance
measure q̂T ), while π parameterizes how much he cares about this aspect of his rewards, for example,
capturing his career concerns resulting from good performance (as measured by q̂T ).
       Then, using the properties of the CARA utility, the agent’s utility u(aT , aF ) is proportional to

                                1                              η(πs)2                        
   τ + πs (aT (1 + αχ) + αaF ) − (cT a2T + cF a2F ) − δaT aF −          (1 + αχ)2 σT2 + α2 σF2 ,               (3)
                                2                                2

where the first two terms correspond to the expected rewards, the second two terms to the costs,
and the last term to the variance multiplied by the coefficient of absolute risk aversion, η.
                                                             √
   We first observe that in the extreme case with δ = cT cA , there is full substitution and the
                                                                    √       √
agent specializes in one task (since in this case Ψ(aT , aF ) = 21 ( cT aT + cF aF )2 ). In the text, we
assume that
                                                             √
                                                     |δ| <       cT cF ,                                     (A1)

which enables us to focus on the more interesting (and less extreme) cases. The Appendix (Section
A.4) discusses the cases of perfect substitutes and perfect complements, establishing that the results
are essentially identical to those presented here.
  18
       A slightly more general assumption would be to have

                                       q̂T = qT + α1 [χ(aT + εT )] + α2 (aF + εF ),
with α1 corresponding to the misrepresentation of collateral damage and α2 to the portrayal of intentional false
positives as true killings. We adopt the simpler specification (with α1 = α2 = α) since we do not have a way of
distinguishing these more detailed parameters in the data.
   19
      Here the reward w is inclusive of monetary rewards as well as non-pecuniary ones, such as promotion and days
off. The assumption that this reward is a linear function of q̂T is for simplicity and tractability.




                                                             11
3.2   Solution and Implications
The agent maximizes u(aT , aF ) in (3) by choosing good and bad effort, aT and aF . Bearing in mind
the possibility of corner solutions, equilibrium effort levels are obtained as

                                                    α
                                  a∗F     = 0⇔δ≥        cT ≡ δF ,
                                                 1 + αχ
                                                 1 + αχ
                                  a∗T     = 0⇔δ≥        cF ≡ δT ,
                                                    α

where δJ is the critical value of δ above which the agent exerts no effort of type J.
   Because the marginal cost of effort is zero when both types of efforts are equal to zero, the agent
will exert at least one kind of effort. To determine which, first suppose that δT < δF , or equivalently
                                         √
√α > 1+αχ                                                                                         ∗
                                                                           
           cT . This implies that δT <  cT cF < δF . Then for δ ∈ 0, δT , the agent chooses aT > 0
         √
 cF
                                 √
and a∗F > 0, while if δ ∈ δT , cT cF , he opts for a∗T = 0 and a∗F > 0. The symmetric argument
holds when δT > δF .
   Intuitively, these conditions underscore that when δ is sufficiently large, the agent specializes in
one kind of effort, and which one this is depends on the relative profitability of bad versus good
                                      √                √
effort (captured in the comparison α/ cF ≷ (1 + αχ)/ cT ). When δ is small (and trivially for
negative δ), both types of effort are exerted.
   Summarizing these possibilities, utility maximization yields the following effort levels:
                             
                              πs αcTcT−δ(1+αχ)
                                                                    
                             
                             
                                      cF −δ 2
                                                         if δ < min δF , δT
                                                                           √
                             
                          ∗       α
                         aF = πs c                       if δT < δ < δF < cT cF ,                                          (4)
                                   F
                                                                      √
                             
                             
                             
                             0                          if δF < δ < cF cT < δT


                                
                                             F −δα
                                 πs (1+αχ)c
                                                                        
                                
                                
                                      cT cF −δ 2
                                                             if δ < min δF , δT
                                                                               √
                                
                        a∗T   =  πs 1+αχ
                                      cT                     if δF < δ < δT < cT cF ,                                      (5)
                                                                         √
                                
                                
                                
                                0                           if δT < δ < cF cT < δF

   We focus on the implications of the model on these equilibrium efforts and, more importantly,
on the quantities that we can measure; true positives given by E[exp(qT∗ )], and false positives given
by E[exp(qF∗ )] (the results for E[qT∗ ] and E[qF∗ ] are identical as we show in the Appendix, Section
A.5). More specifically, these quantities can be computed as

                                                                                      σT2
                                                                                           
                        E[exp(qT∗ )   =   E[exp(a∗T   + εT )] =   exp(a∗T ) exp                 ,                          (6)
                                                                                       2

and

                                                                                                    χ2 σT2 + σF2
                                                                                                                  
         E[exp(qF∗ )] = E[exp(a∗F + εF ) + χ(a∗T + εT )] = exp(χa∗T + a∗F ) exp                                        ,   (7)
                                                                                                          2


                                                        12
where the last equalities in both expressions make use of the fact that the error terms are normally
distributed.
   The next proposition uses these expressions to obtain the comparative statics of true and false
positives.

Proposition 1. (Equilibrium false and true positives and incentives)
A marginal increase in incentives s:

   1. weakly increases true and false positives, i.e.,

                  ∂E[exp(qT∗ )]         ∂E[exp(qT∗ )]
                                ≥ 0 and               = 0 if and only if a∗T = 0,
                      ∂s                    ∂s
                  ∂E[exp(qF∗ )]         ∂E[exp(qF∗ )]
                                ≥ 0 and               = 0 if and only if a∗F = 0 and χ = 0;
                      ∂s                    ∂s

   2. leads to (weakly) greater increases in true and false positives where reported output is a more
      important part of compensation (higher π or stronger career concerns), i.e.,

                 ∂ 2 E[exp(qT∗ )]         ∂ 2 E[exp(qT∗ )]
                                  ≥ 0 and                  = 0 if and only if a∗T = 0,
                      ∂s∂π                     ∂s∂π
                 ∂ 2 E[exp(qF∗ )]         ∂ 2 E[exp(qF∗ )]
                                  ≥ 0 and                  = 0 if and only if a∗F = 0 and χ = 0;
                      ∂s∂π                     ∂s∂π

   3. leads to (weakly) greater increases in false positives where misrepresentation of false positives
      is more likely (higher α), i.e.,

                 ∂ 2 E[exp(qF∗ )]          ∂ 2 E[exp(qF∗ )]
                                  ≥ 0 with                  = 0 if and only if a∗F = 0 and χ = 0;
                      ∂s∂α                      ∂s∂α

   4. may lead to a larger or smaller increase in true positives where misrepresentation of false
      positives is more likely (higher α). In particular,
                                           
                               2       ∗
                                           0       if a∗T = 0
                             ∂ E[exp(qT )] 
                                             ≶ 0 if (a∗T , a∗F ) > 0 and χ ≶ cδF .
                                 ∂α∂s      
                                             > 0 if a∗F = 0
                                           


Proof. All stated results follow from combining equilibrium effort (4) and (5) with (6) and (7).
For the direct impact of s and its interaction with π, these are almost immediate by noticing that
                                                ∂a∗ ∂a∗ ∂ 2 a∗
E[exp(qF∗ )] > 0 and that the derivatives, ∂sJ , ∂πJ , ∂s∂πJ , for J ∈ {F, P }, are greater than or equal
to zero, with equality when the corresponding effort equals zero.
    Only the cross derivative with α requires some elaboration. For true positives, when no good
effort or only good effort is exerted, these results are also immediate. Taking the case where both
                                        ∂a∗      a∗     ∂ 2 a∗T      ∂a∗
efforts are positive, we can compute ∂sT = sT and ∂s∂α          = 1s ∂αT . After substituting and simplifying,
we can write:
                               ∂ 2 E[exp(qT∗ )]                 1 ∂a∗T ∗
                                                 = E[exp(qT∗ )]        (a + 1),
                                    ∂s∂α                        s ∂α T
which leads to the stated condition.



                                                     13
       For false positives, we have

          ∂ 2 E[exp(qF∗ )]                           ∂a∗T  ∂a∗      ∂a∗ ∂a∗
                                                                              2 ∗
                                                                                       ∂ 2 a∗F
                                                                                           
                                                                                ∂ aT
                           = E[exp(qF∗ )]        χ        + F      χ T + F + χ       +            .
               ∂s∂α                                   ∂s    ∂s      ∂α  ∂α      ∂s∂α ∂s∂α

If there is no collateral damage (χ = 0) and no bad effort (a∗F = 0), all derivatives and cross
                                                                 ∂ 2 E[exp(q ∗ )]
derivatives in the expression equal zero and thus       ∂α∂s
                                                              F
                                                                = 0. If this is not the case, the term
with the derivatives with respect to s is always positive because at least one type of effort is strictly
positive. The remaining terms with the derivatives and cross-derivatives with respect to α are also
trivially positive when just one effort is exerted or if δ ≤ 0. In the case of effort substitution, we
can complete the square to obtain
   2 ∗
               ∂ 2 a∗F         ∂a∗    ∂a∗
                                                         h √
      ∂ aT                 1                         π               √ 2           √            i
    χ       +            =    χ T + F =                      (χ cF −   cT ) +  2χ (  c c
                                                                                      F T  − δ)   > 0,
      ∂s∂α ∂s∂α            s   ∂α      ∂α       cF cT − δ 2
                                           √
where we have made use of (A1), or δ < cF cT .

       The first prediction in Proposition 1 is that more high-powered incentives increase both true and
false positives. The increase is strict with a few exceptions (which occur when the agent chooses to
specialize in just one type of effort, and for false positives when in addition there is no collateral
damage). One major implication is that we should expect an increase in both true and false positives,
and this effect should be more pronounced when the agent has greater career concerns (as captured
by the second part of the proposition). Moreover, provided there is collateral damage, this result
applies even when the military are not exerting any bad effort. Crucially, however, the predictions in
the cases where there is and is not bad effort diverge, when we look at the comparative statics with
respect to the quality of local institutions: part 3 shows that greater α will always increase bad effort
and false positives (except in the corner case where there is no bad effort and no collateral damage),
while the impact of worse local judicial institutions on true positives is ambiguous. Intuitively,
worse local judicial institutions encourage bad effort, and thus false positives, because they make it
easier for military personnel to portray such killings as true positives. They also impact good effort,
because they permit collateral damage resulting from good effort to be portrayed as true positives.
Nevertheless, when this collateral damage effect is small (because χ is small) and when there is
sufficient substitutability between the two types of efforts, in contrast to false positives, good effort
and true positives will decline. These contrasting predictions from (the interaction of) the power
of incentives and α on false and true positives is particularly important because they give us a way
to distinguish between a scenario in which false positives are just collateral damage resulting from
good effort versus one in which there is a shift towards more bad effort targeted towards killing
civilians and disguising them as guerilla combatants, and furthermore because in the data we will
indeed find different responses of false and true positives to the quality of local institutions.20
       We next turn to the implications of high-powered incentives on the quality of local institutions,
and show that agents may benefit from weaker local judicial institutions, and as a consequence, may
  20
    In the Appendix (Section A.6), we also show that we cannot distinguish the importance of bad effort relative to
good effort by looking at exp(qF )/ exp(qT ), which is potentially a nonmonotonic function of the extent of bad effort
relative to good effort.


                                                             14
take actions to weaken them given the opportunity.21

Proposition 2. (Implications for institutions)
Consider the agent’s equilibrium payoff u(a∗T , a∗F ). Suppose that δ < min δT , δF , so that an interior
                                                                           

solutions exists. Then

                              ∂u
                                   = πs χa∗T + a∗F − ηπs (1 + αχ)χσT2 + ασF2 ≶ 0
                                                                           
                              ∂α

                            ∂2u
                                   = 2π χa∗T + a∗F − ηπs (1 + αχ)χσT2 + ασF2 ≶ 0
                                                                           
                           ∂α∂s

                          ∂3u
                                   = 4 χa∗T + a∗F − ηπs (1 + αχ)χσT2 + ασF2 ≶ 0
                                                                          
                        ∂α∂s∂π

         Moreover, each of these expressions is positive if and only if

                                    χa∗T + a∗F > ηπs (1 + αχ)χσT2 + ασF2
                                                                                      


which is satisfied provided that the agent’s risk aversion is sufficiently low or the noise for good and
bad efforts is sufficiently small.

Proof. By evaluating the agent’s payoff at the optimum levels of effort and applying the envelope
theorem, we obtain the first expression. The second and third expressions follow from simple differ-
                                                        ∂a∗J                 ∂a∗J
entiation and using (4) and (5) to note that π          ∂π     = a∗J and s    ∂s    = a∗J for J = F, T.

         Proposition 2 implies that agents may be interested in decreasing the quality of local institutions
to raise their payoff (so long as the extra payoff compensates for the cost of the added risk, which
happens either when they are not too risk averse or when effort translates to output without much
noise). More importantly, in this case, they will also have a more pronounced preference for weaker
institutions in the presence of higher-powered incentives when they have stronger career concerns
themselves (when π is greater).


4         Data and Descriptive Statistics
4.1        Data
Our key dependent variables are the number of false and true positives in a given municipality
and year. The basic source is from the Colombian Jesuit NGO “Center for Research and Popular
Education” (or CINEP, for its Spanish acronym), which has been collecting high-quality data on
    21
    The results in Proposition 1 depend only on marginal incentives and are thus entirely independent of how the
intercept of the incentive schedule, τ , is determined. The results in this proposition, on the other hand, depend on
expected total payoffs, and thus on τ . Since, to the best of our knowledge, base salaries for officers and soldiers were
not modified when high-powered incentives were introduced (and certainly not as a function of whether they were
colonels or generals), we assume in the next proposition the most natural benchmark that τ is independent of s and
α.


                                                           15
violent events in Colombia. Their data include a detailed description of chronologically ordered
violent events in Colombia, including date of occurrence, geographical location, the group, or groups,
deemed responsible, individuals killed and injured, and the group to which the victims belong. As
primary sources, CINEP relies on press articles from newspapers with both national and regional
coverage, and reports gathered directly by several organizations on the ground, especially the clergy.
Since the Catholic Church is present even in the most remote areas of the country, CINEP’s data on
Colombian civil conflict are generally considered very comprehensive and accurate. Using this source
and contrasting it with others, Restrepo, Spagat and Vargas (2004) constructed a comprehensive
event-based dataset on Colombian conflict that has been widely used. This dataset codes clashes,
(one-sided) attacks, and casualties from each of the parties involved in Colombia’s internal conflict.
    Our true positives measure comes from the updated version of these data, and is defined as killings
of rebels (guerillas or paramilitaries) by the government. We use both the number of instances
(events) producing such killings as well as the number of rebels killed in the events.22
    As already mentioned above, we define false positives as killings of civilians by the government
which were falsely claimed to be rebels killed in combat, and obtain it from CINEP’s Data Bank on
Human Rights and Political Violence (Banco de Datos de Derechos Humanos y Violencia Polı́tica
del CINEP ). This dataset includes every episode of arbitrary execution and unlawful detention of
alleged rebels and specifies: the date and place of recruitment and execution; whether the victim
was declared to be a member of the guerillas, the paramilitaries or an “unknown” rebel group;
whether the perpetrators were from the army, police, or navy; and whether there is an ongoing
investigation or sentence in connection with the crime. Again, we use both the number of instances
(events) producing such killings and the number of people killed in the events in each municipality
and year.23
    Our main independent variables are municipal judicial inefficiency and the rank (general or
colonel) of brigade commanders in each municipality. To measure judicial inefficiency we use data
from the Inspector General (Procuradurı́a), the institution in charge of disciplinary oversight of all
public servants. In particular, we have an event-based dataset with all processes arising from com-
plaints against public servants, from 1995 to 2010. With these data, we compute both an initial mea-
   22
      The time series patterns of our true positives data, depicted in Figure 3, do not coincide with official statistics
from the Ministry of Defense, which instead point to a more persistent increase in the numbers of guerillas killed
by the army during the period from 2002 to 2007. There are several reasons, however, for not trusting the official
statistics (see, e.g., Grupo de Memoria Histórica, 2013, Chapter 1). In addition to the presence of false positives,
Otero Prada (2008) points out that the official numbers, combined with the numbers of demobilized and captured
guerilla, produce hugely unrealistic totals relative to the estimated sizes of guerilla fighters. For example, just from
2002 to 2007 they imply that more than 50,000 guerilla members were killed or captured, or demobilized, leading to
a much larger number than the estimate of 15,000 guerilla members around this time. These exaggerated numbers
likely reflect a desire to “convey a sense of success in the fight against insurgency” (Otero Prada, 2008, p. 21).
   23
      While any measure of false positives is inevitably imperfect, this dataset appears much better than available
alternatives. Official counts based on investigations by judicial and disciplinary authorities may suffer geographic
biases as a function of institutional capacity. On the other hand, counts from victims’ associations have been criticized
as exaggerating the problem. On the whole, this dataset is quite conservative, including 925 cases of false positives,
involving 1, 513 victims from 1988 to 2011 (compared to more than 4, 000 possible victims mentioned in newspapers
based on judicial investigations). This conservative coding implies that misclassification of true positives as false
positives is very unlikely to explain the divergent time-series patterns shown in Figures 1 and 3 (and in fact, the
magnitude of the decline in true positives is much larger than the increase in false positives).


                                                           16
sure of judicial inefficiency (Jud. Inefficiencym,0 ) and a time-varying measure (Jud. Inefficiencym,t ):

                                    P1999
                                       t=1995 Complaints against judicial functionariesm,t
   Judicial Inefficiencym,0 =                    P1999                                     ,
                                                   t=1995 All complaintsm,t
                                    Complaints against judicial functionariesm,t
   Judicial Inefficiencym,t =                                                    . t ∈ {2000, ..., 2010}
                                                All complaintsm,t

    Thus, while the initial judicial inefficiency measure looks at the five years preceding our estima-
tion period, the time-varying measure considers the period by period variation in this ratio. These
measures have several advantages. First, they are specifically about a corrupt judicial system, the
main dimension of institutional weakness that may affect the ease with which army members may
disguise civilian killings as rebels killed in combat (α in our model). Second, some areas in the
country may have relatively low reporting rates of all public official abuses because of the weakness
of their institutional environment, leading to possible non-classical measurement error. Differences
in reporting rates between different municipalities do not influence our measure since by taking the
ratio between judicial complaints and other types of complaints, any municipality-specific reporting
rate cancels out, leaving only the ratio of judicial abuses to total abuses. Only differences in the
reporting rates that vary both by municipality and type of functionary could bias our measure, a pos-
sibility that we cannot fully rule out but which should be second-order relative to municipality-wide
differences.
    Our colonel variable is the share of brigades operating in a given municipality that are led by
colonels. We compute a weighted share using the population of all municipalities under a brigade’s
jurisdiction as weights, to recognize that larger brigades may be more important. In the Appendix,
we also report results using the simple unweighted share or a dummy variable indicating whether
any brigade operating in the municipality has a colonel commander. We were unable to obtain
from the army the historical records of the military structure and the rank of the commanders of
different units, but we could reconstruct the historical organizational structure from the Colombian
army’s webpage.24 The current structure of the army (jurisdiction and commanders of divisions,
battalions and brigades) is available from the army’s website. For the past structure, we searched
expired versions of the army’s website hosted in the Internet Archive’s Way Back Machine (http://
archive.org/web/). These are available since 2000, and to reach further back in time we checked
other online sources looking for news that mentioned a particular brigade and its commander,
allowing us to identify its rank. We also used news stories from the online archive of El Tiempo,
Colombia’s main national newspaper, enabling us to determine and date the creation of new units
and the changes in their command line. This enabled us to identify the rank of brigade commanders
on a yearly basis.25
  24
     This also means that we are unable to follow officers’ promotions over time and thus do not have the data to
estimate how incentives change when a commander is promoted from colonel to general.
  25
     Because promotions and commander appointments are typically done at the beginning of the year or mid-way
through the year, when the rank of a brigade’s commander varies within a year we take the average rank.



                                                       17
       We also use a range of time-invariant covariates (interacted with time) in our empirical analysis.
These are in particular: the logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the
closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average elevation,
municipality area, students’ test results in the year 2000 in math, science and language, poverty
index, log of tax income per capita in 2000, a dummy for the presence of the navy, Catholic churches
per capita, coca cultivated area per 100 hectares in 1999, and the average protests per capita from
1995 to 1999. In addition, we include a full set of time interactions with initial paramilitary attacks,
guerilla attacks, and the unemployment rate in the municipality.26

4.2      Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the main variables in our analysis, before, during, and
after our “incentives” period. Confirming the patterns visible in Figure 1, false positives show
a remarkable increase. From just 0.01 cases per year and municipality before 2003, the average
incidence of events involving the killings of civilians who were then subsequently purported to be
combatants rises an order of magnitude, to 0.132, during the incentive period (2003-2008), and falls
again to 0.007 once incentives were removed. We see the same thing in the casualties involved in false
positive incidents. There were on average 0.022 deaths per year before 2003 (with a maximum of 7
killings), and 0.207 deaths per year from 2003 to 2008 (with a maximum of 20 deaths). In contrast,
as already shown in Figure 1, episodes producing true positives, while much more frequent, are
roughly constant over the incentive period (0.41 cases per year and municipality on average before
2003, 0.44 from 2003 to 2008) and even declining in terms of the number killed (1.267 average
deaths before 2003 and 0.868 from 2003 to 2008). However, both true positives cases (0.058) and
casualties (0.185) fall when incentives were removed (after 2008).27 The judicial inefficiency index
similarly shows no marked change on average before and after the incentives period, with judicial
complaints representing 7.1% of total before 2003, 6.9% during the incentive period, and 7% after
2008. Nevertheless, as our regressions below indicate, there is a relative worsening of this index in
colonel-led areas.
       Turning to the colonel variables, the average weighted share of brigades in a municipality having
a colonel as commander is 10.6% before 2003, rising to 22.4% during the incentive period (and
continuing to grow to 44.3% after 2008). Figures for the unweighted share are similar, and the
dummy variable indicating the presence of any colonel-led brigade in the municipality rises from
11% before 2003 to 25.3% during the incentive period. Finally, Table 1 also describes attacks by
each of the main groups in the Colombian conflict: guerillas (with a declining incidence of attacks,
  26
     The first two variables are defined as the average yearly attacks of each group between 1991 and 2000 per 100,000
inhabitants. We use the unemployment rate in the municipality in 2005, because this is the earliest year in our sample
that is available (this variable is computed only from census data, and the previous census is 1993). Appendix Table
A-1 lists all variables in the analysis, describing their definition and sources. An additional Online Appendix provides
further details on our reconstruction of army ranks and brigades jurisdictions.
  27
     There is an unusually large instance of true positives before 2003 (but shortly after Uribe’s inauguration in
August): the killing of 260 guerilla members after the armed forces bombarded a FARC camp in Ituango, Antioquia,
on September 19 of 2012.



                                                          18
from an average of 0.957 to 0.325 to 0.169 per year before, during and after the incentive period),
paramilitaries (similarly declining from 0.211 to 0.085 to 0.027), and the government (with a small
increase from 0.113 to 0.150 and then falling to 0.043).
         Table A-2 in the Appendix provides descriptive statistics on our time-invariant variables.


5         Results
Figures 1 and 3, presented in the Introduction, show a sizable increase in false positives with no
corresponding increase in true positives during the period in which the high-powered incentives
were in operation. However, this time-series evidence cannot be directly used to answer our main
questions or mapped to our theoretical framework because of confounding events impacting false or
true positives, such as the guerilla withdrawing to remoter areas following the collapse of President
Pastrana’s peace process. Our main evidence, instead, comes from the longitudinal implications
of high-powered incentives as outlined in our theory section. In the remainder of this section we
describe our empirical strategy to investigate these predictions, the main results of this empirical
strategy, a range of robustness checks and also results on the impact of high-powered incentives on
the quality of institutions.

5.1         Empirical Strategy
The main idea we investigate in our empirical work is the one emphasized by Proposition 1, that
following the introduction of high-powered incentives for military personnel, the increase in false
and true positives should be larger in places where brigades are commanded by colonels (who have
stronger career concerns and thus should be more responsive to high-powered incentives). We
then attempt to distinguish between the scenarios where all these patterns can be explained as a
consequence of collateral damage versus those in which there is a significant increase in bad effort
aimed at deliberately killing and then disguising civilians. For this we will exploit the result that
while false positives should also respond more to higher-powered incentives in areas with weaker
judicial institutions, the same is not true for true positives. Finally, we will turn to the impact of
these high-powered incentives on local judicial institutions.
         All of our results are obtained from regressions of the following form, where m denotes munici-
pality and t year28 :

ym,t = ν Pre,Col (Pre × Colonelm,t ) + β Col (Incentivest × Colonelm,t ) + ν Post,Col (Post × Colonelm,t )
            + ν Pre,Jud (Pre × J. Ineffm,0 ) + β Jud (Incentivest × J. Ineffm,0 ) + ν Post,Jud (Post × J. Ineffm,0 )
                                            X
            + ϕColonelm,t + δm + γt +            Φx (x × γt ) + εm,t .                                          (8)
                                              x∈Xm


In (8), ym,t is our outcome variable of interest — in our main results, either true or false positives,
but also later the quality of judicial institutions in the municipality. In our main specifications,
    28
         We cannot follow members of the military to have a longitudinal data set at the officer level.


                                                              19
these variables are parameterized as ln(1 + x), since there are many municipality-year observations
in which false positives or true positives are equal to zero.29 Colonelm,t is the share of brigades
with jurisdiction over m that are commanded by colonels, while J. Ineffm,0 is our measure of judicial
inefficiency in the municipality. As already discussed above and suggested by Figure 1, we will use
two specifications for Incentivest : either an indicator variable for the period in which incentives were
in place (from 2003 to 2008) or a linear trend for this period. This latter parameterization attempts
to capture both the intensification of higher-powered incentives and the potentially cumulative
effects of these policies while they were in effect. Throughout, we also always include an interaction
with the year before the period in which the incentives are in effect (2002, denoted by Pre in
the expression), which will act as a simple test for whether there are pre-trends in municipalities
where the brigades are commanded by colonels and where judicial institutions are weak. (We
also investigate the role of pre-existing trends by including municipality-specific time trends in our
robustness checks). In some specifications we also include an additional interaction with the year
after the period of incentives (denoted by Post) to see whether once the government reverses its
policy of higher-powered incentives with little oversight, false positives show a sharp decline and
what the impact of this change in incentives is on true positives.
       In addition, we include a full set of municipality fixed effects δm , thus focusing on within-
municipality variation, before and after the ratcheting up of incentives, and a full set of time fixed
effects γt capture any national-level trend in false or true positives. Notice also the penultimate
      P
term x∈Xm Φx (x × γt ) in (8), which stands for a full set of time (year) interactions with a rich set
of time-invariant municipality characteristics, which were described in Section 4. These interactions
also control for any potential differential trends that might exist by municipalities that differ in
terms of their economic, social, geographic or historical features.
       We also investigated the presence of a systematic correlation between the assignment of colonels
to a specific area and that area’s time-invariant and time-varying characteristics. A regression similar
to (8), but with the share of colonels on the left-hand side and just year and municipality dummies
on the right-hand side has an R2 of 0.488. When the time-invariant characteristics interacted with
the pre, incentives, and post time periods are added, the R2 increases by an additional 0.0136, to
0.5016, which is quite modest. When the judicial inefficiency variables are added, there is a further
increase of just 0.0008, which is again very modest. This evidence thus suggests that there is no
strong correlation between the assignment of colonels and municipality characteristics, especially
judicial institutions.30
       The key coefficients are β Col and β Jud , and measure the differential response of false or true
positives to a greater share of colonels and weaker institutions in a municipality during the high-
  29
     In the Appendix, we use the inverse hyperbolic sine parameterization as well,√which is more flexible and yields
very similar results. The inverse hyperbolic sine transformation is defined as ln(x + 1 + x2 ) and except for very
                                                                                                                √ small
x, coefficients in this specification can be interpreted as percentage impacts (notice that its derivative is 1/ 1 + x2 ,
which if x is not too small approximates 1/x, the derivative of ln(x)). The use of these specifications is motivated by
the fact that we are unable to estimate nonlinear count models because of the size of the dataset and the large number
of right-hand side variables included.
  30
     These regressions are reported in Appendix Table A-3.



                                                           20
powered incentive period. In addition, the ν          Pre   coefficients also matter greatly as they indicate
whether there is prima facie evidence that municipalities with a higher share of colonels and with
weaker judicial institutions appear to be on differential trends. We find no systematic pre-existing
trends, suggesting that judicial inefficiency and the assignment of colonels to different jurisdictions
was not systematically related to the difficulty of fighting the guerillas.
       Finally, throughout all standard errors are corrected for spatial and first-order temporal auto-
correlation following Conley (1999, 2008).31

5.2      Main Results
Table 2 shows our baseline results when estimating equation (8) for false positives. Odd-numbered
columns look at the cases of false positives, while even-numbered columns are for casualties from
these incidents. The first two columns are for the specification where incentives are parameterized
as a dummy variable, while the next two are for the case in which they are parameterized as a linear
trend during the period of incentives. The last four columns also include the interactions with 2009,
the year following the period of high-powered incentives.
       Overall, the picture is very clear. In all specifications, the interactions with share of colonels
and judicial inefficiency in the municipalities are positive and significant — at 5% or less with the
colonels and at 1% or less judicial inefficiency. The positive coefficients indicate that during the
period of higher-powered incentives, false positives increased significantly more in municipalities
where there were more colonels in charge and institutions were weaker. Also notably, there is no
evidence of pre-trends. Finally, columns 5-8 show that there is no evidence that these differential
effects survived to the years after the end of the higher-powered incentives.
       Table 3 turns to true positives. Here too the pattern is fairly clear. Though in the time series,
true positives did not show an increase during the period of higher-powered incentives, they appear
to increase more during this period in municipalities with a greater share of colonels in charge relative
to other municipalities. More consequential for the purposes of distinguishing the pure collateral
damage story from the switch to bad effort scenario is that there is no evidence of an increase in
true positives during this period in municipalities with weak judicial institutions — the interaction
between judicial inefficiency and the incentive variable is not significant and has the opposite sign
to that predicted by a pure collateral story. In addition, there is again no indication of pre-trends in
this table either. Finally, the general picture from columns 5 to 8 is once again one in which these
effects die out once the high-powered incentives on the army are removed.
       The magnitudes of the coefficient estimates in Tables 2 and 3 are not transparent since the left-
hand side variable is parameterized as ln(1 + x) and the coefficients of interest are interaction terms.
Table 4 gauges their magnitudes by computing the counterfactual changes in false and true positives
when all brigades are commanded by colonels or when all municipalities are brought to the level of
lowest judicial inefficiency. The numbers are very consistent across panels and specifications. The
  31
    Specifically, we allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure
that each municipality has at least one neighbor.



                                                        21
counterfactual exercise of removing the colonels reduces false positive cases and casualties by about
6% (estimates ranging from 5.06 to 6.21%), while getting rid of judicial inefficiency has a slightly
larger impact (ranging from 7.98 to 9.14%). We further find that both of these exercises have much
smaller effects on true positives, ranging from a decline of 1.04 to 1.09% for getting rid of colonels
and an increase from 0.46 to 1.14% for getting rid of judicial inefficiency. Thus, our estimates suggest
that, conditional on having the high-powered incentives in place, introducing the appropriate checks
and removing the agents with the strongest career concerns would have had little cost in terms
of combating the guerillas, but would have saved a significant number of innocent civilian lives.32
We should emphasize that these counterfactuals do not inform us about the implications of not
having the high-powered incentives in place; these effects are absorbed by the time effects. Indeed,
Figure 1 suggests that these may have been quantitatively much more important than removing the
worse career concerns and having better checks in an environment of otherwise very high-powered
incentives.

5.3      Robustness
We next report several robustness exercises, which show that the patterns in Tables 2 and 3 are
generally robust and bolster our confidence in the general picture presented so far.
       Table 5 starts by including municipality-specific linear trends. As in all the robustness tables
in the text, we no longer report specifications with the post-interactions and instead combine false
and true positives in a single table. Though much more demanding, these specifications including
municipality-specific trends show similar results to our baseline. The coefficient estimates for the
interactions with judicial inefficiency in the regressions for false positives are very comparable to
those in Tables 2 and strongly significant. Those for the interactions with share of colonels are about
30% to 50% smaller depending of the specification, but still statistically significant with the linear
specification for incentives. We also see no significant pre-trends coefficients, and the interactions
for share of colonels in the regressions for true positives are insignificant.
       Table 6 probes the robustness of our results in a different dimension — by dropping outliers.
Specifically, we drop all municipality-year observations that are below the 2.5th or above the 97.5th
percentile in the distribution of residuals in our baseline regressions. The qualitative nature of the
results changes very little, and the parameter estimates are somewhat larger for the key interactions
for false positives and also for the interactions with the share of colonels for true positives. There
continues to be no evidence of a differential increase in true positives in areas with weaker judiciary,
and no indication of systematic pre-trends except for the true positive specifications using casualties.
       Table 7 takes yet another approach and includes a fourth-order polynomial in true positives
on the right-hand side (parameterized again as ln(1 + x)) when estimating the impact of higher-
powered incentives on false positives. Though true positives, which are also endogenous to incentives,
are a ‘bad control’ (Angrist and Pischke, 2008), this specification is nonetheless a useful, even if
  32
    We use the coefficient estimates, regardless of whether they are statistically significant. The main message is
similar when we do not use insignificant coefficients.



                                                        22
demanding, check as it verifies whether there is an increase in false positives over and beyond
that which would be predicted by a simple collateral damage story linking false positives to a
given (polynomial) function of true positives. The results are very similar, both qualitatively and
quantitatively, to those presented in Table 2, and provide another piece of evidence against the
hypothesis that false positives are just a consequence of collateral damage from effort directed
towards killing the guerilla.
    In addition to these robustness checks reported in the text, in the Appendix we show that
the results are robust when we use the unweighted share of colonels or a dummy for any brigade
commanded by a colonel in the area instead of the share of colonels; when we use the inverse
hyperbolic sine transformation for the left-hand side variable, which flexibly covers the linear and
the logarithmic cases; and when we control linearly for population on the right-hand side instead
of using a quartic polynomial as in our baseline.33 Some of our results are weaker when we do not
include any covariates in our baseline specifications, which we interpret as reflecting the differential
behavior of false and true positives in areas with different characteristics, an interpretation that
also receives support from the fact that without covariates there is evidence of some pre-trends as
well. In addition, we investigated whether false positives are driven solely by mobile brigades, which
increased in number over the period and were always led by colonels, by separately including the
share of colonel-led regular and the share of mobile brigades. The results of this exercise show that
both types of colonel-led brigades are associated with more true and false positives in the incentives
period.34 We also verified the robustness of our baseline specification to including the total number
of brigades interacted with time effects as an additional control, indicating that the importance of
colonels is not driven simply by competition between more brigades within a jurisdiction.35
    We also investigated whether there are significant spillovers from the career concern-induced
incentives in neighboring municipalities. This is a possibility which could potentially bias our esti-
mates because guerillas may relocate from one area to another in response to differential incentives
of brigades to attack them. To do this, we constructed neighbors’ incentives by taking the arithmetic
average of the share of colonels in all neighboring (adjacent) municipalities,36 and found no signifi-
cant effects from incentives or judicial institutions of neighboring areas on false or true positives in
   33
      In the case of the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation and the changes in the measure of colonels, because
coefficients are not comparable to our baseline estimates, we also computed the implied magnitudes as in Table 4 and
verified that they are very similar.
   34
      Specifically, both types of colonel-led brigades are associated with more false positives during the incentives period
(with coefficients that are significant at least at the 95% level). While the coefficient for mobile brigades is larger, the
implied sizes are similar because the scale and variation of these variables are different.
   35
      Two alternative interpretations of our results are that colonels are not as good at maintaining discipline among
their troops as generals, leading to more false positives, or that colonels are easier scapegoats than generals, who
could instead avoid being noticed or prosecuted when facilitating these crimes. However, the anecdotal evidence we
discuss at length in Appendix A.1 shows that it was not that commanders were trying, but could not, control soldiers.
Instead, they often systematically induced them to produce false positives. The scapegoating of lower-ranked officers
is also unlikely to be a concern, since we are basing our analysis not on official data, but on the CINEP data that
utilizes all available local information.
   36
      Acemoglu, Garcia-Jimeno and Robinson (2015) incorporate both distance and changes in elevation of the ter-
rain between municipalities to weight municipalities’ neighbors. For simplicity, regressions reported below take the
unweighted average of neighbors’ characteristics instead.



                                                            23
a given municipality.

5.4   The Impact of High-Powered Incentives on Institutions and Security
In this subsection, we turn to the impact of high-powered incentives on the quality of institutions. As
argued in Proposition 2, powerful agents may have heightened incentives to weaken local institutions
when they start facing higher-powered incentives.
   In Table 8, we start with the effect of higher-powered incentives coming from the more pro-
nounced career concerns of colonels on the quality of local judicial institutions. We thus estimate
(8) with the time-varying judicial inefficiency variable on the left-hand side, and without any inter-
actions involving the judicial inefficiency variable on the right-hand side. These specifications show
that judicial inefficiency increases differentially in municipalities with a higher share of colonels
during the period of higher-powered incentives. However, there is a significant and large negative
differential effect in 2002 which is concerning. In Table 9, we investigate the source of this pre-trend,
and show that it is caused by outliers. When we take out outliers in the same manner as in Table
6, the impact of high-powered incentives on the quality of local judicial institutions remains similar
as in Table 8, but the pre-trend in 2002 disappears. Overall, though the pre-trends in some of the
specifications make us a little cautious in overinterpreting these results, they do appear to indicate
worsening judicial institutions in places where career concerns of commanders were conducive to
generating extrajudicial killings.
   Table 10 turns to the effect of higher-powered incentives on attacks by the guerillas, paramil-
itaries, and the government. Since high-powered incentives were ostensibly directed at increasing
the state’s military control, we should find a decline in illegal armed groups attacks and possibly
an increase in government attacks against these groups in places where the military has stronger
incentives. But the pattern is quite different. For guerilla attacks, we see a positive effect from the
interactions with the share of colonels, significant in the linear incentives specification, and no effect
from interactions with local judicial institutions. For paramilitary attacks, we also see a positive
coefficient for the share of colonels in the municipality during the period of high-powered incentives,
thought it is not significant. These results suggest high-powered incentives as a counterinsurgency
strategy were at best ineffective and at worst counterproductive in expanding the control of the state
over nonstate armed actors. Though this is a little speculative, the most likely explanation for this
paradoxical result is that higher-powered incentives of the military may have worsened rather than
improved the security situation. The time pattern further suggests that in areas where the military
had incentives for extrajudicial killings, the security situation may have worsened so much, and trust
of the population in the military may have collapsed so completely, that the power of the guerilla
and paramilitary forces may have increased and remained high even after the period of high-powered
incentives came to an end. We also do not see an increase in government attacks against non-state
actors in areas with higher-powered incentives as shown in the last two columns of Table 10, even
if these results should be interpreted with greater caution, because there is a negative pre-trend in
the interaction of colonels with 2002. All the same these results add to the impression that the


                                                   24
higher-powered incentives for soldiers — at least when focusing on variation across municipalities
in the intensity of these incentives — did not achieve its main aim of significantly improving the
security situation in Colombia.
    In sum, these results paint a picture of high-powered incentives for the military being fairly
ineffective as a counterinsurgency strategy. Not only do we see a sizable increase in false positives,
documented in the previous subsections, but there is evidence that the areas where these incentives
were strongest experienced a deterioration in their judiciary and even in their security situation.


6    Concluding Discussion
Creating a secure environment for civilians and defeating various non-state armed groups and in-
surgencies preying on them are some of the most pressing problems facing poor and even some
middle-income countries around the world. Long-running conflicts have sometimes motivated gov-
ernments to turn to high-powered incentives for their military and security services to intensify the
fight against the insurgents, even though judicial and other institutions are typically quite weak
and incapable of constraining misbehavior by the state’s agents. President Alvaro Uribe’s policy of
strengthening the military and its incentives to combat the guerilla after he came to office in 2002,
is emblematic of this type of effort, especially in the way it has taken place in the context of very
weak institutions.
    In this paper, we have shown that these efforts appear to have indeed created very significant
unintended consequences, while also weakening the judicial dimension of state capacity. After pre-
senting a simple multi-tasking model adapted to this environment, we presented evidence consistent
with the implications of this model. The evidence suggests that the high-powered incentives, which
rewarded soldiers for killing non-state armed actors, particularly guerilla combatants, led to a large
upsurge in illegal murders of civilians, who were then disguised to look like guerillas. Crucially, this
happened more in municipalities where military units were headed by colonels, who have stronger
career concerns because of their promotion incentives, and where local judicial institutions were less
efficient and thus presumably less capable of investigating reports of killings of innocent civilians.
We also found that the efficiency of judicial institutions further deteriorated in places where brigades
were led by colonels, presumably because this made it easier to execute civilians and get away with
it. Even more counter-productively, in these same places both guerilla and paramilitary attacks do
not appear to decline, and if anything may have increased somewhat.
    Though the situation in Colombia is unique, as we pointed out in the Introduction there are
many other examples of the use of high-powered incentives as a counterinsurgency strategy. The
available evidence suggests that in these cases too, there were widespread abuses and violence against
civilians. In Guatemala, Peru and South Africa, for example, post-conflict truth and reconciliation
commissions have documented widespread killings of civilians. In Peru, the commission documented
the “cold-blooded” killings of individuals outside combat, which were used “repeatedly by members
of the Army, the Navy, and the Police as part of the counterinsurgency strategy from 1983 to 1996”
(Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación, 2003, p. 134). The impetus for these murders came,

                                                  25
according to the commission’s report, from the incentives and impunity given to the military:

            “by privileging a military approach, one of the main objectives of the counterinsur-
         gency strategy was the elimination of members, sympathizers or collaborators of the
         armed insurrection, even more than the objective of capturing them to be judged by the
         competent judicial authorities” (p. 146).

The report emphasizes the importance of the lack of judicial control in these outcomes as well (p.
176). The Guatemalan commission too reaches a similar conclusion to our study on the adverse
effects of such a strategy on the quality of judicial institutions, stating:

            “Militarization became a pillar of impunity. Moreover, in a broad sense, it weakened
         the country’s institutions, reducing their possibilities for functioning effectively and con-
         tributing to their loss of legitimacy” (Comisión para el Esclarecimiento Histórico, 1999,
         p.28).

It goes on to conclude: “The justice system, nonexistent in large areas of the country before the
armed confrontation, was further weakened when the judicial branch submitted to the requirements
of the dominant national security model” (p. 36). The South African commission also reaches similar
conclusions on the pervasiveness of human rights abuses (Truth and Reconciliation Commission of
South Africa, 1998, p. 62).
       Our results are relevant beyond the issue of the use of high-powered incentives, for the broader
question of state-building in conflict-riven societies. The use of high-powered incentives, though
extreme in many ways, is consistent with the dominant paradigm on the state in the political
science and political economy literatures, which views the establishment, by any means, of the state’s
monopoly of violence over its territory as the first and unrivaled prerequisite for building a state
and its capabilities; other aspects of state capacity, including bureaucratic, fiscal and administrative
capacity and rule of law, can be developed thereafter, once this monopoly of violence is secure.37
This view reaches much farther than academic circles, and has become the guiding principle for
US interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq in recent years (e.g., as articulated in Fukuyama, 2004,
and further emphasized in Giustozzi, 2011). The World Bank (2012, p. 25), for example, states
“There is now an emerging consensus that unless a minimum level of security is established across
the territory, interventions in other domains may be ineffective or even counterproductive.” Though
many practitioners recognize that several aspects of state capacity need to be built ultimately, they
typically end up endorsing the security first view (e.g., OECD, 2010, Grävingholt, Leininger and
  37
     The clearest articulations of this view are in the context of the “state first” or “security first” theories of state build-
ing, often associated with Huntington’s (1968) seminal work. This approach maintains that the Weberian monopoly of
violence needs to be imposed on society before other aspects of state capacity can be developed, and thus views state
building as a top-down process (generally proceeding without the consent or participation of society). It is historically
illustrated by the state-building projects of powerful leaders such as Peter the Great, Louis XIV, Kemal Ataturk or
Park Chung-Hee (e.g., Huntington and Nelson, 1976, Tilly, 1990, Fukuyama, 2014). Several important critiques of
this interpretation of the historical process of state building should be noted in this context, however (e.g., Rudolph
and Rudolph, 1979, Berman, 2016),


                                                               26
von Haldenwang, 2012). Our results can then be interpreted as highlighting how efforts to build the
state’s monopoly of violence by focusing primarily on military dominance can backfire with tragic
consequences. Not only did the introduction of high-powered incentives for the military in Colombia
bring about significant loss of innocent human life, but our findings suggest that this overall approach
was counter-productive even in terms of the explicit goals it was trying to achieve. This reading of
the evidence, together with the recent literature on different counterinsurgency strategies discussed
in the Introduction, suggests that the implications of focusing on military victory at the expense of
all else, for example by using high-powered incentives, in the absence of accountability can be highly
perverse, and that the goal of attaining a legitimate monopoly of violence may be better served by
attempting to build state institutions in multiple dimensions simultaneously.




                                                  27
References
   Acemoglu, Daron, Camilo Garcı́a-Jimeno and James A Robinson (2015) “State Ca-
pacity and Economic Development: A Network Approach,” American Economic Review, 105(8):
2364-2409.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Michael Kremer, and Atif Mian (2008) “Incentives in Markets, Firms,
and Governments,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 24 (2): 273 - 306.
   Ager, Philipp, Leonardo Bursztyn, and Hans-Joachim Voth (2016) “Killer incentives:
Status competition and pilot performance during World War II”, NBER Working Paper No. w22992.
   Alston, Philip (2010) “Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbi-
trary executions,” Mission to Colombia, United Nations, Human Rights Council.
   Amnesty International (2017) “Philippines: ‘If You Are Poor, You Are Killed’: Extraju-
dicial Killings In The Philippines’ ‘War On Drugs”’. Available at https://www.amnesty.org/en/
documents/asa35/5517/2017/en/.
   Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke (2008) Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Aviv, Rachel (2014) “Wrong Answer: In an era of high-stakes testing, a struggling school made
a shocking choice,” in The New Yorker, July, Available at http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/
2014/07/21/wrong-answer.
   Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo and Rachel Glennerster (2008) “Putting a Band-Aid on
a Corpse: Incentives for Nurses in the Indian Public Health Care System,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 6(2-3), 487–500.
   Baker, George (1992) “Incentive contracts and performance measurement,” Journal of Polit-
ical Economy, 100, 598-614.
   Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy (1994) “Subjective Performance
Measures in Optimal Incentive Contracts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 1125-56.
   Barbassa, Juliana (2015). Dancing with the Devil in the City of God: Rio de Janeiro on the
Brink, New York: Simon and Schuster.
   Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia, and Ruben Enikolopov (2016) “Winning hearts and
minds through development: Evidence from a field experiment in Afghanistan,” Unpublished.
   Berman, Eli, Jacob N. Shapiro and Joseph Felter (2011) “Can Hearts and Minds Be
Bought? The Economics of Counterinsurgency in Iraq,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(4), 766-
819.
   Berman, Sheri (2016) Democracy and Dictatorship in Europe: From the Ancien Regime to
the Collapse of Communism, (Oxford University Press forthcoming)
   Cárdenas, Ernesto and Edgar Villa (2013) “La polı́tica de seguridad democrática y las
ejecuciones extrajudiciales,” Ensayos Sobre Polı́tica Económica, 31: 64-72.
   CINEP (2009) Informe Especial, Falsos Positivos: Balance del Segundo Semestre de 2008,
Bogotá: CINEP Centro de Investigación y Educación Popular.
   Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación (2003), Informe Final, Tomo VI: Sección cuarta:


                                                 28
los crı́menes y violaciones de los derechos humanos. Available at http://www.cverdad.org.pe/
ifinal/index.php
   Comisión para el Esclarecimiento Histórico (1999), Memory of Silence: Report of the
Commission for Historical Clarification: Conclusions and Recommendations, Available at http://
www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/migrate/uploads/mos en.pdf.
   Conley, Timothy G. (1999) “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of
Econometrics, 92(1): 1-45.
   Conley, Timothy G. (2008) “Spatial econometrics.” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Eco-
nomics. Second Edition. Eds. Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume. Palgrave Macmillan,
2008. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online. Palgrave Macmillan. 07 March 2016
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008 S000450
   Crost, Benjamin, Joseph Felter, and Patrick Johnston (2014) “Aid under Fire: Devel-
opment Projects and Civil Conflict,” American Economic Review, 104(6): 1833-56
   Dal Bó, Ernesto, Frederico Finan and Martı́n Rossi (2013) “Strengthening State Ca-
pabilities: The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128(3), 1169-1218.
   Dell, Melissa and Pablo Querubı́n (2016) “Bombing the Way to State Building? Lessons
from the Vietnam War,” Unpublished.
   Denvir, Daniel (2013) “The Secret History of the Vietnam War”, In VICE, Apr 17 2013.
Available at https://www.vice.com/en us/article/vietnam-and-the-mere-gook-rule
   Dixit, Avinash, (1997) “Power of Incentives in Private versus Public Organizations,” Ameri-
can Economic Review, 87(2): 378-382.
   Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna and Stephen P. Ryan (2012) “Incentives Work: Getting
Teachers to Come to School,” American Economic Review, 102(4), 1241-78.
   Finan, Frederico, Benjamin A. Olken and Rohini Pande (2015) “The Personnel Eco-
nomics of the State,” NBER Working Paper #21825.
   Fisman, Raymond and Yongxiang Wang (2017) “The Distortionary Effects of Incentives
in Government: Evidence from China’s ‘Death Ceiling’ Program,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 9(2): 202–18.
   Fukuyama, Francis (2004) State-Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st Century,
Ithaka: Cornell University Press.
   Fukuyama, Francis (2014) Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolu-
tion to the Globalization of Democracy, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
   Galiani, Sebastián, Martı́n A. Rossi, and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2011) “Conscription
and Crime: Evidence from the Argentine Draft Lottery,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3(2): 119-36.
   Gibson, James William (2000) The perfect war: Technowar in Vietnam New York: Atlantic
Monthly Press.
   Guistozzi, Antonio (2011) Art of Coercion: The Primitive Accumulation and Management
of Coercive Power, New York: Oxford University Press.

                                               29
   Government of Colombia (2008) “Informe especial: La Polı́tica de Seguridad Democrática
y la protección del derecho a la vida,” September, Available at http://web.presidencia.gov.co/
sp/2008/septiembre/16/informe.pdf.
   Grävingholt, Jörn, Julia Leininger and Christian von Haldenwang (2012) “Effective
statebuilding? A review of evaluations of international statebuilding support in fragile contexts,”
http://www.oecd.org/derec/denmark/effective statebuilding.pdf
   Grupo de Memoria Histórica (2013), ¡Basta Ya! Colombia: Memorias de Guerra y Dig-
nidad, Bogotá: Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica.
   Holmström, Bengt and Milgrom, Paul (1991) “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: In-
centive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization,
7(0), 24-52.
   Human Rights Watch (2015) “On Their Watch: Evidence of Senior Army Officers’ Respon-
sibility for False Positive Killings in Colombia,” https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/06/24/their-
watch/evidence-senior-army-officers-responsibility-false-positive-killings
   Huntington, Samuel P. (1968) Political Order in Changing Societies, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
   Huntington, Samuel P. and Joan E. Nelson (1976) No Easy Choice: Political Participation
in Developing Countries, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
   Kalyvas, Stathis, Mathew Kocher and Tom Pepinsky (2011) “Aerial Bombing and
Counterinsurgency in the Vietnam War,” American Journal of Political Science, 55:2, 1-18.
   Levitt, Steven D. and Brian Jacob (2003) “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Preva-
lence and Predictors of Teacher Cheating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 843-77.
   Lohmuller, Michael (2015), “Lessons for LatAm from Colombia’s Extrajudicial Killings”,
In Insight Crime, Friday, 3 July. Available at http://www.insightcrime.org/news-analysis/
hrw-report-judicial-killings-colombia-false-positives.
   Lyall, Jason (2014) “Bombing to Lose? Airpower and the Dynamics of Violence in Counterin-
surgency Wars,” http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=2422170
   Miller, Grant and Kimberly S. Babiarz (2014) “Pay-for-Performance Incentives in Low-
and Middle-Income Country Health Programs”, In Culyer, Anthony J. ed., Encyclopedia of Health
Economics, Elsevier, San Diego, p 457-466.
   OECD (2010) Do No Harm: International Support for Statebuilding, Paris: OECD.
   Oficina de Derechos Humanos del Arzobispado de Guatemala (1998), Informe de
Recuperación de la Memoria Histórica – Guatemala: Nunca Más, Tomo II: Capitulo 3: Los mecan-
ismos del Horror.    Available at http://www.derechoshumanos.net/lesahumanidad/informes/
guatemala/informeREMHI-Tomo2.htm#t2c1e2-2.
   Otero Prada, Diego (2008), “Experiencias de Investigación: Las cifras del Conflicto Colom-
biano,” INDEPAZ.
   Oyer, Paul (1998), “Fiscal Year Ends and Nonlinear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on
Business Seasonality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 149-185.



                                                  30
   Prendergast, Canice (2011) “What Have We Learnt About Pay For Performance?,” The
Economic and Social Review, 42(2), 113–134.
   Restrepo, Jorge, Michael Spagat and Juan F. Vargas (2004) “The Dynamics of the
Colombian Civil Conflict: A New Dataset,” Homo Oeconomicus, 21(2): 396–428.
   Rudolph, Lloyd I. and Susanne Hoeber Rudolph (1979) “Authority and Power in Bu-
reaucratic and Patrimonial Administration: A Revisionist Interpretation of Weber on Bureaucracy,”
World Politics, 31(2), 195-227.
   Stulberg, Adam N., and Michael D. Salomone (2013). Managing Defense Transfor-
mation: Agency, Culture and Service Change. Chapter 6: “U.S. Counterinsurgency in Vietnam:
Shirking Transformation”, Farnham, UK: Ashgate Publishing.
   Thompson, Mark (2009) “Should the Military Return to Counting Bodies?”               In Time
Magazine, June 2, 2009. Available at http://content.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599
,1902274,00.html.
   Tilly, Charles (1990) Coercion, Capital, and European States, AD 990–1990, Cambridge:
Basil Blackwell.
   Truth and Reconciliation Commission of South Africa (1998), Report, Volume II: Chap-
ter 2: The State outside South Africa (1960-1990). Available at http://www.justice.gov.za/trc/
report/finalreport/Volume%202.pdf
   Turse, Nick (2013) Kill anything that moves: The real American war in Vietnam, London:
Macmillan.
   Verdad Abierta (2011) “El cierre del DAS,” Published November 1, 2011. Available at
http://www.verdadabierta.com/component/content/article/3637-el-cierre-del-das.
   World Bank (2012) “Guidance for Supporting State Building in Fragile and Conflict-Affected
States: A Tool-Kit,” http://siteresources.worldbank.org/PUBLICSECTORANDGOVERNANCE/Resources/
285741-1343934891414/8787489-1347032641376/SBATGuidance.pdf




                                               31
                                                         Figure 1: False Positives
                                                      Cases and casualties 1988 - 2011


             250
                                                                                                                                         Incentives period
             200
             150




                                                                                                                                         Linear incentives
             100
             50




                                                                                                               Pre-treatment            Dummy incentives               Post-treatment
             0
                   1988

                          1989

                                 1990

                                        1991

                                               1992

                                                      1993

                                                             1994

                                                                    1995

                                                                           1996

                                                                                   1997

                                                                                          1998

                                                                                                 1999

                                                                                                        2000

                                                                                                                  2001

                                                                                                                         2002

                                                                                                                                 2003

                                                                                                                                        2004

                                                                                                                                               2005

                                                                                                                                                      2006

                                                                                                                                                             2007

                                                                                                                                                                    2008

                                                                                                                                                                           2009

                                                                                                                                                                                  2010

                                                                                                                                                                                         2011
                                                                                  Cases                                         Casualties



Notes: False positives between 1988 and 2011. Cases is the total number of events producing false positives, while casualties
are the total number of people that were killed in these events. In both cases we depict the 2-year moving average of the raw
numbers.
Source: CINEP.




                                                                                                 32
                                         Figure 2: False positives
                                 Total executions per 100.000 inhabitants




Notes: False positives per municipality over the entire sample period. Own calculations with data from CINEP (false positives)
and DANE (population).




                                                             33
                                                           Figure 3: True Positives
                                                        Cases and casualties 1988 - 2011
             1500




                                                                                                                                          Incentives period
             1000




                                                                                                                                          Linear incentives
             500




                                                                                                                Pre-treatment            Dummy incentives               Post-treatment
             0
                    1988

                           1989

                                  1990

                                         1991

                                                1992

                                                       1993

                                                              1994

                                                                     1995

                                                                            1996

                                                                                    1997

                                                                                           1998

                                                                                                  1999

                                                                                                         2000

                                                                                                                   2001

                                                                                                                          2002

                                                                                                                                  2003

                                                                                                                                         2004

                                                                                                                                                2005

                                                                                                                                                       2006

                                                                                                                                                              2007

                                                                                                                                                                     2008

                                                                                                                                                                            2009

                                                                                                                                                                                   2010

                                                                                                                                                                                          2011



                                                                                   Cases                                         Casualties



Notes: True positives between 1988 and 2011. Cases is the total number of events producing true positives, while casualties
are the total number of people that were killed in these events. In both cases we depict the 2-year moving average of the raw
numbers.
Source: CINEP - Restrepo, Spagat and Vargas (2004).




                                                                                                  34
                      Figure 4: ‘Secret’ Army Directive 29 of November 17 2005
                                    Colombian Ministry of Defense



                                                                 SECRETO

                                                    REPUBLICA DE COLOMBIA




                                             MINISTERIO DE DEFENS.A NACIONAL


                                                            COPIA No [2- DE    I j, COPIP,s
                                                            MINISTERIO DE DEFENSA NACIONAL
                                                            BOGOTA, D.C.           1 7 NOV. .2005
                DIRECTIVA MINISTERI.AL PERMANENTE




                ASUNTO         :          Politica ministerial que desarrolla critErios para el pago de
                                          recompensas por la captura 0 abatimiento en combale de
                                          cabecillas de las organizaciones armadas al margen de la ley,
                                          material de guerra, intendencia 0           comunicaciones e
                                          informacion sobre actividades relacionadas con el narcotrafico
                                          y pago de informacion que sirva de fundamento para la
                                                         de labores de. inteligencia y el posterior
                                          planeamiento de operaciones.

                AL
Notes: Exhibit of the army directive leaked by the press, detailing a reward schedule for killings and capturing members of illegal
groups, seizing 1. OBJETO
                weapons,       Y ALCANCE.-
                         and sharing information. National media and political commentators criticized many of the features of
this directive, as likely triggers of the increase in killings of civilians later presented as rebels, know as false positives.
                     a. Finalidad

                        Oefinir una politica ministerial que desarrolle criterios claros y definidos para
                        el pago de recompensas por la captura 0 abatimiento en combate de
                        cabecillas de las organizaciolles armadas al margen de la ley, material de
                        guerra, in!endencia 0 comunicaciones e informacion sobre actividades
                        relacionadas con el narcotrafico y pago              informacion que sirva de
                        fundamento para la continuacion de labores de inteligenCla y el posterior
                        planeamiento de operaciones.

                     b. Objetivos Especificos

                        i)   Definir pago por informacion Y'·pago por recompensas.
                                                                   35
                        ii) Fijar critErios de valoraci6n para cancelar recompensas por los
                            principales cabecillas de las OA.ML y los cabecillas de narcotrafico, de

                                                              SEep.ETO
                   Figure 5: Presidential Decree 1400 of May 5 2006 or BOINA
                         Bonuses for Operations of National Importance


                   !




                                                %!$,-"'.+#(!#./"/0-'+ !




                                 (!$+%*+0!)*/#+(0')'&*%+*'?/#(!#"+#84).'9)#$4-"'.+!
                                                         !
                                      J8BU8V1!6WE8UX!5@AA#J8!@YYZ!



                         "#$!%&!'()&!*%!'$%)!&)!+#,-.-')'-/,!0#$!10%$)'-#,%*!2%!340#$5),'-)!6)'-#,)&!7!
                                                              !"#$%!



                                    !"#$%!&'(!)*!#(!#"+#%!$,-"'.+#(!#./"/0-'+1!


                            8,!2%*)$$#&&#!2%!&)*!,#$4)*!9%,%$)&%*!*%:)&)2)*!%,!&)!;%<!=)!2%!>??@A!



                                                             (!.%!*+2!



                       +%*3.4"/# 567# -/)'8'.+.'9)# $/%# /$!%+.'/)!&# (!# '0$/%*+).'+#
                       )+.'/)+"# :-/')+7# B$C)*%! &)! +#,-.-')'-/,! 0#$! 10%$)'-#,%*! 2%! 340#$5),'-)!
                       6)'-#,)&! 7! +136DA! 0)$)! &#*! E-%4F$#*! 2%! &)! G(%$H)! "IF&-')! <! .(,'-#,)$-#*! 2%&!
                       J%0)$5)4%,5#! D24-,-*5$)5-K#! 2%! L%9(,2)2! 7! JDLA! M(%! 0)$5-'-0%,! %,! (,)!
                       #0%$)'-/,!2%!-40#$5),'-)!,)'-#,)&A!&)!'()&!*%!#5#$9)$N!0#$!')2)!#')*-/,A!

                       $+%;<%+8/# 567# 8*5)! F#,-.-')'-/,! 0#2$N! *%$! #5#$9)2)! )! (,)! 4-*4)! 0%$*#,)!
                       5),5)*!K%'%*!'(),5)*!*%!O)9)!)'$%%2#$)!)!%&&)A!0#$!0)$5-'-0)'-/,!%,!#0%$)'-#,%*!
                       2%!-40#$5),'-)!,)'-#,)&P!

                       $+%;<%+8/#=67#;)!+#,-.-')'-/,!2%!M(%!5$)5)!%*5%!)$5Q'(&#A!*#&#!*%$N!$%'#,#'-2)!
                       <!0)9)2)!0#$!&)!0)$5-'-0)'-/,!%,!&)!$%*0%'5-K)!#0%$)'-/,!2%!-40#$5),'-)!,)'-#,)&P!

                       $+%;<%+8/# >67# 8*5)! F#,-.-')'-/,! ,#! '#,*5-5(<%! .)'5#$! 0)$)! &-M(-2)$! %&%4%,5#*!
                       *)&)$-)&%*! #! 0$%*5)'-#,)&%*A! ,-! *%! 5%,2$N! %,! '(%,5)! 0)$)! 2%5%$4-,)$!
                       $%4(,%$)'-#,%*!2%!#5$#*!*%$K-2#$%*!0IF&-'#*P!

                       +%*3.4"/# = 6 7# /$!%+.'/)!&# (!# '0$/%*+).'+# )+.'/)+"7# ")$)!
                       %.%'5#*! 2%&! 0$%*%,5%! 2%'$%5#A! *%! '#,*-2%$),! 2%! -40#$5),'-)! ,)'-#,)&! )M(%&&)*!
                       #0%$)'-#,%*!%,!&)*!'()&%*!*%!&#9$%!&)!')05($)!2%!&#*!')F%'-&&)*!2%!&#*!,-K%&%*!3!<!33!
                       M(%! *%! %,'(%,5$),! 2%5%$4-,)2#*! %,! &)! J-$%'5-K)! %R0%2-2)! 0#$! %&! E-,-*5$#! 2%!
                       J%.%,*)!6)'-#,)&P!

                     +%*3.4"/# > 6 7# ?+"/%# (!# "+# -/)'8'.+.'9)7# ;)! F#,-.-')'-/,! 0#2$N!
                     #5#$9)$*%! Decree
Notes: Exhibit of Presidential   O)*5)! 1400
                                        0#$! (,! K)&#$!
                                             of May     %M(-K)&%,5%!
                                                     5 2006, rewarding)!army
                                                                           2#'%!  S>@T! )*-9,)'-#,%*!
                                                                               members                  FN*-')*!
                                                                                         or DAS functionaries –Colombia’s former
                     4%,*()&%*! M(%! 0%$'-F)! %&! 4-%4F$#! 2%! &)! G(%$H)! "IF&-')! #! %&! .(,'-#,)$-#! 2%&!
intelligence agency– J%0)$5)4%,5#!
                     with up to 12 times their monthly2%!
                                     D24-,-*5$)5-K#!    salary for participating
                                                           L%9($-2)2!            in M(-%,!
                                                                        7! JDLA! )! successful
                                                                                           *%!operations of “national
                                                                                               &%! $%'#,#H')! %&!     importance”
                     2%$%'O#!)!0%$'-F-$!&)!4-*4)P
against the insurgency.                            !
                          It is known that these bonuses,   authorized by the President, were not directly responsible for false
positives. But they did fit into the general policy of providing high-powered incentives in the fight against the guerilla.
                       8&!4#,5#!2%!&)!F#,-.-')'-/,!*%$N!2%5%$4-,)2#!0#$!%&!"$%*-2%,5%!2%!&)!U%0IF&-')A!%,!
                       %&!2%'$%5#!4%2-),5%!%&!'()&!*%!#5#$9(%!&)!F#,-.-')'-/,P!


                                                                36
                                           Figure 6: False positives
                                        Evidence of Scene Manipulation




Notes: The figure shows four pictures from alleged guerillas killed in combat. The picture in the top left reveals that the
victims fingers were artificially placed on the trigger. Moreover, forensic tests revealed that the weapon was not fired. The
second picture, to the right, shows three grenades dangerously placed on a victim’s pockets, where they could easily explode in
the midst of combat. In the bottom left picture the victim is wearing the right boot on the left foot, and vice versa. Finally, in
the bottom right picture the cartridge is stored inside the boot, an uncomfortable place for combat.
Source: Semana, “Los casos olvidados de los falsos positivos”, July 17, 2010, http://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/los
-casos-olvidados-falsos-positivos/119416-3.




                                                               37
                      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics: Time-varying variables


  Variable                                          Mean      Std. Dev.      Mean      Std. Dev.      Mean      Std. Dev.

                                                        Before 2003               2003 to 2007              After 2008
  False positives:
   Cases                                            0.010        0.144       0.132        0.623        0.007       0.085
   Casualties                                       0.022        0.288       0.207        1.018        0.008       0.123
  True positives:
   Cases                                            0.410        1.024       0.440        1.243        0.058       0.331
   Casualties                                       1.267        6.030       0.868        2.758        0.185       1.771

  Judicial Inefficiency                             0.071        0.145       0.069        0.126        0.070       0.128
  Colonel in charge (weighted share)                0.106        0.308       0.224        0.404        0.443       0.490
  Colonel in charge (unweighted share)              0.111        0.312       0.253        0.429        0.467       0.494
  Colonel in charge (dummy)                         0.110        0.313       0.256        0.437        0.467       0.499

  Guerilla attacks                                  0.957        2.209       0.325        1.062        0.160       0.603
  Paramilitary attacks                              0.211        0.715       0.085        0.503        0.027       0.175
  Government attacks                                0.113        0.441       0.150        0.743        0.043       0.228

Notes: Data from 2000 to 2010. False positives cases are number of instances were civilians are killed to be presented
as rebels in a given municipality and year, while casualties are the total number killed in these events. True positives
cases are events producing true killings of rebels and casualties the total number of rebels killed. Judicial inefficiency
is the ratio of complaints against judicial functionaries relative to total complaints against all public officials. Colonel
in charge (unweighted share) is the fraction of brigades with jurisdiction over the municipality that are led by colonels,
the weighted share takes the population of municipalities under each brigade’s jurisdiction as weights, and dummy
is a dichotomous variable indicating whether any brigade present in the municipality is led by a colonel. Guerilla,
paramilitary, and government attacks are the number of one-sided attacks by each of these groups.




                                                            38
                                        Table 2: False positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                                                   Baseline results


                                        Incentives Dummy                           Incentives Linear               Incentives Dummy                 Incentives Linear
                                        Cases      Casualties                      Cases    Casualties             Cases     Casualties             Cases    Casualties
                                          (1)          (2)                          (3)         (4)                  (5)        (6)                  (7)         (8)
         Dependent variable is log (1+false positives)

         Judicial Inefficiency
         ... x 2002                             −0.0059          0.0323          −0.0135          0.0278         −0.0033          0.0329         −0.0135           0.0271
                                                (0.0563)        (0.0734)         (0.0565)        (0.0739)        (0.0570)        (0.0748)        (0.0575)         (0.0753)
         ... x Incentives (2003-2008)           0.1589∗∗∗       0.2153∗∗∗        0.0419∗∗∗       0.0597∗∗∗       0.1615∗∗∗       0.2159∗∗∗       0.0420∗∗∗        0.0595∗∗∗
                                                (0.0388)        (0.0497)         (0.0107)        (0.0148)        (0.0400)        (0.0517)        (0.0111)         (0.0154)
         ... x 2009                                                                                               0.0106          0.0024          0.0005          −0.0034
                                                                                                                 (0.0478)        (0.0534)        (0.0485)         (0.0543)

         Colonel in charge (share)




39
         ... x 2002                   −0.0072                    −0.0220         −0.0037         −0.0186          −0.0071         −0.0210         −0.0020         −0.0164
                                      (0.0149)                   (0.0225)        (0.0148)        (0.0223)         (0.0153)        (0.0228)        (0.0153)        (0.0229)
         ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0323∗∗                   0.0459∗∗        0.0083∗∗        0.0111∗∗         0.0324∗∗        0.0470∗∗        0.0087∗∗        0.0116∗∗
                                      (0.0158)                   (0.0208)        (0.0033)        (0.0045)         (0.0164)        (0.0219)        (0.0035)        (0.0048)
         ... x 2009                                                                                                0.0004          0.0029          0.0052          0.0071
                                                                                                                  (0.0124)        (0.0147)        (0.0132)        (0.0157)

         Controls x time effects                     X               X               X               X                X               X               X               X
         Observations                              9823            9823            9823            9823             9823            9823            9823            9823
         Municipalities                             893             893             893             893              893             893             893             893
         R-Squared                                 0.094           0.091           0.095           0.092            0.094           0.091           0.095           0.092
     Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In ”... x Incentives (2003-2008)”, the variable shown is interacted with: a
     dummy that equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both for the period from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of
     time invariant predetermined municipal controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the closest major city,
     quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’ test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log
     of tax income per capita, presence of navy, paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, 1999 coca cultivated area per 100 hectares
     and 1995-1999 average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial
     correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at the 10% level, **
     is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
                                    Table 3: True positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                                              Baseline results


                                      Incentives Dummy                         Incentives Linear              Incentives Dummy               Incentives Linear
                                      Cases     Casualties                     Cases    Casualties            Cases     Casualties           Cases    Casualties
                                        (1)         (2)                         (3)         (4)                 (5)        (6)                (7)         (8)
       Dependent variable is log (1+true positives)

       Judicial Inefficiency
       ... x 2002                              0.1173          0.0875         0.1168          0.1280         0.0920          0.0306         0.0984          0.0965
                                              (0.1372)        (0.2278)       (0.1325)        (0.2172)       (0.1459)        (0.2455)       (0.1372)        (0.2260)
       ... x Incentives (2003-2008)           −0.0611         −0.1630        −0.0174         −0.0269        −0.0864         −0.2199        −0.0216         −0.0341
                                              (0.0879)        (0.1439)       (0.0192)        (0.0301)       (0.1010)        (0.1707)       (0.0208)        (0.0333)
       ... x 2009                                                                                           −0.1015         −0.2275        −0.0952         −0.1617
                                                                                                            (0.1351)        (0.2379)       (0.1260)        (0.2183)

       Colonel in charge (share)




40
       ... x 2002                   −0.0014                   −0.0728         0.0006         −0.0701        −0.0020         −0.0701         0.0009         −0.0667
                                    (0.0465)                  (0.0673)       (0.0465)        (0.0672)       (0.0469)        (0.0687)       (0.0469)        (0.0684)
       ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0428∗                   0.0562∗        0.0098∗∗        0.0128∗         0.0422          0.0591        0.0099∗         0.0136∗
                                    (0.0239)                  (0.0335)       (0.0050)        (0.0070)       (0.0266)        (0.0382)       (0.0055)        (0.0079)
       ... x 2009                                                                                           −0.0020          0.0073         0.0004          0.0101
                                                                                                            (0.0249)        (0.0402)       (0.0246)        (0.0396)

       Controls x time effects                    X               X              X               X              X               X              X               X
       Observations                             9823            9823           9823            9823           9823            9823           9823            9823
       Municipalities                            893             893            893             893            893             893            893             893
       R-Squared                                0.085           0.082          0.085           0.082          0.085           0.082          0.085           0.082
     Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In ”... x Incentives (2003-2008)”, the variable shown is interacted
     with: a dummy that equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both for the period from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the
     following set of time invariant predetermined municipal controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to
     the closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’ test results in math, science
     and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy, paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita,
     1999 coca cultivated area per 100 hectares and 1995-1999 average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses control for spatial and first-order time correlation
     following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at
     least one neighbor. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
      Table 4: False and true positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                    Size of the effects


                                      Without Post Trend                                  With Post Trend
                            Incentives Dummy Incentives Linear                 Incentives Dummy Incentives Linear
                            Cases Casualties Cases Casualties                  Cases Casualties Cases Casualties
                              (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)                    (5)        (6)      (7)    (8)

     Observed (false)        853         1403         853         1403          853         1403          853        1403
     Observed (true)         6392        15183        6392        15183         6392        15183        6392        15183

     Panel A. Dependent variable is log (1+false positives), all controls

     Judicial Inefficiency to minimum
     Predicted          −76      −112        −72       −113        −78                      −112        −72          −113
     Percent Change −8.91        −7.98      −8.44      −8.05       −9.14                    −7.98       −8.44        −8.05
     Colonels to Generals
     Predicted          −52       −72        −53        −73        −52                       −71        −51           −71
     Percent Change −6.10        −5.13      −6.21      −5.20       −6.10                    −5.06       −5.98        −5.06
     Panel C. Dependent variable is log (1+true positives), all controls

     Judicial Inefficiency to minimum
     Predicted           37      128    36                          70           52          173           44          88
     Percent Change     0.58    0.84  0.56                         0.46         0.81         1.14         0.69        0.58
     Colonels to Generals
     Predicted          −69     −165   −68                        −163         −69          −161        −68          −158
     Percent Change −1.08      −1.09  −1.06                       −1.07        −1.08        −1.06       −1.06        −1.04

Notes: Using the corresponding regressions in Tables 2 and 3, we compute the predicted false and true positives, respectively, of
either setting judicial inefficiency to its minimum (zero) or setting all brigades to be led by generals (fixing the colonel share at
zero). The first line in each case shows the predicted number of false (Panels A and B) or true (Panel C and D) positives, and the
second the percent change relative to observed false or true positives. In Panels A and C all controls are used in the simulation
regardless of significance, and in Panels B and D controls not significant at the 95% level are not used in the estimation.




                                                                41
                                Table 5: False positives, true positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                                             Municipality-specific trends


                                             Incentives Dummy                          Incentives Linear              Incentives Dummy               Incentives Linear
                                             Cases      Casualties                     Cases    Casualties            Cases     Casualties           Cases    Casualties
                                               (1)         (2)                          (3)         (4)                 (5)        (6)                (7)         (8)
              Dependent variable is log (1+false or true positives)

                                                                          False Positives                                                True Positives
              Judicial Inefficiency
              ... x 2002                              0.0075          0.0585         −0.0197          0.0247          0.1070         0.0602          0.1064         0.1013
                                                     (0.0560)        (0.0743)        (0.0561)        (0.0742)        (0.1552)       (0.2650)        (0.1491)       (0.2513)
              ... x Incentives (2003-2008)           0.1533∗∗∗       0.2066∗∗∗       0.0425∗∗∗       0.0594∗∗∗       −0.0559        −0.1563         −0.0245        −0.0357
                                                     (0.0387)        (0.0487)        (0.0107)        (0.0142)        (0.0818)       (0.1261)        (0.0197)       (0.0283)

              Colonel in charge (share)




42
              ... x 2002                   −0.0051                   −0.0183         −0.0030         −0.0164          0.0315        −0.0304          0.0298        −0.0331
                                           (0.0110)                  (0.0164)        (0.0108)        (0.0162)        (0.0462)       (0.0657)        (0.0463)       (0.0657)
              ... x Incentives (2003-2008)  0.0226                    0.0327         0.0066∗         0.0088∗          0.0390         0.0429          0.0080         0.0082
                                           (0.0168)                  (0.0219)        (0.0034)        (0.0045)        (0.0245)       (0.0330)        (0.0061)       (0.0085)

              Controls x time effects                    X               X               X               X               X              X               X              X
              Observations                             9823            9823            9823            9823            9823           9823            9823           9823
              Municipalities                            893             893             893             893             893            893             893            893
              R-Squared                                0.151           0.150           0.152           0.151           0.190          0.204           0.190          0.205

     Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In ”... x Incentives (2003-2008)”, the variable shown is interacted with: a dummy
     that equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both for the period from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant
     predetermined municipal controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the closest major city, quality of soil index,
     erosion index, water availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’ test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita,
     presence of navy, paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, 1999 coca cultivated area per 100 hectares and 1995-1999 average protests
     per capita. Municipality specific trends are also included. Errors in parentheses control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow
     spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is
     significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
                           Table 6: False and true positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                                         Removing outliers


                                    Incentives Dummy                            Incentives Linear                Incentives Dummy                Incentives Linear
                                    Cases      Casualties                       Cases    Casualties              Cases     Casualties            Cases    Casualties
                                      (1)         (2)                            (3)         (4)                   (5)        (6)                 (7)         (8)
     Dependent variable is log (1+false or true positives)

                                                                  False Positives                                                   True Positives

     Judicial Inefficiency
     ... x 2002                              −0.0057          0.0333          −0.0091           0.0324          0.1185         −0.0230          0.1112          −0.0117
                                             (0.0514)        (0.0721)         (0.0517)         (0.0726)        (0.1241)        (0.1581)        (0.1207)         (0.1456)
     ... x Incentives (2003-2008)            0.1732∗∗∗       0.2487∗∗∗        0.0429∗∗∗        0.0630∗∗∗       −0.0296         −0.1310         −0.0118          −0.0203
                                             (0.0405)        (0.0540)         (0.0109)         (0.0151)        (0.0840)        (0.1380)        (0.0185)         (0.0289)

     Colonel in charge (share)




43
     ... x 2002                   −0.0078                    −0.0190          −0.0043          −0.0173          0.0083         0.0893∗∗         0.0097          0.0779∗∗
                                  (0.0147)                   (0.0227)         (0.0147)         (0.0228)        (0.0491)        (0.0375)        (0.0493)         (0.0396)
     ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0378∗∗                   0.0555∗∗∗        0.0090∗∗∗        0.0124∗∗∗       0.0486∗         0.0588∗         0.0109∗∗         0.0128∗
                                  (0.0161)                   (0.0209)         (0.0034)         (0.0044)        (0.0250)        (0.0321)        (0.0051)         (0.0068)

     Controls x time effects                     X                X                X               X               X               X                X               X
     Observations                              8888             8888             8888            8888            8888            8888             8888            8888
     Municipalities                             893              893              893             893             893             893              893             893
     R-Squared                                 0.152            0.143            0.151           0.144           0.124           0.124            0.124           0.124

       Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In ”... x Incentives (2003-2008)”, the variable shown is
       interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both for the period from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are
       interacted with the following set of time invariant predetermined municipal controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average
       rainfall level, distance to the closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’
       test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy, paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment
       rate, catholic churches per capita, 1999 coca cultivated area per 100 hectares and 1995-1999 average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses control for
       spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s
       centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. Outliers are defined as those observations below the 2.5th and above the 97.5th
       percentile in the distribution of estimation residuals from our baseline regressions. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is
       significant at the 1% level.
               Table 7: False positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                Controlling for collateral damage


                                 Incentives Dummy          Incentives Linear        Incentives Dummy          Incentives Linear
                                 Cases      Casualties     Cases    Casualties      Cases     Casualties      Cases    Casualties
                                   (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)           (7)         (8)
  Dependent variable is log (1+false positives)

  Judicial Inefficiency
  ... x 2002                     −0.0244      0.0222      −0.0344      0.0161      −0.0202      0.0260      −0.0338      0.0173
                                 (0.0504)    (0.0720)     (0.0506)    (0.0726)     (0.0512)    (0.0734)     (0.0517)    (0.0742)
  ... x Incentives (2003-2008)   0.1679∗∗∗   0.2218∗∗∗    0.0433∗∗∗   0.0608∗∗∗    0.1722∗∗∗   0.2256∗∗∗    0.0435∗∗∗   0.0611∗∗∗
                                 (0.0386)    (0.0492)     (0.0108)    (0.0147)     (0.0397)    (0.0510)     (0.0112)    (0.0153)
  ... x 2009                                                                        0.0169      0.0154       0.0034      0.0068
                                                                                   (0.0461)    (0.0504)     (0.0471)    (0.0517)

  Colonel in charge (share)
  ... x 2002                   −0.0080       −0.0215      −0.0048      −0.0182     −0.0081      −0.0206     −0.0035      −0.0161
                               (0.0151)      (0.0223)     (0.0151)     (0.0222)    (0.0155)     (0.0226)    (0.0155)     (0.0227)
  ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0294∗       0.0431∗∗     0.0076∗∗     0.0105∗∗    0.0293∗      0.0441∗∗    0.0079∗∗     0.0110∗∗
                               (0.0155)      (0.0204)     (0.0033)     (0.0044)    (0.0161)     (0.0214)    (0.0035)     (0.0047)
  ... x 2009                                                                       −0.0002       0.0028      0.0042       0.0069
                                                                                   (0.0121)     (0.0144)    (0.0128)     (0.0155)

  True Positives Polynomial
  True Positives             0.1009          0.1451∗∗      0.1025     0.1452∗∗      0.1009     0.1452∗∗      0.1025     0.1453∗∗
                            (0.0878)         (0.0580)     (0.0877)    (0.0575)     (0.0878)    (0.0580)     (0.0877)    (0.0575)
  (True Positives)2         −0.0525          −0.1344∗     −0.0570     −0.1346∗     −0.0526     −0.1344∗     −0.0568     −0.1347∗
                            (0.1916)         (0.0783)     (0.1919)    (0.0778)     (0.1916)    (0.0783)     (0.1919)    (0.0778)
  (True Positives)3         −0.0064           0.0540∗     −0.0030      0.0541∗     −0.0063      0.0540∗     −0.0031      0.0542∗
                            (0.1230)         (0.0305)     (0.1234)    (0.0303)     (0.1230)    (0.0305)     (0.1234)    (0.0303)
  (True Positives)4          0.0131          −0.0064∗      0.0123     −0.0064∗      0.0131     −0.0064∗      0.0124     −0.0064∗
                            (0.0233)         (0.0033)     (0.0233)    (0.0033)     (0.0233)    (0.0033)     (0.0233)    (0.0033)


  Controls x time effects           X            X            X           X            X           X            X           X
  Observations                    9823         9823         9823        9823         9823        9823         9823        9823
  Municipalities                   893          893          893         893          893         893          893         893
  R-Squared                       0.114        0.101        0.115       0.102        0.114       0.101        0.115       0.102

Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In ”... x Incentives (2003-2008)”, the
variable shown is interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both for the period
from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant predetermined municipal controls: quartic
polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the closest major city, quality of soil index,
erosion index, water availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’ test results in math, science and language,
poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy, paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic
churches per capita, 1999 coca cultivated area per 100 hectares and 1995-1999 average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses
control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to
279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at the 10%
level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                                44
                             Table 8: Judicial inefficiency and colonels, 2000-2010


                                           Baseline                         Post Trends                 Municipal Trends
                                    Dummy         Linear                Dummy       Linear             Dummy       Linear
                                      (1)           (2)                   (3)         (4)                (5)        (6)
     Dependent variable is judicial inefficiency

     Colonel in charge (share)
     ... x 2002                   −0.0249∗              −0.0246∗      −0.0293∗∗       −0.0286∗∗      −0.0320∗∗       −0.0322∗∗
                                  (0.0131)              (0.0131)       (0.0134)        (0.0134)       (0.0149)        (0.0149)
     ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0152∗∗              0.0033∗∗        0.0104          0.0024       0.0172∗∗         0.0038∗∗
                                  (0.0074)              (0.0014)       (0.0078)        (0.0015)       (0.0076)        (0.0015)
     ... x 2009                                                       −0.0134         −0.0128
                                                                       (0.0105)        (0.0105)




45
     Controls x time effects                  X             X              X               X              X               X
     Observations                           9823          9823           9823            9823           9823            9823
     Municipalities                          893           893            893             893            893            9823
     R-Squared                              0.030         0.030          0.030           0.030          0.140           0.140

     Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In ”... x Incentives (2003-
     2008)”, the variable shown is interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns),
     both for the period from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant predeter-
     mined municipal controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance
     to the closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average elevation, municipality
     area, students’ test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of
     navy, paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, 1999 coca cultivated area
     per 100 hectares and 1995-1999 average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses control for spatial and first-order
     time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each mu-
     nicipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. Columns 5 and 6 include in addition
     municipality-specific trends. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the
     1% level.
                                     Table 9: Judicial inefficiency and colonels, 2000-2010 5%
                                                         Removing outliers


                                                       Baseline                              Post Trends               Municipal Trends
                                                Dummy         Linear                      Dummy      Linear            Dummy     Linear
                                                  (1)           (2)                         (3)       (4)                (5)       (6)
                 Dependent variable is judicial inefficiency

                 Colonel in charge (share)
                 ... x 2002                    0.0035                     0.0026         −0.0040         −0.0053       −0.0029        −0.0033
                                              (0.0089)                   (0.0089)        (0.0101)        (0.0101)      (0.0133)       (0.0134)
                 ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0241∗∗∗                  0.0046∗∗∗       0.0216∗∗∗       0.0040∗∗      0.0159∗∗       0.0035∗∗
                                              (0.0078)                   (0.0015)        (0.0083)        (0.0016)      (0.0073)       (0.0014)
                 ... x 2009                                                              −0.0104         −0.0120




46
                                                                                         (0.0103)        (0.0104)

                 Controls x time effects                      X               X               X              X             X              X
                 Observations                               9108            9108            9108           9108          9332           9332
                 Municipalities                              893             893             893            893           893            893
                 R-Squared                                  0.046           0.046           0.046          0.046         0.162          0.163

     Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In ”... x Incentives (2003-2008)”, the variable shown
     is interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both for the period from 2003 to 2008. Time
     dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant predetermined municipal controls: logarithm of the population in 2000, average
     rainfall level, distance to the closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average elevation, municipality area,
     students’ test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy, paramilitary and guerilla attacks,
     unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, 1999 coca cultivated area per 100 hectares and 1995-1999 average protests per capita. Errors in
     parentheses control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279
     km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. Outliers are defined as those observations below
     the 2.5th and above the 97.5th percentile in the distribution of estimation residuals from our baseline regressions. * is significant at the 10% level,
     ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
Table 10: Guerilla, paramilitary, and government attacks and colonels, 2000-2010


                                  Guerilla            Paramilitary                                    Government
                            Dummy        Linear    Dummy      Linear                               Dummy     Linear
                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)                                  (5)      (6)
 Dependent variable is dummy variable for attacks by group.

 Judicial Inefficiency
 ... x 2002                               0.2004        0.1871       −0.0747        −0.0553         0.0414          0.0106
                                         (0.1690)      (0.1663)      (0.0893)       (0.0856)       (0.0893)        (0.0879)
 ... x Incentives (2003-2008)             0.0460        0.0069       −0.0267         0.0017        0.0924∗          0.0117
                                         (0.0803)      (0.0166)      (0.0618)       (0.0123)       (0.0518)        (0.0102)

 Colonel in charge (share)
 ... x 2002                    0.0447                   0.0490       −0.0035        −0.0038       −0.0420∗        −0.0438∗
                              (0.0506)                 (0.0502)      (0.0284)       (0.0282)      (0.0242)        (0.0241)
 ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0314                   0.0084∗        0.0083         0.0016       −0.0074         −0.0022
                              (0.0225)                 (0.0047)      (0.0131)       (0.0025)      (0.0109)        (0.0020)

 Controls x time effects                     X             X             X              X              X               X
 N                                         9823          9823          9823           9823           9823            9823
 Municipalities                             893           893           893            893            893             893
 R-Squared                                 0.088         0.088         0.109          0.109          0.074           0.074

Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In ”... x Incentives (2003-
2008)”, the variable shown is interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns),
both for the period from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant predetermined
municipal controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the closest
major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’ test
results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy, paramilitary and
guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, 1999 coca cultivated area per 100 hectares and 1995-1999
average protests per capita. Columns 5 and 6 include in addition municipality-specific trends. Errors in parentheses control
for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to
279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at the
10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                              47
A      Appendix (Not for Publication)
A.1      Context and Case-study Evidence
In Section 2 of the paper we gave a brief sketch of the Colombian context and some of the key pieces
of evidence which undergird our approach. Here we present some additional case study evidence
which supports our arguments and interpretations of the evidence.

A.2     The Introduction and Removal of High-powered Incentives
After the Soacha scandal mentioned in the text, Semana and other media outlets published a number
of documents recently declassified by US intelligence, all of which highlighted army incentives as
creating the conditions for the emergence of human rights abuses. Some of these dated back to
the 1990s.38 Despite these early concerns, the later increase in false positives in the 2000s was
unprecedented. The ensuing national scandal also led to an investigation from a United Nations
Special Rapporteur, Phillip Alston, to an internal investigation by the armed forces, and to the
ousting of a number of army members, including high-ranking officials.
    As noted in Philip Alston’s final report on the issue, while the existence of different sorts of
incentives is clear, it is to some extent unclear how rewards for killings worked since this was
informal in many ways. While critics argue that members of the armed forces received money,
holidays, medals, and promotions for killing guerillas, the government has pointed out that rewards
(like those established in Directive 29) cannot be paid to public servants like soldiers. Nonetheless,
as the case-study evidence below reveals and as was recognized by Alston and judicial investigations,
this theoretical principle was not always true in practice.
    First, based on his investigations Alston noted that even if not receiving money “members of
the military have also been provided various incentives to kill, including vacation time, medals, and
promotions” (Alston, 2010, p. 11). Human Rights Watch point out that army members colluded
with potential recruiters for false positives to share the monetary rewards. Moreover, other sources
of payment in the form of “gastos reservados” (confidential expenses) and commanders’ discretionary
funds were used as rewards. Referring to these sources, Alston notes that the Government “conceded
that there is more discretion for officers in distributing confidential expenses, and that ‘there could be
problems there”’ (Alston, 2010, p. 10). These observations explain his conclusion already reproduced
in the main text that “There were incentives: an informal incentive system for soldiers to kill, and a
formal one for civilians who provided information leading to the capture or killing of guerillas. The
latter system lacked oversight and accountability” (Alston, 2010, p. 2).
    There is some controversy over whether formal directives like 29 of 2005 were directly responsible
for false positives or not. But there is little doubt among experts and members of the Office of the
General Attorney consulted that incentives were delivered and played a role. These directives leaked
by the press can therefore be taken more as a signal of a general effort by the army to provide direct
incentives for killing guerillas than as an exact description of how incentives worked in practice. This
policy, as Alston reports, was reflected not just in the formal policies adopted, but in informal and
  38
     For instance, in a 1994 report, US Ambassador Myles Frechett says that Colombia’s Defense Minister Fernando
Botero’s statements, referring to the growing awareness within the military on the importance of human rights pro-
tection and the blocking of promotions to officers suspected of having been involved in abuses, were ‘wishful think-
ing’. Instead, the ambassador claims that a ‘body count’ mentality is widespread among the Colombian military,
and a necessary condition for promotion. Another document quotes a Colombian colonel commenting in 1997 that
there was a “body count syndrome” in the army, responsible for “fueling human rights abuses by well-meaning sol-
diers that just try to get their quota to impress superiors”. See Evans, Michael, “Los ‘falsos positivos’ son una
práctica vieja en el Ejército”, Semana, January 7, 2009. Available at http://www.semana.com/opinion/articulo/
los-falsos-positivos-practica-vieja-ejercito/98864-3 (last accessed August 29, 2016).


                                                       A-1
unregulated incentives. The pressure to “show results” and rewards of doing so is cited by experts,
even within the military, as one of the causes of false positives. A soldier explained a killing by his
unit would be rewarded with 15 days vacation. “When important holidays approached, he stated,
soldiers would attempt to ‘earn’ vacation time” (Alston, 2010, p. 11).
    In the end, a full incentives scheme was in place, that included the expectation of money, vacation
and promotions for army members and commanders capable of producing more killings of rebels.
In line with a long tradition in Colombia of a body-count mentality, these incentives exacerbated
the idea that only army commanders “successful” in the fight against insurgency using this metric
were likely to rise up in the military ladder.
    Perhaps the most clear indication of the importance of incentives in explaining false positives is
the governments’ reaction to the media uncovering of the Soacha killings. In a special September
2008 report following the scandal, the government discussed the achievements of President Uribe’s
flagship Democratic Security Policy, but acknowledged concerns around the persistent complaints
of false positive cases. Moreover, when discussing its efforts to avoid false positives, it acknowledges
that some measures had already been taken to adjust, precisely, the incentive policy. In particular,
it mentions Directive 10 of 200739 which “reiterates the obligation of authorities to enforce the
law and avoid homicides of protected persons” and created a committee to investigate complaints.
In November 2007, this directive was complemented with a second one emphasizing that army
commanders should ensure deaths in combat were first investigated by the judicial police. Yet a
third directive, 300-28 of November 2007, was aimed at prioritizing rewards for demobilizations and
rescuing hostages rather than killings. In May 2008, Directive 142 changed the criteria for awarding
medals (the medalla al valor and medalla de orden público). According to the report, starting with
this directive demobilizations and capturing members of criminal and illegal armed groups are valued
“as much or more” than killings (Government of Colombia, 2008)40 .
    The 2005 directive 29 was later modified by directives 02 of 2008 and 01 of 2009. All of these are
confidential, and only the first one was widely circulated in the press. Nevertheless, reports based on
government information such as Alston’s final report indicate that later directives toughened controls
and sought to make it harder to use monetary incentives for false positives. In particular, they
explicitly excluded the payment of rewards to army members and required that operations have the
support of prior intelligence and included more controls on supporting documents. Other measures,
while not influencing rewards directly, did affect the perceived consequences of committing false
positives. Indeed, the government took disciplinary actions, ousting high-ranking officials involved
in possible false positives. It also created a specialized unit in the Office of the Attorney General
(Fiscalı́a) to investigate the crimes.

A.3     Case studies
We now turn to a more careful description of some of the false positives cases on which there is
information. The information comes from two main sources. First, for closed criminal cases on which
we are able to access information on trial hearings and sentences (for open cases this information
is confidential). Second, from secondary sources, mainly the press and NGO’s investigating specific
cases, we also have some information even for cases on which there is no definite sentence yet.
    Our emphasis is on the role of incentives when explaining false positives, and in particular how
these interacted with two main factors: first, a weak judicial system which made army members
believe they could “get away” with the killings of civilians; second, the stronger incentives faced
  39
     Issued on june 6 of 2007, and made available at http://web.presidencia.gov.co/especial/ddhh 2009/
Directivas ddhh.pdf.
  40
     We have not had direct access, however, to this secret directive.



                                                  A-2
by colonels to commit false positives in search of promotion. We also discuss the incentive of the
military to further erode the quality of judicial institutions, to facilitate committing these crimes.
We further emphasize that the case study evidence is not consistent with false positives being simply
the result of collateral damage, an unfortunate by-product of genuine combat activities.

A.3.1     The Role of Incentives
The case study evidence that we report in this section shows that the incentive package given to
military personnel who excelled in the production of quantifiable counterinsurgency results included
rewards, permits of absence or vacation time, honors and compliments from superiors, and promo-
tions. In addition to the ‘carrots’, there were also sticks in the form of high pressure from superior
officials to produce ‘results’ (in the form of killings) and penalties for soldiers who failed to do so.
Crucially, the pressure was not merely to work hard in the fight against insurgents, but to deliver
measurable results. Sticks thus operated with a similar logic as the carrots in our theoretical model:
as high-powered incentives responding to alleged killed rebels. Indeed, several army officials who
have been interviewed by the press after the scandal broke out have stated that the psychological
torture of having to deliver operational results every day was unbearable.41
    One example of such pressure for results and punishment of failures can be seen in army official
Edgar Iván Flórez Maestre’s statement during his hearing before the General Prosecutor. According
to Flórez, 14th Brigade’s commander Colonel Wilson Cedeño used to tell his troops: “Each company
commander is responsible of one combat death per month, and the Second Section is responsible
for three deaths per month. At this time war is measured with liters of blood. The commander
that cannot show results in terms of deaths every month will face a sanction that will appear in his
folder.” Flórez also stated that colonel Juan Carlos Barrera Jurado, former commander of the 14th
Brigade, once told all battalion commanders under his orders that the battalions that did not have
any killings in combat in the next 90 days would have their commanders fired for negligence and
operational lack of capacity. According to Flórez, the pressure was so intense that soldiers would
start counting the days that they had not faced combat. The excess pressure finally resulted in
misbehavior. According to Flórez a fellow soldier once told him how frustrated he was that the only
people that were getting permits of leave and honors were the ones that were producing killings,
and so that he was planning a “job” for which he had already obtained a gun (to put on the victim’s
hands to make him appear as a combatant).42
    Major Juan Carlos Rodrı́guez Agudelo tells a similar story in an interview with newspaper El
Tiempo. According to Rodrı́guez, while back in 1995 an honor medal was given for two combat kills,
by 2004 the threshold had gone up to 10 kills. In staff operational meetings, commanders who had
produced many killings were praised and those who could not show enough bodies were ridiculed
by superiors. Rodrı́guez argues that wearing one of these honor medals had such high status within
the army that the pursuit of glory pushed him to make mistakes and he ended up killing civilians.43
    Human Rights Watch (2015) presents a great deal of supportive evidence. For example, they
cite retired Lieutenant Colonel Robinson González del Rı́o as giving testimony that General Mario
Montoya, the army’s top commander between February 2006 and November 2008 “Pressured sub-
ordinate commanders to increase body counts, punishing them for failing to do so” (p. 4). Other
testimony by army personnel suggested that Montoya “organized competitions between military
  41
     “Cada dı́a se van unos 17 hombres del Ejército”, El Tiempo, July 2, 2006. Available at: http://www.eltiempo
.com/archivo/documento/MAM-2087862 (last accessed August 14, 2014).
  42
     Source: Hearing of Edgar Iván Flórez Maestre before the Unit of Human Rights of the National Direction of
Special Investigations of the General Prosecutor Office, Medellı́n, December 15, 2009.
  43
     “Oficial del Ejército admite cómo participó en ‘falsos positivos’”, El Tiempo, June 3, 2012. Available at: http://
www.eltiempo.com/archivo/documento/CMS-11918454 (last accessed August 14, 2014).


                                                          A-3
units over the number of reported combat kills” (p. 27). González del Rı́o told prosecutors that
“you were evaluated based . . . on combat kills” (p. 27).
    In addition to pressure and threats, ‘positive’ incentives played a major role. This is acknowl-
edged by official Edgar Iván Flórez Maestre, in the same hearing mentioned above, when stating
that one of the incentives offered to commanders of all battalions was vacation for the entire month
of December for the platoon that could show the highest number of killings in a given year. In
addition, the soldier that perpetrated the highest number of killings would be sent to Sinai, or a
course out of the country.44
    In 2007, Sargent Alexander Rodrı́guez Sánchez reported to the authorities (the offices of the
Attorney General and the General Prosecutor, and even the Army Command) that his unit, mo-
bile Brigade 15, was engaging in unlawful assassinations of civilians in the department of Norte
de Santander. Sargent Rodrı́guez reported that fellow soldiers that killed civilians and portrayed
them as guerillas killed in combat were granted a five-day vacation period per casualty produced.
His testimony accuses the unit commander, Colonel Santiago Herrera Fajardo, of having pressured
battalion commanders to generate results. According to Rodrı́guez this was because the Army com-
mander in chief, General Mario Montoya, was himself putting pressure on Herrera and other brigade
commanders.45 The accusation was investigated by a military committee headed by Montoya. The
result was that Rodriguez was fired from the army while Colonel Herrera was promoted because of
the operational results of his unit.46
    This is not the only testimony that relates commander in chief Montoya with putting pressure
from above to unit commanders to produce results, in particular killings, as we noted above. In
an interview with TV magazine Noticias RCN, Colonel Robinson González del Rio states that he
once heard General Montoya saying “I want rivers of blood, I want results”, and that he made
famous a “top 10” ranking of units according to the results produced as measured by killings.47
This is consistent with the concerns expressed by the US Embassy in Bogotá, in a cable filtered by
Wikileaks, according to which General Montoya picked General Oscar Enrique González Peña as his
successor as commander in chief of the military forces, praising him as “the best commander in the
country” during his tenure in charge of the 4th Brigade, because his unit reported the most killings
of all: 857.48 Finally, in the cited interview with El Tiempo, Major Juan Carlos Rodrı́guez Agudelo
said that the instructions from above, all the way to General Montoya, first produced “bottles of
blood” and that ended in “tanker trucks” of blood. Indeed, according to Major Rodrı́guez, soldiers
  44
      Colombia is part of The Multinational Force and Observers (MFO), an international peacekeeping force that
operates in the Sinai peninsula overseeing the 1979 peace treaty between Egypt and Israel.
   45
      The lack of results of Brigade 15 that generated this pressure may have been a key factor triggering the Soacha
killings. A witness in the Soacha case investigations, Sargent Muñoz, declared that after several reprimands from higher
level officials, the brigade commander, Colonel Gabriel Rincón Amado agreed to “buy” civilians (from intermediaries
who would recruit them for fake jobs) and present them as enemies killed in combat. This is how civilians Jhonnatan
Orlando Soto (17) and Julio César Meza (24) disappeared from Soacha after accepting job offers from the recruiter.
They were killed two days afterwards. The recruiters were payed 2.2 million pesos (just over US$ 1,000). After that,
according to Sargent Muñoz, Colonel Rincón wanted to repeat the operation with more people (“Ası́ se tejió la trampa
de los falsos positivos”, El Tiempo, May 24, 2009. Available at: http://www.eltiempo.com/archivo/documento/
MAM-3456789 (last accessed August 15, 2014)).
   46
      Sources: Beriain, David “A su muchacho lo matamos nosotros, señora” Agencia de Prensa Rural, May 24. Available
at: http://prensarural.org/spip/spip.php?article1124 (last accessed August 14, 2014); and “Primer militar
que denunció ‘falsos positivos’ en Norte de Santander está preso”, El Tiempo, May 10, 2009. Available at:http://
www.eltiempo.com/archivo/documento/CMS-5177467 (last accessed August 14, 2014).
   47
      “General Montoya responde a denuncias del coronel Del Rı́o”, Semana.com, June 9, 2014. Available at: http://www
.semana.com/nacion/articulo/general-montoya-responde-denuncias-del-coronel-del-rio/391036-3 (last ac-
cessed August 14, 2014).
   48
      The Wikileak cable can be downloaded from: http://wikileaks.ch/cable/2008/11/08BOGOTA4028.html (last
accessed August 14, 2014).



                                                          A-4
that did not have any deaths in their history were “out of the system”, and captures just did not
count.49
     This suggests that while the cited formal documents emphasized both captures of insurgents
and their death as acceptable outcomes, the informal incentives privileged killings over captures.
In another telling example of his interview with El Tiempo, Major Rodrı́guez says that a common
situation was one in which a soldier would call a superior to report, say, two killings and three
captures, and the superior would reply by saying that he was now calling the local representative
of the Attorney for him to remove all the five corpses, making clear that he expected the soldier to
kill the three insurgents who had been captured.
     Another incentive used to persuade army members to engage in this practice was the direct pay-
ment of rewards. Even if the Directive 29 and other of the cited documents do not mention military
personnel as potential recipients of the money that the government had budgeted for intelligence
rewards, army units designed mechanisms to allow for funds to be transferred to their soldiers if
they were successful at producing results. According to Colonel Luis Fernando Borja, in addition to
vacation and honors, soldiers could obtain cash. To this end, units would “create” fake informants
that upon receiving the rewards would pass it to the command to distribute it discretionally among
soldiers. Colonel Borja confessed he himself managed these funds in his unit.50 Alfamir Castillo,
mother of a false positive victim, Darvey Mosquera, told news web magazine La Silla Vacı́a that
she had proof that each of the soldiers of Counter-guerilla battalion Mártires de Puerres, involved
in the killing of her son and that of his friend, Alex Hernando Ramı́rez, received about 3 million
pesos in addition to a one-month permit of absence. The two victims were portrayed as insurgents
killed in combat. The Human Rights Watch report cites several other instances of this.

A.3.2     Oversight by Local Judicial Institutions
Recall that one of our predictions is that, for a given reward structure, cheating is more likely if it
is easier to falsify. This highlights the importance of an independent an efficient legal system. As
noted by UN Special Rapporteur, Phillip Alston, in his 2010 report:

       “Lack of sufficient accountability has been a key factor in the continuation of falsos
       positivos. Estimates of the current rate of impunity for alleged killings by the security
       forces are as high as 98.5%. Soldiers simply knew that they could get away with murder.
       This resulted from problems (...) at each stage of the investigation and disciplinary or
       criminal justice system” (p. 12).

   In Colombia, the local branch of the Office of the Attorney General and its Technical Investigation
Unit (CTI) are in charge of the initial inspection and removal of the corpse after a killing in combat,
and local attorneys are the key investigators of alleged false positives. When an accusation is issued,
the case and the available evidence are transferred to the local judges, who conduct hearings and
  49
      There are testimonies that involve the then Minister of Defense and current President, Juan Manuel Santos, in
exerting pressure to commanders to produce results and threatening punishment to under-performers. However, in
sharp contrast with the case of General Montoya, Santos does not appear to be asking for killings, just vaguely for
‘results’. In his hearing before the Attorney General, Colonel Luis Fernando Borja Aristizabal, former commander of
the Joint Task Force of Sucre, states that when Santos visited the area to preside over a Security Council, he addressed
Borja and warned him that he needed to achieve measurable quantitative results, or else he would be fired. Borja,
who confessed to having perpetrated 57 false positives and is now facing a 42-year sentence, told the attorney that
he felt threatened (“El Coronel que confesó 57 falsos positivos”, KienyKe, 30 August, 2011. Available at: http://
www.kienyke.com/historias/el-coronel-que-confeso-57-falsos-positivos/ (last accessed August 14, 2014)).
   50
      “Soy culpable”, Semana, July 16, 2011. Available at: http://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/soy-culpable/
243091-3 (last accessed August 15, 2014.


                                                         A-5
gather additional evidence. If one of these branches of the judiciary is corrupt or just inefficient,
the incentives to commit abuses in their jurisdiction is higher. These can take the form of delays in
investigations, harassment, threatening and even killing key witnesses, etc.
    There is also evidence that the weakness of the judicial system facilitated these crimes. Moreover,
the anecdotal evidence that we review in this subsection also offers several examples of the resulting
incentive, for army members, to further corrupt the judicial system in order to get away with the
murder of civilians.
    As a telling example, according to magazine Semana, Colonel Publio Hernán Mejı́a, former
commander of “La Popa” battalion and now jailed for his links with paramilitaries and for commit-
ting extrajudicial executions of civilians, had little trouble in producing in false positives because
the local representative of the Attorney General helped him with the setups necessary to ‘legalize’
the victims as insurgents.51 Similarly, in his testimony, Captain Antonio Rozo Valbuena, former
commander of the GAULA special operations unit working in the department of Córdoba, stated
that local representatives of the Attorney General Office helped the unit ‘legalize’ the execution of
civilians.52 More generally, according to the International Federation of Human Rights, in various
instances there was evidence of proximity and collaboration between local attorneys and the military
unit that operates in the area, with a few cases in which the attorneys even worked inside military
garrisons.53
    There is also indirect evidence of collaboration between local attorneys and the army when it
comes to cases of false positives. According to the UN’s Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, in several instances of illegal executions of civilians, the local office of the attorney refrained
from claiming the competence of removing the corpses and initiating a judicial investigation. In
these circumstances, cases are referred to the military criminal justice system, largely accused of
underplaying the importance of false positives.54 Human Rights Watch document several cases
where functionaries of the military judicial system helped cover up false positives even giving advice
to soldiers as to how to make them look more ‘realistic’ (pp. 77-81).
    As a consequence, the UN report conclusion that witnesses were not only afraid of the perpe-
trators, but also of the local attorneys and prosecutors, since they were believed to cooperate with
the perpetrators. This was especially so in the most rural and remote areas. For instance, a human
rights activist working in the Casanare region, told La Silla Vacı́a that it was the case that when
people approached the authorities to report a disappearance of a family member, the next victims
were themselves. Thus “a culture of silence was created”.55
    As already mentioned, after the initial inspection and removal of the corpse by local attorneys,
the investigations of alleged false positives are conducted by the judges who have jurisdiction in
the area where the crime is perpetrated. However, this practice is sometimes detrimental for the
success of investigations. Indeed, in cases in which the victim is abducted or disappears in one place
but is executed in another, there is often a dispute of legal responsibility between the judges of the
two jurisdictions. Because such disputes take long to resolve (up to a year in some cases), it is not
  51
     “De héroe a villano”, Semana, January 27, 2007. Available at: http://www.semana.com/nacion/articulo/
de-heroe-villano/83183-3 (last accessed August 15, 2014).
  52
     “Confesiones siniestras”, Agencia Prensa Rural, October 10, 2011. Available at: http://prensarural.org/spip/
spip.php?article6588 (last accessed August 15, 2014).
  53
     “Colombia. La guerra se mide en litros de sangre” - 2012 Report of the International Federation of Human Rights
and the Colombia-Europe-USA Coordination. Available at: http://www.fidh.org/IMG/pdf/colombie589e.pdf (last
accessed August 15, 2014).
  54
     2005 Report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on the human rights situation in Colombia, UN Document
No E/CN 4/2006/009.
  55
     “La batalla cotidiana en Casanare por la verdad de los falsos positivos”, La Silla Vacı́a, November
5, 2011.     Available at: http://lasillavacia.com/historia-invitado/24106/kristina-johansen/la-batalla
-cotidiana-en-casanare-por-la-verdad-de-los-fals (last accessed August 15, 2014).


                                                       A-6
uncommon that in the meantime parts of the evidence get lost and witnesses cannot be found or
their memories have conveniently changed. This was frequently the case in the investigation of false
positives.56
    This dual responsibility among judges of different jurisdictions also created incentives for the
implicated parties to push for the investigations to end up in one place rather than the other. For
instance the defense lawyers of the military members involved in the Soacha scandal formally asked
for the cases to be transferred from the regular criminal system to the military criminal justice
system. When the petition was denied, the attorneys requested for the cases to be transferred from
Soacha, where the victims were recruited, to Norte de Santander, where the victims were killed.57
This is quite a telling example, as the false positives in Soacha, which created the major media scan-
dal around the phenomena, were perhaps particularly salient precisely because they occurred near
the capital city of Bogotá, where state institutions including the judiciary are presumably stronger.
Consistent with such situation, these victims were not actually executed near the recruitment cite
as in most cases, but were taken far away before being killed.
    Other evidence directly suggests that committing false positives likely led to a deterioration of
institutional quality. Human Rights Watch (2015, p. 75) report a revealing transcript obtained
by the newsmagazine Semana of a phone conversation in 2012 between the then-head of the army
General Leonardo Barrero and Lieutenant Colonel González del Rı́o who at the time was being
investigated under arrest for his involvement in false positives. Barrero tells González del Rı́o to
“create a mafia” to discredit prosecutors. In order to perpetuate false positives there is also evidence
that the army paid criminal organizations to find victims. We noted this in the Soacha case and
González del Rio also testified that when he had commanded the Gaula Antioquia unit of the 4th
Brigade General González Peña, commanded of the joint Caribbean Command, “suggested he work
with organized crime groups to commit false positives” (Human Rights Watch, 2015, p. 68). It is
likely that things such as attacks on witnesses and threats also help to undermine local institutions
(Human Rights Watch, 2015, p. 74).

A.3.3     Promotion Incentives for Colonels
In our main theoretical and empirical analysis, we posited that the body count incentives that
generated the surge in false positives after 2002 were stronger for colonels than for generals. Our
empirical strategy builds on the idea that colonels leading brigades are, unlike generals, up for
promotion. Therefore, high-powered incentives are more likely to have an effect on their behavior.
    Recall for instance the example of Sargent Alexander Rodrı́guez, who testified to having wit-
nessed the assassination of several civilians by his unit. However, after blaming the unit’s colonel
for orchestrating the killings, he had his testimony reviewed by a military board headed by General
Mario Montoya. The outcome of the investigation was that Sargent Rodrı́guez was fired from the
force, and the involved colonel was promoted.58 In addition, Alfamir Castillo, mother of false pos-
itive victim Darvey Mosquera, told news web magazine La Silla Vacı́a that even if several soldiers
were already serving jail time for the killing of her son, the officials that ordered the killing and
organized for him to be portrayed as a guerilla were still free. The officials are Brigadier Generals
Emiro José Barrios and Jorge Enrique Navarrete, both of whom were colonels at the time of the
  56
     “Colombia. La guerra se mide en litros de sangre” - 2012 Report of the International Federation of Human Rights
and the Colombia-Europe-USA Coordination. Available at: http://www.fidh.org/IMG/pdf/colombie589e.pdf (last
accessed August 15, 2014).
  57
     “Los secretos de los expedientes de falsos positivos”, El Tiempo, October 18, 2009. Available at: http://www
.eltiempo.com/archivo/documento/MAM-3674086 (last accessed September 20, 2014).
  58
     Beriain, David “A su muchacho lo matamos nosotros, señora” Agencia de Prensa Rural, May 24. Available at:
http://prensarural.org/spip/spip.php?article1124 (last accessed August 14, 2014).


                                                       A-7
events.59,60
    There are several accusations of colonels, acting as unit commanders, for orchestrating and
perpetrating false positives. All of them share common features, for instance that colonels’ main
motive was to be promoted. For instance, according to magazine Semana, 27 soldiers, an entire
platoon, were expelled from the army in 2008 for refusing to fire at two alleged guerilla members,
but who were dressed as civilians and not engaging in combat. The platoon had seen two individuals
in a guerilla camp site and, as one of them said, “it would have been easy to shoot and kill them, but
they were unarmed and dressed as civilians”. Moreover, they couldn’t approach the camp for fear of
land mines. When moving, however, the guerilla members in the area noticed the military presence
and engaged in combat. The guerilla members escaped, but the soldiers captured one under-age
female guerilla member and confiscated provisions and computers. Upon returning to their battalion
with what they considered a positive outcome, the reaction of the platoon commander (a Lieutenant
Colonel) is described by one of the soldiers as follows:

       “When my colonel came in he started insulting us and scolding us and told us that
       we were good for nothing, that we did not understand that the live guerilla insurgent
       was useless for him, and that what mattered were killings because he was going to be
       promoted to colonel and he was “measured” that way. He told us he was going to have
       us all expelled.”61

A.3.4     The Issue of Collateral Damage
It is important to note that the case study literature also decisively suggests that false positives
cannot be interpreted as simple collateral damage which occurs as an unfortunate by product of
taking the fight to the guerillas. This is because the evidence is overwhelming that this was a
planned criminal operation by the army. Human Rights Watch interviews with military officers
confirmed that units had “systems in place for committing false positives” (p. 6) and officers would
“meet with their battalion commander on a weekly basis to plan false positives” (p. 6) moreover
“the crimes required significant organizing, planning, and logistical coordination by military officers
and soldiers” (p. 25).
    Evidence against the collateral damage hypothesis also comes from the copious judicial and
media evidence. Human Rights Watch (p. 25) quotes a 2012 report from the International Criminal
Court that sums up a large body of this evidence by saying that false positives “were directed
against particular categories of civilians, who resided in remote areas and were considered to belong
to a marginalized sector of the population”. Human Rights Watch goes on to note that victims
“included farmers, children, unemployed people, homeless people, people . . . dependent on drugs,
people with mental disabilities, community leaders, people with criminal records, petty criminals.
  59
     “Entiendo a los soldados a pesar de que mataron a mi hijo. Cumplı́an órdenes”, LaSillaVacia.com, September 19,
2013. Available at: http://lasillavacia.com/historia/entiendo-los-soldados-pesar-de-que-mataron-mi-hijo
-cumplian-ordenes-alfamir-castillo-45670 (last accessed September 20, 2014).
  60
     This particular case is peculiar because it became known that the insurgent guerillas killed in combat were civilians
because of two key witnesses. One was José Didier Marı́n, one of the three civilians targeted by the army, who happened
to escape before they shot him. The other one was Ernesto Quintana, a soldier of the involved unit (Counter-guerilla
Battalion Mártires de Puerres), who recognized his cousin was one of the victims when the perpetrators triumphantly
showed the photo album of the alleged combat. When he asked his superiors why his civilian was cousin among the
“insurgents” killed, they offered vacations and money for him to remain silent. When he left the battalion to take the
promised vacation, he was warned that Major Linares had given orders to kill him. Both witnesses are now part of
the government’s witness protection program.
  61
     “La historia inédita de los falsos positivos”, Semana, July 6, 2013. Available at: http://www.semana.com/nacion/
articulo/la-historia-inedita-falsos-positivos/349851-3 (last accessed September 20, 2014).



                                                          A-8
Demobilized guerillas and paramilitaries, and in some rare cases, supposed guerilla collaborators or
guerillas who had been detained or surrendered” (p. 25). Thus committing false positives was a
purposeful activity which was not a natural side effect of engaging in actual combat with guerillas.
This feature also suggests that it probably substituted for such actual combat and what we have
termed true positives.

A.4    Theoretical Results for the Perfect Substitutes and Perfect Complements
       Cases
First consider the perfect complements case, where
                                                         1
                                                           min cT a2T , cF a2F .
                                                              
                                         Ψ(aT , aF ) =
                                                         2
                                q
                      aT            cF
Then, after setting   aF    =       cT   to minimize costs and substituting in the objective function, we
obtain the following optimal efforts:
                                                                   
                                                       1 + αχ     α
                                          a∗F   = πs √         +                                      (A.1)
                                                         cF cT   cF
                                                                        
                                                       1 + αχ       α
                                          a∗T   = πs           +√                                     (A.2)
                                                         cT        cF cT

Proposition A.1. (False positives with perfect technological complements)
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                      min cT a2T , cF a2F .
                                                                                                         
Suppose that false and true positives are perfect technological complements, with Ψ(aT , aF ) =   2
Then, a marginal increase in incentives s:

  1. Increases true and false positives.

  2. Leads to a larger increase in true and false positives where reported output is a more important
     part of compensation (higher π).

  3. Leads to a larger increase in true and false positives where misrepresentation of false positives
     is more likely (higher α)

Proof. All results follow directly from expressions (A.1) and (A.2) together with expressions (6) and
(7) in the main text for E[exp(qT∗ )] and E[exp(qF∗ )].
                                                           √
    Now consider the perfect substitutes case, where δ = cT cF . Then, we can write the first order
conditions for maximization of the agent’s payoff in complementary slackness form as follows:
                √           √       √                    √    √       √
           πsα − cF        ( cF aF + cT aT ) ≤ 0, [πsα − cF ( cF aF + cT aT )] aF = 0
                √           √       √                          √    √       √
    πs(1 + αχ) − cT        ( cF aF + cT aT ) ≤ 0, [πs(1 + αχ) − cT ( cF aF + cT aT )] aT = 0
                                                aF   ≥ 0, aT ≥ 0                                      (A.3)

Therefore, we cannot have both aF > 0 and aT > 0 except in a borderline case. More specifically:

                                                                       if √αcF > 1+χα
                            πsα
                           
                           (0, cF )                                              √
                                                                                    cT
                           
                           ( πs(1+χα) , 0)
                           
                                                                       if √α
                                                                               < 1+χα
                                                                                  √
            (a∗T , a∗F ) =        cT
                                              √         √                  α
                                                                            cF      cT
                                                                                 1+χα
                                                                                           (A.4)
                           
                           
                           (a T , aF ) ≥ 0 :   cF aF +   cT a T = πsB if √
                                                                            cF =  √
                                                                                    cT ≡ B
                           
                           


                                                             A-9
   This is enough to establish our main results.

Proposition A.2. (False positives with perfect technological substitutes)
                                                                                     √
Suppose that false and true positives are perfect technological substitutes, with δ = ct cF .
    Then, agents specialize in one kind of effort (a∗T > 0 and a∗F = 0 or a∗T = 0 and a∗F > 0) except
                                                             √          √
if √αcF = 1+χα
           √
             cT ≡ B, when any pair (aT , aF ) ≥ 0 such that    cF aF + cT aT = πsB is optimal.

   A marginal increase in incentives s:

  1. (Weakly) increases observed false and true positives,

                                          ∂E[exp(qF∗ )]      ∂E exp(qT∗ )]
                                                        ≥ 0,               ≥ 0.
                                              ∂s                 ∂s
                 ∂E[exp(q ∗ )]                                                                 ∂E[exp(q ∗ )]
      Moreover      ∂s
                       T
                          = 0 ⇔ a∗T = 0 (the agent specializes in bad effort), and        ∂s
                                                                                             F
                                                                                                =0⇔
      a∗F = χ = 0 (the agent specializes in good effort and false positives are purely intentional).

  2. Leads to a (weakly) larger increase in false and true positives where reported output is a more
     important part of compensation (higher π),

                                         ∂ 2 E[exp(qF∗ )]      ∂ 2 E[exp(qT∗ )]
                                                          ≥ 0,                  ≥ 0.
                                              ∂s∂π                  ∂s∂π
                            ∗ )]
                 ∂ 2 E[exp(qT                                      ∗ )]
                                                        ∂ 2 E[exp(qF
      Moreover        ∂s∂π         = 0 ⇔ a∗T = 0, and        ∂s∂π         = 0 ⇔ a∗F = χ = 0.

  3. Leads to a (weakly) larger increase in false and true positives where misrepresentation of false
     positives is more likely (higher α),

                                         ∂ 2 E[exp(qF∗ )]      ∂ 2 E[exp(qT∗ )]
                                                          ≥ 0,                  ≥ 0.
                                              ∂s∂α                  ∂s∂α
                            ∗ )]
                 ∂ 2 E[exp(qT                                      ∗ )]
                                                        ∂ 2 E[exp(qF
      Moreover        ∂s∂α         = 0 ⇔ a∗T = 0, and        ∂s∂α         = 0 ⇔ a∗F = χ = 0.

Proof. All implications follow directly from (A.4) combined with expressions (6) and (7) in the main
text for E[exp(qT )] and E[exp(qF )].

     Contrasting Proposition A.2 with Proposition 1 in the main text, the only difference is in predic-
tion 3. In particular, we no longer obtain the result emphasized throughout the discussion that true
positives may respond less in areas where α is larger so long as false positives are largely intentional
(small χ). However, this contrast emerges not from a deep fundamental difference in the predictions,
but from the fact that the propositions have been established for marginal changes in incentives and
surrounding conditions. But in the perfect substitutes case, agents select a corner solution except
in a borderline case. Thus, it is more important to focus on the implications that the changes in
underlying parameters have on the agent’s choice about which effort to choose, good or bad.
     The next corollary establishes a result with implications along the lines of prediction 4 in Propo-
sition 1 in the main text. In particular, it shows that, as long as false positives are largely intentional,
it is more likely that the agent specializes in bad effort in places with weak institutions. This im-
plies that, when comparing places with stronger and weaker institutions, the impact of incentives on
true positives is smaller in places with weaker institutions (namely, no impact) than in those with
stronger institutions (where there should be an increase).


                                                        A-10
Corollary A.3. (Weak institutions and specialization in bad effort)
                                                                                     √
Suppose that false and true positives are perfect technological substitutes, with δ = cT cF .
    Then, weaker institutions are more likely to lead to specialization in bad effort (a∗T = 0 and
a∗F > 0) if and only if:                           r
                                                      cT
                                              χ>
                                                      cF
Proof. The result follows directly from inspecting the effect of an increase in α in either term of the
inequality √αcF ≶ 1+χα
                   √
                     cT , the key condition in (A.4).


A.5     Implications for E(q)
Consider focusing on:

                          E[qT∗ ] = E[a∗T + εT ] = a∗T ,                                               (A.5)
                          E[qF∗ ]   =   E [χ(a∗T   + εT ) +   (a∗F   + εF )] =   χa∗T   +   a∗F .      (A.6)

To see that comparative statics are identical as when focusing on E[exp(qJ∗ )] it suffices to notice that
for J ∈ {F, P }
                          ∂a∗J    a∗ ∂ 2 a∗J    1 ∂a∗J       ∂ 2 a∗J   1 ∂a∗J
                               = J,          =         , and         =        .
                           ∂s      s ∂s∂π       s ∂π         ∂s∂α      s ∂α
Therefore, after deriving, substituting these properties and rearranging, the following equivalences
hold for true positives:

                               ∂E[exp(qT∗ )]                          ∂a∗T
                                                   = E[exp(qT∗ )]          ,
                                     ∂s                                ∂s
                              ∂ 2 E[exp(qT∗ )]                              ∂ 2 a∗T
                                                   = E[exp(qT∗ )](1 + a∗T )         ,
                                   ∂s∂π                                     ∂s∂π
                              ∂ 2 E[exp(qT∗ )]                              ∂ 2 a∗T
                                                   = E[exp(qT∗ )](1 + a∗T )         .
                                   ∂s∂α                                     ∂s∂α
Similarly, for false positives:

                   ∂E[exp(qF∗ )]                       ∂a∗T    ∂a∗F
                                                                   
                                    =   E[exp(qF∗ )] χ       +        ,
                       ∂s                               ∂s      ∂s
                  ∂ E[exp(qF∗ )]
                                                                     2 ∗
                   2                                                           ∂ 2 a∗F
                                                                                       
                                              ∗             ∗    ∗      ∂ aT
                                    = E[exp(qF )] (1 + χaT + aF ) χ          +           ,
                     ∂s∂π                                               ∂s∂π ∂s∂π
                  ∂ E[exp(qF∗ )]
                                                                     2 ∗
                   2                                                           ∂ 2 a∗F
                                                                                       
                                                                        ∂ aT
                                    = E[exp(qF∗ )] (1 + χa∗T + a∗F ) χ       +           .
                     ∂s∂α                                               ∂s∂α ∂s∂α

Since E[exp(qJ∗ )], 1 + a∗T , and 1 + χa∗T + a∗F are strictly positive, this establishes that the sign of the
partials and cross partials for E[exp(qJ∗ )] is determined by the sign of the partials and cross partials
for E[qJ∗ ] — since in each case, the partials and cross partial of E[qJ∗ ] are given by the terms in
parentheses, which give the responses of a∗T and χa∗T + a∗F to the parameter changes.




                                                        A-11
A.6     Ratio of Outputs and Bad Effort
As noted in the text, examining the response of the ratio of true to false positives to incentives does
not help determine the role of bad relative to good effort. To see this, define this ratio as

                      exp (qF (s))
             r(s) =                = exp [χ(a∗T (s) + εT ) + (a∗F (s) + εF ) − (a∗T (s) + εT )] .
                      exp (qT (s))

Taking the derivative with respect to incentives s and using ∂a∗T (s)/∂s = a∗T (s)/s, we find

                                ∂r(s)   r(s)
                                      =      ((χ − 1) (a∗T (s)) + a∗F (s)) .
                                 ∂s      s
Thus, even with agents exerting bad effort, the ratio of false to true positives may increase or
decrease depending on the (unknown) relative magnitudes of good effort, bad effort, and the fraction
of collateral damage (which moreover has been assumed constant for tractability, but could vary
with the degree of effort further complicating the relationship between the importance of both types
of effort and the ratio of observed false to true positives).




                                                    A-12
A.7        Additional Tables

                                                Table A-1: Variables and sources



Variable                        Description                                                                                           Sources

                                                                     Dependent variables

                                                                            Positives

False positives                 Arbitrary executions of civilians presented as members of illegal armed groups. Measured from         CINEP’s Data Bank on
                                2000 to 2010. We use both the number of instances (events) where the Colombian armed forces           Human Rights and Politi-
                                are involved producing such killings (false positives cases) as well as the number of people killed   cal Violence.
                                in the events in each municipality and year (false positives casualties).

True positives                  Killings of rebels, guerillas or paramilitaries, by the government armed forces. Measured from        CERAC-Universidad del
                                2000 to 2010. We use both the number of instances (events) producing such killings (true              Rosario with information
                                positives cases) as well as the number of people killed in the events in each municipality and        from CINEP.
                                year (true positives casualties).


                                                                       Judicial Institutions

Judicial Inefficiency Index     Ratio of complaints against functionaries in the judicial branch to total complaints. Measured        Inspector General (Procu-
                                from 2000 to 2010.                                                                                    radurı́a).


                                                                             Security

Guerilla, government, or        Dummy variable that equals 1 if the corresponding group perpetrated any attack on a given             CERAC-Universidad del
paramilitary attacks            municipality and year, from 2000 to 2010.                                                             Rosario with information
                                                                                                                                      from CINEP.


                                                                    Explanatory variables


Initial Judicial Inefficiency   Ratio of complaints against functionaries in the judicial branch to total complaints, from 1995       Inspector General (Procu-
                                to 1999 (before the main sample period)                                                               radurı́a).

Colonels                        We use three measures at the year and municipality level: a dummy, unweighted share, and              Colombian Army Web-
                                weighted share. The dummy is simply an indicator variable that equals one if any of the brigades      page and expired versions
                                operating in a given municipality are led by colonels. The unweigthed share computes the share of     through Internet Archive’s
                                brigades with influence in the municipality that are led by colonels. The weighted share computes     Way      Back    Machine
                                the share weighting by brigade population, defined as the total population in municipalities under    (http://archive.org/
                                each brigade’s jurisdiction. We also distinguish between the mobile brigade share and regular         web/), Online news search
                                colonel-led brigade share in additional Appendix exercises. The mobile brigade share is the ratio     in El Tiempo, DANE
                                of mobile to total brigades in the municipality (with mobile brigades always led by colonels),        for municipal population
                                and te regular colonel share is the ratio of colonel-led regular brigades to total brigades.          figures.


                                                                                                                                      -Continues in next page-




                                                                          A-13
                                                Table A-1: Variables and sources
                                                    -continued from previous page-



Variable                        Description                                                                                             Sources

                                                                             Controls

                                                                             Geographic

Rainfall                        Mean annual rainfall level in each municipality in millimeters                                          All geographic controls
                                                                                                                                        from Municipal Panel,
Distance to capital             Linear distance to the state’s capital in thousands of kilometers                                       CEDE, Universidad de los
                                                                                                                                        Andes
Soil quality and soil erosion   Soil types are categorized by the Colombian Geographic Institute on a scale of 1-8 based on
                                suitability for agriculture, and on a scale of 1-6 based on soil erosion. The index is weighted
                                average of soil type by municipality.

Water availability              Weighted average from sub-municipal indicators of availability.

Altitude                        Altitude above sea level, in meters, of the urban center of each municipality

Municipality area               Total municipal area in hectares (in logs)

                                                                Basic socioeconomic, in year 2000

Population, 2000                Total municipal population (in logs)                                                                    Colombian     Statistical
                                                                                                                                        Agency (DANE)

Math, language, and sci-        Municipal average scores per area for high-school graduates in the official standardized test           Colombian Institute for
ence test scores, 2000                                                                                                                  Higher Education (ICFES)

Tax Income per cap, 2000        Municipal total amount collected taxes. Millions of pesos per 100.000 inhabitants (in logs +1)          Colombian National Plan-
                                                                                                                                        ning Department (DNP)

Poverty index, 2000             Proportion of people in poverty according to the Index of Unmet (or Unsatisfied) Basic Needs.           Colombian     Statistical
                                Basic Needs are defined at the household level using indicators for housing overcrowding, dwelling      Agency (DANE)
                                physical characteristics, access to public services, proportion of economically dependent mem-
                                bers, and children school attendance.

                                                                             Additional

Navy presence                   Indicator variable that equals 1 if a Navy unit operates in the municipality.                           Colombian Army Official
                                                                                                                                        Website

Guerrilla,   government         Average attacks by group, between 1991 and 2000 and per 100.000 inhabitants                             CERAC-Universidad      del
and paramilitary attacks                                                                                                                Rosario
(1991-2000)

Unemployment rate, 2005         Municipal unemployment rate                                                                             Colombian   Statistical
                                                                                                                                        Agency (DANE), Census
                                                                                                                                        2005

Catholic    churches     per    Number of catholic churches per person in each municipality.                                            Municipal Panel, CEDE,
capita                                                                                                                                  Universidad de los Andes

Coca cultivated area, 1999      Municipal area cultivated with coca, per 100 hectares                                                   Municipal Panel, CEDE,
                                                                                                                                        Universidad de los Andes

Average     protests     per    Sum of all protests per year and per person. Protests are defined as the set of social actions with     CINEP, Base de datos
capita, 1995-1999               more than 10 people who intentionally express demands or push for solutions from the state at           de luchas sociales (Social
                                its different levels, or from private entities or individuals, to address injustices, inequalities or   struggles database)
                                exclusions.




                                                                           A-14
                   Table A-2: Descriptive Statistics: Time-invariant variables


  Variable                                                   Mean       Std. Dev.         Min          Max        Obs.

                                             Judicial Inefficiency Index

  Initial judicial inefficiency (1995-1999)                  0.077         0.080         0.000         0.538       893

                           Controls (Interacted with time dummies in regressions)

  Geographic

  Mean annual rainfall                                     1971.843      1064.394       160.000      9200.000      893
  Distance to state capital (thousand kms)                 130.527       107.190         0.000       790.000       893
  Soil quality index                                        2.683         1.203          0.000        8.000        893
  Soil erosion index                                        1.978         1.019          0.000        5.000        893
  Water availability index                                 3.4e+06       5.3e+05        2.0e+06      5.6e+06       893
  Altitude (Km)                                             1.143          1.178         0.002        25.221       893
  Log (Municipal area in km2 )                              10.517         1.153         7.313        15.698       893

  Basic socioeconomic (in year 2000)

  Log (population)                                           9.665          1.056         7.144       15.657       893
  Math test scores                                          42.505         1.086         37.083      46.750        893
  Language test scores                                      44.581          1.945        35.750      50.563        893
  Science test scores                                       44.205         1.069         40.886      49.000        893
  Log (Tax income per cap)                                   6.625         2.447          0.000       10.518       893
  Poverty index                                             45.739         21.703         7.220      104.530       893

  Additional

  Navy presence                                              0.029          0.168        0.000        1.000        893
  guerilla attacks (1991-1999)                              3.559          5.607         0.000       78.954        893
  Paramilitar attacks (1991-1999)                           0.430          0.951         0.000        8.922        893
  Unemployment rate 2005                                     0.049          0.044        0.000        0.430        893
  Catholic churches per capita                              11.204         11.260        0.000       106.671       893
  Coca cultivated area per 100 hectares 1999                0.078          0.656         0.000       16.072        893
  Average protests per capita (1995-1999)                   0.679          2.118         0.000       31.571        893

Notes: Judicial inefficiency is the ratio of complaints against judicial functionaries relative to total complaints against
all public officials, over the period 1995 to 1999.




                                                          A-15
                      Table A-3: Colonel assignment and observable characteristics
                                                         Pre           Incentives          Post        Pre            Incentives          Post

       Variable                                         2002     Incentives (2003-2008)    2009       2002      Incentives (2003-2008)    2009

       Dependent variable is (weighted) colonel share

       Variable (times time-period dummies indicated in columns)

       Initial judicial inefficiency (1995-1999)                                                      0.1027           0.2708∗           −0.1900
                                                                                                     (0.1691)          (0.1393)          (0.2038)
       Geographic

       Mean annual rainfall                             −0.00           −0.00               0.00      −0.00            −0.00               0.00
                                                        (0.00)          (0.00)             (0.00)     (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
       Distance to state capital (thousand kms)          0.00           0.00∗               0.00       0.00            0.00∗               0.00
                                                        (0.00)          (0.00)             (0.00)     (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
       Soil quality index                                0.02           −0.01              −0.02       0.02            −0.01              −0.02
                                                        (0.02)          (0.01)             (0.01)     (0.02)           (0.01)             (0.01)
       Soil erosion index                               −0.01           −0.01              −0.01      −0.01            −0.01              −0.01
                                                        (0.02)          (0.02)             (0.02)     (0.02)           (0.02)             (0.02)
       Water availability index                         −0.00          −0.00∗∗∗           −0.00∗∗∗    −0.00           −0.00∗∗∗           −0.00∗∗∗
                                                        (0.00)          (0.00)             (0.00)     (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
       Altitude (m)                                     −0.00            0.00               0.00      −0.00             0.00               0.00
                                                        (0.00)          (0.00)             (0.00)     (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
       Log (Municipal area in km2 )                     −0.00            0.00               0.00      −0.00             0.00               0.00
                                                        (0.00)          (0.00)             (0.00)     (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)

       Basic socioeconomic (in year 2000)

       Log (population)                             −0.94                 2.23              8.60     −0.94               2.23              8.60
                                                    (4.40)               (3.03)            (5.69)    (4.40)             (3.03)            (5.69)
       Log (population)2                             0.08               −0.35             −1.21       0.08             −0.35             −1.21
                                                    (0.60)               (0.41)            (0.78)    (0.60)             (0.41)            (0.78)
       Log (population)3                            −0.00                 0.02              0.08     −0.00               0.02              0.08
                                                    (0.04)               (0.02)            (0.05)    (0.04)             (0.02)            (0.05)
       Log (population)4                            −0.00               −0.00             −0.00∗     −0.00             −0.00             −0.00∗
                                                    (0.00)               (0.00)            (0.00)    (0.00)             (0.00)            (0.00)
       Math test scores                             0.04∗                0.04∗∗             0.03     0.04∗              0.04∗∗             0.03
                                                    (0.02)               (0.02)            (0.04)    (0.02)             (0.02)            (0.04)
       Language test scores                         −0.02∗              −0.03∗∗           −0.03∗     −0.02∗            −0.03∗∗           −0.03∗
                                                    (0.01)               (0.01)            (0.02)    (0.01)             (0.01)            (0.02)
       Science test scores                           0.01                 0.01             0.04∗      0.01               0.01             0.04∗
                                                    (0.02)               (0.01)            (0.02)    (0.02)             (0.01)            (0.02)
       Log (Tax income per cap)                     −0.01               −0.01             −0.02∗∗    −0.01             −0.01             −0.02∗∗
                                                    (0.01)               (0.00)            (0.01)    (0.01)             (0.00)            (0.01)
       Poverty index                                 0.00                 0.00              0.00      0.00               0.00              0.00
                                                    (0.00)               (0.00)            (0.00)    (0.00)             (0.00)            (0.00)

       Additional

       Navy presence                                  0.13               −0.07            −0.23∗∗      0.13             −0.07            −0.23∗∗
                                                     (0.12)              (0.10)            (0.11)     (0.12)            (0.10)            (0.11)
       guerilla attacks (1991-1999)                   0.00                0.00             −0.00       0.00              0.00             −0.00
                                                     (0.00)              (0.00)            (0.00)     (0.00)            (0.00)            (0.00)
       Paramilitar attacks (1991-1999)                0.03                0.00             −0.04       0.03              0.00             −0.04
                                                     (0.02)              (0.02)            (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)
       Unemployment rate 2005                       −0.32                0.63∗∗             0.23     −0.32              0.63∗∗             0.23
                                                     (0.37)              (0.29)            (0.41)     (0.37)            (0.29)            (0.41)
       Catholic churches per capita                   0.00                0.00              0.00       0.00              0.00              0.00
                                                     (0.00)              (0.00)            (0.00)     (0.00)            (0.00)            (0.00)
       Coca cultivated area per 100 hectares 1999   −0.04∗∗              −0.03            −0.08∗∗∗   −0.04∗∗            −0.03            −0.08∗∗∗
                                                     (0.02)              (0.02)            (0.03)     (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.03)
       Average protests per capita (1995-1999)      −0.01                0.01∗              0.01     −0.01              0.01∗              0.01
                                                     (0.01)              (0.01)            (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)


Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. Columns 1 to 3 is one regression
(R2 = 0.5016) and columns 4 to 6 a separate regression (R2 = 0.5024). Each variable in the row is interacted with time-period
dummies indicated in the columns. Errors in parentheses control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley
(1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each
municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the
1% level.
                                                                         A-16
                                Table A-4: False and true positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                                            Using colonel dummy


                                          Incentives Dummy           Incentives Linear                               Incentives Dummy                Incentives Linear
                                          Cases      Casualties     Cases     Casualties                             Cases     Casualties            Cases    Casualties
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                                  (5)        (6)                 (7)         (8)
           Dependent variable is log (1 + false positives)
                                                          False Positives                                                               True Positives

           Judicial Inefficiency
           ... x 2002                              −0.0062          0.0327         −0.0126          0.0293           0.1220         0.0937          0.1213           0.1339
                                                   (0.0562)        (0.0732)        (0.0566)        (0.0738)         (0.1363)       (0.2264)        (0.1315)         (0.2159)
           ... x Incentives (2003-2008)            0.1587∗∗∗       0.2155∗∗∗       0.0426∗∗∗       0.0604∗∗∗        −0.0592        −0.1596         −0.0166          −0.0257
                                                   (0.0392)        (0.0501)        (0.0108)        (0.0149)         (0.0877)       (0.1436)        (0.0192)         (0.0302)




A-17
           Colonel in charge (dummy)
           ... x 2002                   −0.0076                    −0.0205         −0.0028         −0.0153           0.0316        −0.0414          0.0318         −0.0408
                                        (0.0156)                   (0.0222)        (0.0155)        (0.0219)         (0.0441)       (0.0646)        (0.0438)        (0.0639)
           ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0459∗∗∗                  0.0555∗∗∗       0.0123∗∗∗       0.0147∗∗∗        0.0569∗∗       0.0770∗∗        0.0128∗∗∗       0.0174∗∗∗
                                        (0.0148)                   (0.0187)        (0.0031)        (0.0040)         (0.0232)       (0.0332)        (0.0047)        (0.0067)

           Controls x time effects                     X                X               X               X               X              X               X                X
           Observations                              9823             9823            9823            9823            9823           9823            9823             9823
           Municipalities                             893              893            446.5           446.5            893            893            446.5            446.5
           R-Squared                                 0.097            0.092           0.099           0.094           0.086          0.082           0.086            0.082
       Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In , the variable shown is interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd
       columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant predetermined municipal
       controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water
       availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’ test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy,
       paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, fraction of coca cultivated area, and average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses
       control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid
       to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
                                        Table A-5: False positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                                               Unweighted colonel share


                                           Incentives Dummy           Incentives Linear                               Incentives Dummy               Incentives Linear
                                           Cases      Casualties     Cases     Casualties                             Cases     Casualties           Cases    Casualties
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                                  (5)        (6)                (7)         (8)
            Dependent variable is log (1+false positives)
                                                           False Positives                                                              True Positives

            Judicial Inefficiency
            ... x 2002                             −0.0018           0.0491         −0.0074          0.0460          0.1178          0.0754         0.1118          0.1104
                                                   (0.0562)         (0.0732)        (0.0541)        (0.0672)        (0.1363)        (0.2264)       (0.1316)        (0.2145)
            ... x Incentives (2003-2008)           0.1509∗∗∗        0.2077∗∗∗       0.0407∗∗∗       0.0583∗∗∗       −0.0610         −0.1660        −0.0197         −0.0298
                                                   (0.0390)         (0.0501)        (0.0107)        (0.0148)        (0.0879)        (0.1439)       (0.0191)        (0.0301)




A-18
            Colonel in charge (unweighted share)
            ... x 2002                    0.0014  −0.0011                            0.0048          0.0021          0.0430         −0.0287         0.0423         −0.0295
                                         (0.0162) (0.0210)                          (0.0160)        (0.0208)        (0.0497)        (0.0748)       (0.0494)        (0.0742)
            ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0380∗∗ 0.0477∗∗                          0.0098∗∗∗       0.0119∗∗∗       0.0567∗∗        0.0796∗∗       0.0122∗∗        0.0171∗∗
                                         (0.0149) (0.0192)                          (0.0032)        (0.0042)        (0.0235)        (0.0333)       (0.0049)        (0.0070)

            Controls x time effects                     X               X               X                X              X               X              X               X
            Observations                              9614            9614            9614             9614           9614            9614           9614            9614
            Municipalities                             874             874             437              437            874             874            437             437
            R-Squared                                 0.096           0.092           0.097            0.093          0.083           0.080          0.083           0.080
       Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In , the variable shown is interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd
       columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant predetermined municipal
       controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water
       availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’ test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy,
       paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, fraction of coca cultivated area, and average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses
       control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid
       to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
                                Table A-6: False and true positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                                        Baseline results - No Controls


                                           Incentives Dummy           Incentives Linear                             Incentives Dummy               Incentives Linear
                                           Cases      Casualties     Cases     Casualties                           Cases     Casualties           Cases    Casualties
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                                (5)        (6)                (7)         (8)
            Dependent variable is log (1+false positives)
                                                           False Positives                                                             True Positives

            Judicial Inefficiency
            ... x 2002                             −0.0049          0.0208         −0.0238          0.0036         0.3038∗∗       0.4855∗∗        0.2729∗        0.4721∗∗
                                                   (0.0595)        (0.0830)        (0.0588)        (0.0816)        (0.1441)       (0.2274)        (0.1418)       (0.2217)
            ... x Incentives (2003-2008)           0.2324∗∗∗       0.2832∗∗∗       0.0573∗∗∗       0.0727∗∗∗        0.0284        −0.0102         −0.0067        −0.0095
                                                   (0.0438)        (0.0554)        (0.0122)        (0.0160)        (0.0689)       (0.1119)        (0.0152)       (0.0236)




A-19
            Colonel in charge (share)
            ... x 2002                   −0.0256∗                 −0.0431∗∗        −0.0220         −0.0393∗        −0.0399       −0.1048∗∗        −0.0360       −0.0987∗∗
                                         (0.0154)                  (0.0216)        (0.0153)        (0.0213)        (0.0338)       (0.0482)        (0.0332)       (0.0473)
            ... x Incentives (2003-2008)  0.0175                    0.0246          0.0053          0.0069          0.0089         0.0061          0.0036         0.0038
                                         (0.0143)                  (0.0191)        (0.0032)        (0.0044)        (0.0265)       (0.0367)        (0.0053)       (0.0073)

            Controls x time effects                    X               X               X               X               X              X              X               X
            Observations                             12155           12155           12155           12155           12155          12155          12155           12155
            Municipalities                           1105            1105            1105            1105            1105           1105           1105            1105
            R-Squared                                0.004           0.004           0.005           0.005           0.001          0.002          0.001           0.002
       Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In , the variable shown is interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd
       columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both from 2003 to 2008. Errors in parentheses control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008).
       We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at
       the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
                                Table A-7: False and true positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                                    Inverse hyperbolic sine transformation


                                            Incentives Dummy           Incentives Linear                              Incentives Dummy               Incentives Linear
                                            Cases      Casualties     Cases     Casualties                            Cases     Casualties           Cases    Casualties
                                              (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)                                 (5)        (6)                (7)         (8)
            Dependent variable is false positives inverse hyperbolic sine transformation
                                                           False Positives                                                              True Positives

            Judicial Inefficiency
            ... x 2002                             −0.0025           0.0667         −0.0101          0.0625          0.1394          0.1062         0.1310          0.1506
                                                   (0.0562)         (0.0732)        (0.0696)        (0.0862)        (0.1363)        (0.2264)       (0.1673)        (0.2642)
            ... x Incentives (2003-2008)           0.1976∗∗∗        0.2694∗∗∗       0.0532∗∗∗       0.0755∗∗∗       −0.0755         −0.2029        −0.0248         −0.0357
                                                   (0.0503)         (0.0646)        (0.0139)        (0.0191)        (0.1136)        (0.1827)       (0.0247)        (0.0384)




A-20
            Colonel in charge (share)
            ... x 2002                    0.0017                    −0.0018          0.0060          0.0022          0.0544         −0.0256         0.0534         −0.0264
                                         (0.0210)                   (0.0269)        (0.0207)        (0.0266)        (0.0644)        (0.0944)       (0.0639)        (0.0936)
            ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0490∗∗                   0.0610∗∗        0.0126∗∗∗       0.0152∗∗∗       0.0735∗∗        0.0998∗∗       0.0158∗∗        0.0216∗∗
                                         (0.0193)                   (0.0246)        (0.0041)        (0.0053)        (0.0302)        (0.0424)       (0.0063)        (0.0089)

            Controls x time effects                     X               X               X                X              X               X              X               X
            Observations                              9614            9614            9614             9614           9614            9614           9614            9614
            Municipalities                             874             874             437              437            874             874            437             437
            R-Squared                                 0.097           0.093           0.098            0.094          0.083           0.079          0.083           0.079
       Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In , the variable shown is interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd
       columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant predetermined municipal
       controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water
       availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’ test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy,
       paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, fraction of coca cultivated area, and average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses
       control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid
       to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
                                 Table A-8: False and true positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                                               Not-controlling for quartic population polynomial


                                           Incentives Dummy           Incentives Linear                                 Incentives Dummy                Incentives Linear
                                           Cases      Casualties     Cases     Casualties                               Cases     Casualties            Cases    Casualties
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                                    (5)        (6)                 (7)         (8)
            Dependent variable is log (1+false positives)
                                                           False Positives                                                                 True Positives

            Judicial Inefficiency
            ... x 2002                               0.0003           0.0392          −0.0065          0.0355           0.1435          0.1194          0.1503          0.1707
                                                    (0.0617)         (0.0806)         (0.0619)        (0.0808)         (0.1427)        (0.2270)        (0.1381)        (0.2165)
            ... x Incentives (2003-2008)            0.1574∗∗∗        0.2154∗∗∗        0.0419∗∗∗       0.0601∗∗∗        −0.0876         −0.2014         −0.0214         −0.0325
                                                    (0.0387)         (0.0497)         (0.0108)        (0.0148)         (0.0889)        (0.1442)        (0.0196)        (0.0304)




A-21
            Colonel in charge (share)
            ... x 2002                   −0.0153                      −0.0324         −0.0115          −0.0285         −0.0099         −0.0818         −0.0081         −0.0794
                                         (0.0135)                     (0.0205)        (0.0135)         (0.0204)        (0.0459)        (0.0695)        (0.0458)        (0.0693)
            ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0321∗∗                     0.0458∗∗        0.0084∗∗         0.0113∗∗        0.0474∗∗        0.0633∗         0.0107∗∗        0.0141∗∗
                                         (0.0160)                     (0.0212)        (0.0034)         (0.0045)        (0.0238)        (0.0336)        (0.0050)        (0.0070)

            Controls x time effects                      X                X               X                X               X               X               X               X
            Observations                               9823             9823            9823             9823            9823            9823            9823            9823
            Municipalities                              893              893             893              893             893             893             893             893
            R-Squared                                  0.087            0.082           0.088            0.083           0.078           0.074           0.079           0.074
       Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In , the variable shown is interacted with: a dummy that equals one (odd
       columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant predetermined municipal
       controls: logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average
       elevation, municipality area, students’ test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy, paramilitary and guerilla
       attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, fraction of coca cultivated area, and average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses control for spatial and
       first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each
       municipality has at least one neighbor. * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
    Table A-9: False and true positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency, 2000-2010
                             Regular and mobile brigades


                                 Incentives Dummy           Incentives Linear              Incentives Dummy            Incentives Linear
                                 Cases      Casualties     Cases     Casualties            Cases     Casualties        Cases    Casualties
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                 (5)        (6)             (7)         (8)
  Dependent variable is log (1+false positives)
                                                 False Positives                                           True Positives

  Judicial Inefficiency
  ... x 2002                       −0.0021        0.0485      −0.0103        0.0426        0.1044        0.0612       0.0995        0.0978
                                   (0.0533)      (0.0663)     (0.0536)      (0.0667)      (0.1364)      (0.2262)     (0.1314)      (0.2151)
  ... x Incentives (2003-2008)     0.1445∗∗∗     0.2016∗∗∗    0.0376∗∗∗     0.0551∗∗∗     −0.0707       −0.1798      −0.0222       −0.0335
                                   (0.0387)      (0.0499)     (0.0103)      (0.0146)      (0.0875)      (0.1437)     (0.0192)      (0.0303)

  Colonel in charge (regular)
  ... x 2002                    0.0009           −0.0019        0.0024      −0.0007        0.0212       −0.0486       0.0209       −0.0490
                               (0.0151)          (0.0200)      (0.0150)     (0.0198)      (0.0530)      (0.0765)     (0.0528)      (0.0761)
  ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.0302∗∗          0.0404∗∗      0.0075∗∗     0.0096∗∗      0.0472∗∗      0.0660∗∗     0.0103∗∗      0.0144∗∗
                               (0.0146)          (0.0192)      (0.0031)     (0.0043)      (0.0234)      (0.0332)     (0.0050)      (0.0070)

  Colonel in charge (mobile)
  ... x 2002                    0.0881            0.0873       0.0620        0.0762       0.7225∗∗      0.6384        0.6242∗      0.5050
                               (0.1499)          (0.1803)     (0.1406)      (0.1700)      (0.3671)     (0.5191)      (0.3641)     (0.5067)
  ... x Incentives (2003-2008) 0.4058∗∗∗         0.3889∗∗∗    0.0983∗∗∗     0.1003∗∗∗     0.4636∗∗∗    0.6558∗∗∗     0.0825∗∗∗    0.1192∗∗∗
                               (0.1271)          (0.1319)     (0.0303)      (0.0311)      (0.1384)     (0.2068)      (0.0288)     (0.0404)

  Controls x time effects              X             X             X            X             X            X             X             X
  Observations                       9614          9614          9614         9614          9614         9614          9614          9614
  Municipalities                      874           874           874          874           874          874           874           874
  R-Squared                          0.107         0.097         0.110        0.100         0.085        0.082         0.085         0.081
Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In , the variable shown is interacted with:
a dummy that equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted
with the following set of time invariant predetermined municipal controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000,
average rainfall level, distance to the closest major city, quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average elevation,
municipality area, students’ test results in math, science and language, poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy,
paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, fraction of coca cultivated area, and average protests
per capita. Errors in parentheses control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999, 2008). We allow spatial
correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor. *
is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.




                                                                A-22
       Table A-10: False and true positives, colonels and judicial inefficiency: neighboring spillovers, 2000-2010


                                      Incentives Dummy                     Incentives Linear              Incentives Dummy                Incentives Linear
                                      Cases      Casualties                Cases    Casualties            Cases      Casualties           Cases     Casualties
                                        (1)         (2)                     (3)         (4)                 (5)         (6)                (7)         (8)
       Dependent variable is log (1+false or true positives)

                                                               False Positives                                               True Positives

       Judicial Inefficiency
       ... x 2002                          −0.0081         0.0239        −0.0157         0.0193           0.1090         0.0606          0.1083          0.1006
                                           (0.0582)       (0.0815)       (0.0584)       (0.0820)         (0.1392)       (0.2259)        (0.1346)        (0.2153)
       ... x Incentives (2003-2008)        0.1589∗∗∗      0.2155∗∗∗      0.0419∗∗∗      0.0597∗∗∗        −0.0609        −0.1621         −0.0173         −0.0268
                                           (0.0389)       (0.0499)       (0.0107)       (0.0149)         (0.0878)       (0.1436)        (0.0192)        (0.0301)

       Colonel in charge (share)
       ... x 2002                   −0.0353                −0.1377        −0.0330        −0.1351        −0.1848∗∗      −0.6010∗∗       −0.1797∗∗       −0.5939∗∗
                                    (0.0869)               (0.1616)       (0.0868)       (0.1614)        (0.0896)       (0.2526)        (0.0898)        (0.2520)
       ... x Incentives (2003-2008)  0.0381                0.0685∗        0.0090∗        0.0156∗∗         0.0160         0.0230          0.0053          0.0075
                                    (0.0262)               (0.0356)       (0.0052)       (0.0073)        (0.0485)       (0.0722)        (0.0103)        (0.0152)




A-23
       Colonel in charge (average share for neighbors)

       ... x 2002                           0.0364          0.1499         0.0380         0.1506         0.2381∗        0.6857∗∗        0.2341∗         0.6794∗∗
                                           (0.1029)        (0.1908)       (0.1030)       (0.1909)        (0.1229)       (0.3234)        (0.1228)        (0.3226)
       ... x Incentives (2003-2008)        −0.0076         −0.0294        −0.0009        −0.0059          0.0348         0.0430          0.0058          0.0066
                                           (0.0283)        (0.0380)       (0.0058)       (0.0078)        (0.0579)       (0.0857)        (0.0121)        (0.0174)

       Controls x time effects                 X              X               X              X               X              X               X               X
       Observations                          9823           9823            9823           9823            9823           9823            9823            9823
       Municipalities                         893            893             893            893             893            893             893             893
       R-Squared                             0.094          0.091           0.095          0.092           0.086          0.083           0.086           0.083

       Notes: Panel estimation from 2000 to 2010 with municipality and time (year) fixed effects. In , the variable shown is interacted with: a dummy that
       equals one (odd columns) or a linear trend (even columns), both from 2003 to 2008. Time dummies are interacted with the following set of time invariant
       predetermined municipal controls: quartic polynomial for logarithm of the population in 2000, average rainfall level, distance to the closest major city,
       quality of soil index, erosion index, water availability index, average elevation, municipality area, students’ test results in math, science and language,
       poverty index, log of tax income per capita, presence of navy, paramilitary and guerilla attacks, unemployment rate, catholic churches per capita, fraction
       of coca cultivated area, and average protests per capita. Errors in parentheses control for spatial and first-order time correlation following Conley (1999,
       2008). We allow spatial correlation to extend to up to 279 km from each municipality’s centroid to ensure that each municipality has at least one neighbor.
       * is significant at the 10% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, *** is significant at the 1% level.
