                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT CENTERS AND LOCAL CRIME

                                     Samuel R. Bondurant
                                        Jason M. Lindo
                                       Isaac D. Swensen

                                     Working Paper 22610
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22610


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




This work was supported by a grant from the Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs,
National Institute of Justice (2014-R2-CX-0015). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Samuel R. Bondurant, Jason M. Lindo, and Isaac D. Swensen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Substance Abuse Treatment Centers and Local Crime
Samuel R. Bondurant, Jason M. Lindo, and Isaac D. Swensen
NBER Working Paper No. 22610
September 2016
JEL No. I12,K14,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper we estimate the effects of expanding access to substance-abuse treatment on local
crime. We do so using an identification strategy that leverages variation driven by substance-
abuse-treatment facility openings and closings measured at the county level. The results indicate
that substance-abuse-treatment facilities reduce both violent and financially motivated crimes in
an area, and that the effects are particularly pronounced for relatively serious crimes. The effects
on homicides are documented across three sources of homicide data.


Samuel R. Bondurant                              Isaac D. Swensen
Department of Economics                          Department of Agricultural Economics,
Texas A&M University                             and Economics
4228 TAMU                                        Montana State University
College Station, TX 77843                        P.O. Box 17290
bondurantsr@tamu.edu                             Bozeman, MT 59717
                                                 isaac.swensen@montana.edu
Jason M. Lindo
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
jlindo@econmail.tamu.edu
1        Introduction

Drug-induced deaths in the United States have increased 280 percent since 1999 and now represent
the largest major category of external causes of death by a wide margin: there were 47,055 deaths
due to drug overdoses in 2014 compared to 32,675 due to motor vehicle accidents.1 These facts
underscore a growing need to understand how to reduce drug-related harms. Towards this end, a
large body of work has shown that policies targeting the supply of drugs are rarely effective.2 In
contrast, recent work indicates that expanding access to substance-abuse treatment (SAT) facilities
significantly reduces severe drug abuse, as measured by drug-induced mortality (Swensen, 2015).
While this evidence highlights that investments in SAT can improve outcomes for some individuals,
it does not necessarily reflect a broad-based benefit for communities that might be considering
making such investments. In this paper we fill this important gap in the literature by estimating
the effects of SAT facilities on local crime.
        There are several mechanisms through which SAT facilities may affect local crime. As outlined
in Goldstein’s (1985) influential tripartite conceptual framework for the drugs-violence nexus, drugs
may affect violence through psychopharmacological effects, economically compulsive effects, and
systemic effects. In these terms, SAT could be expected to reduce violence by: (i) reducing the
use of drugs that lead to aggressive behavior (though there may be some offsetting effects caused
by withdrawal), (ii) by reducing conflicts associated with financially motivated crimes committed
by addicts seeking funds to buy drugs, and (iii) by reducing violence among and against those
associated with the drug trade.3 Moreover, drug-abuse treatment may reduce gun carrying through
all three of these mechanisms, which could serve to reduce the amount—and intensity—of violence
in communities. It is also important to keep in mind that a relatively large share of drug users
have mental health problems that contribute to their addiction and to violent behaviors (Lavine,
1997; Hoaken and Stewart, 2003). As such, we could expect SAT to reduce violence because it can
itself include—or can direct patients towards—treatment for underlying mental health problems
that contribute to violence (Lavine, 1997; Marcotte and Markowitz, 2011). Finally, SAT treatment
may reduce criminal activity through positive spillover effects on friends and family members of
those receiving treatment.
    1
     See Rudd et al. (2016) and NCSA (2015).
    2
     See for instance Dinardo (1993), Yuan and Caulkins (1998), Miron (2003), Cunningham and Liu (2003), Kuziemko
and Levitt (2004), Dobkin and Nicosia (2009), Cunningham and Finlay (2013), and Dobkin, Nicosia, Weinberg (2014).
   3
     Prior studies have documented causal effects of drug activity on community violence by exploiting variation in
drug use induced by price shocks (Markowitz, 2001, 2005) and by exploiting variation in the timing with which
specific drugs became available across different cities (Evans, et al., 2012; Fryer et al., 2013).



                                                        2
   Although these mechanisms highlight how SAT facilities can reduce crime through their effect
on drug abuse, there are other mechanisms through which we might expect SAT facilities to increase
local crime. Featuring prominently in not-in-my-backyard arguments against SAT facilities is the
notion that such facilities pose risks by drawing into the area individuals who have relatively high
rates of crime perpetration (drug users). Going beyond the idea of shifting crime perpetration from
one place to another, SAT facilities could increase crime by altering the social and environmental
context faced by drug users. That is, by altering the types of people and places that they encounter
and with which they interact.
   In this study we contribute to this policy debate by quantifying the effects of SAT facilities on
crime. Specifically, we use annual county-level data on the number of SAT facilities to evaluate the
degree to which crime rates change when SAT facilities open and close. We consider various crime
outcomes measured over time at the county and law-enforcement agency level, based on data from
the National Center for Health Statistics and the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting Program. These
panel data allow us to include a rich set of fixed effects (county/agency and state-by-year) and
control variables (demographics, various measures of economic conditions, and law enforcement
presence) in our models, so the estimates are identified based on plausibly exogenous variation.
Several ancillary analyses support the validity of this research design, including analyses that
demonstrate that outcomes in an area change after but not before the number of facilities change.
   Our approach shifts the focus from the effects of SAT on those who receive treatment to the
effects of SAT facilities on the communities they serve. This allows us to make several contributions.
First, we consider outcomes that tend to be beyond the scope of randomized control trials (RCTs),
which are limited by small samples, short follow-up periods, and the potential for false reporting.
In particular, our approach allows us to consider severe-but-infrequent outcomes (e.g., homicide)
and behaviors that individuals are likely to conceal (e.g., sexual assault). Second, our estimates
reflect the effects of SAT on patients and the spillover effects onto the broader community, inclusive
of any spillover effects on nearby friends and family and on the market for illegal drugs. In so doing,
our estimates will allow for more comprehensive cost-benefit considerations. Third, whereas the
nature of RCTs tends to require the use of small localized samples, which may have limited external
validity, our use of administrative data allows us to obtain estimates that reflect the effects of SAT
facilities across the United States.
   Our analysis reveals significant and robust evidence that expanding access to SAT through
additional treatment facilities reduces local crime. The effects appear to be particularly pronounced


                                                  3
for relatively serious violent and financially motivated crimes: homicides, aggravated assaults,
robbery, and motor vehicle theft. We do not find significant effects on more frequent but less
serious crimes (simple assault, burglary, and larceny), nor do we find a significant effect on sexual
assault. Overall, we find that an additional treatment facility reduces felony-type crimes by 0.10
percent annually. We show that the estimated effect on homicides is present across three different
sources of homicide data.
        Despite the various contributions of our research described above, there are some limitations
that bear noting. First, our empirical approach, which focuses on county- and law-enforcement-
agency-level aggregates, implies that we cannot separate the effects of SAT facilities on those who
receive treatment from the effects of SAT facilities on the broader community. That said, we view
this as a reasonable tradeoff in order to be able to speak to the effects on the community as a whole.
Second, while there is significant variation across SAT facilities in the types of treatment that they
offer, our estimates will reflect an average of the effects of these facilities. Finally, openings and
closings of SAT facilities are not random. While this has the potential to compromise our ability to
identify causal effects, our ancillary analyses, which are discussed in detail in subsequent sections,
demonstrate that it is unlikely in light of our empirical strategy.
        The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses relevant background on
drug abuse and treatment in the United States, in addition to related studies that have considered
the effects of SAT on crime. Sections 3 and 4 describe the data and our empirical approach in
detail. Section 5 begins with a replication and extension of Swensen (2015) to show the effects
of SAT facilities on severe drug abuse and then presents the results of our analyses that focus on
crime. We offer concluding remarks in Section 6.


2        Background

2.1        Substance Abuse and Treatment

According to the National Survey of Drug Use and Health over 21.5 million people in the U.S. are
classified as having a substance-use disorder (CBHSQ, 2015).4 A high incidence of substance abuse
is also apparent in crime perpetration, with 40 percent of convicted violent criminals being under the
influence of alcohol and nearly 60 percent of all arrestees testing positive for some illicit substance
    4
        Based on criteria specified in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition (DSM-IV)




                                                            4
at the time of arrest.5 The annual societal costs of drug abuse solely in terms of drug-related crime
are estimated at over 56 billion dollars.6
       Though substance-abuse treatment is a promising avenue to reduce these costs, treatment rates
for those in need remain very low. In 2014, 85 percent of those abusing or dependent on an
illicit substance did not receive treatment and despite the prevalence of alcohol and drugs among
arrestees, 70 percent of arrestees have never been in any form of drug or alcohol treatment (ONDCP,
2014). Notably, recent changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act are expected to increase
coverage and take-up of treatment (Buck, 2011; Beronio, Glied, and Frank 2014).
       In this context, the number of substance-abuse treatment facilities may be a particularly rel-
evant policy parameter. In the United States, over 14,500 stand-alone treatment facilities are the
primary setting for delivery of substance-abuse treatment, offering a wide range of drug-treatment
programs and related services (SAMHSA, 2014). Local treatment centers most commonly offer out-
patient care to deliver treatment programs such as detoxification, methadone maintenance, regular
outpatient, adolescent outpatient, and drug-court programs (SAMHSA, 2014). For more serious
substance-abuse problems, facilities provide residential treatment in which clients temporarily live
at the treatment site (e.g. inpatient detoxification, chemical dependency programs, therapeutic
communities). While treatment programs vary substantially and often target particular demo-
graphic groups or specific drug addictions, all treatment approaches share similar goals to mitigate
the consequences of drug abuse and encourage healthier lifestyles.
       More broadly, the substance-abuse treatment industry includes profit, non-profit, and public
providers, the bulk of which (87 percent) are privately-owned facilities.7 Though the objective
functions of facilities may differ somewhat by ownership status and treatment focus, the decision
to open or close a treatment facility likely depends crucially on (i) a perceived need for treatment
providers or opportunities to improve upon currently offered treatment services and (ii) the ability
to secure funding for treatment services from either public or private third-party payers (SAMHSA
2011). Given the high need for addiction treatment and existing evidence of binding treatment
capacity constraints and long wait lists, the availability of funds is particularly relevant when
considering the predictors of facility openings and closings.8
   5
     See https://ncadd.org/about-addiction/alcohol-drugs-and-crime.
   6
     Estimates based on the 2011 National Drug Threat Assessment counducted by the National Drug Intelligence
Center.
   7
     According to the 2013 National Survey of Substance Abuse Treatment Services, 60 percent of facilities are
nonprofit, 30 percent are for profit, and 10 percent are public.
   8
     Evidence suggests that capacity concerns and being put on a wait list are important barriers to treatment
enrollment (Appel et al., 2004; Friedmann et al., 2003; Pollini et al., 2006). Relatedly, Dave and Mukerjee (2011)



                                                        5
      Unlike general health care, which relies on funding through insurance mechanisms, substance-
abuse treatment relies primarily on public funding in the form of federal block grants and state
subsidies. That said, recent mental health parity legislation and the rise of managed-care contracts
have increased the importance of public and private insurance revenue to providers (Horgan and
Merrick, 2001; Olmstead and Sindelar, 2004). Assuming these sources of financing generally increase
with drug abuse and related problems, analyses of the effect of treatment provision on drug-related
outcomes may understate the actual effect of treatment.


2.2     Related Literature on SAT and Crime

An extensive literature has evaluated the relationship between substance-abuse treatment programs
and criminal activities, including some that use “the gold standard” for empirical research, ran-
domized control trials (RCTs). In a widely-cited meta analysis, Pendergast et al. (2002) reviewed
78 studies of SAT, 60 percent of which used random or quasi-random assignment to treatment and
25 of which examined crime outcomes. The authors found an average 13 percent decline in criminal
involvement as a result of treatment.9 More recent reviews of specific treatment approaches provide
consistent evidence that criminal involvement declines during treatment and mixed evidence when
considering longer-run crime outcomes (Amato et al., 2005; Holloway et al., 2006; Egli et al., 2009;
Mattick et al., 2014).
      The existing literature also adds insight into the efficacy of specific treatment settings in reduc-
ing drug-related crime. Some of the more convincing and consistent evidence comes from studies
evaluating prison-based drug treatment. This is partly due to the relative ease of employing a
randomized treatment design and the ability to consider recidivism rates rather than relying on
self-reported criminal activity.10 Summarizing the literature, Mitchell et. al (2012) review 74 stud-
ies of prison-based treatment programs and conclude that substance-abuse treatment for inmates
reduces recidivism by 15 percent. Existing evidence also suggests that court-mandated treatment
programs, which account for a third of all treatment admissions, can be effective in reducing crime.11
For instance, Wilson, Mitchell, and Mackenzie (2006) identify and review 55 quasi-experimental and
analyze the effect of state legislation that reduces out-of pocket costs for mental health and substance-abuse treatment
and find a relatively small effect on treatment admissions. They argue that the effect on admissions is muted, in
part, because of treatment capacity constraints suggested by limited growth in the number of treatment facilities and
increasing treatment waiting periods.
   9
     Crime outcomes included self-reported crimes and official records on arrest, conviction and incarceration. As
such, this review includes evidence from crime outcomes during and after treatment.
  10
     Treatment rates increased by 34 percent among state inmates and 90 percent among federal inmates from 1997-
2004.
  11
     See SAMHSA (2014) for a breakdown of admissions by treatment referral source.



                                                           6
experimental evaluations of drug courts. They concluded that court-referred treatment does lower
re-arrest rates though the estimated effects were notably smaller and less precise among evaluations
that employed randomization. They also find consistent evidence of declines in re-offending both
during and following court-referred treatment programs, however the estimated effects do decay
over time.
         Together, this literature provides consistent evidence that treatment programs can reduce crime.
While these studies have made significant contributions to our knowledge, the merit of our study
is predicated on the notion that some of the most important questions about the effects of SAT are
only likely to be answered using alternative methods applied to observational data. In particular,
our study shifts the focus from the effects of SAT on those who receive treatment to the effects of
SAT facilities on the communities they serve and uses data that allows us to obtain estimates that
reflect the effects of SAT facilities on local-area crime across the United States.
         To our knowledge only one other recent working paper attempts to consider the effects of SAT
on crime in such a comprehensive fashion. Wen, Hockenberry, and Cummings (2014) consider
the effects of changes in SAT rates on property and violent crimes using data collected by the
FBI that span the United States. Their instrumental variables approach relies on the assumption
that state health insurance expansions (made possible through Health Insurance Flexibility and
Accountability waivers) only relate to changes in crime through their impacts on SAT.12 This
assumption could be violated if, for example, expanding access to health insurance affects crime
through its impact on treatment for mental health problems or through its impacts on overall health
and well being. As all observational studies rely on fundamentally untestable assumptions, and as
any body of evidence is more compelling when similar results are documented using approaches that
rely on different assumptions, we view our work as an important contribution that complements this
prior study, which reports that increases in substance-use-disorder treatment significantly reduces
robbery, aggravated assault, and larceny.


3         Data

Following Swensen (2015), we identify county-level changes in the number of substance-abuse treat-
ment facilities using data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns (CBP). The
    12
    They also use as an instrumental variable state-level mandates requiring private group health plans to provide
benefits for substance-use disorder treatment that are no more restrictive than the benefits for medical insurance
parity mandates; however, it is always used in conjunction with the waiver expansion instrument, presumably due to
a lack of independent power.



                                                        7
CBP data reports the annual number of substance-abuse treatment clinics (a single physical loca-
tion) in each U.S. county for both outpatient and residential facilities from 1999-2012.13 Although
classified separately in the CBP data, residential and outpatient establishments often offer both
residential and outpatient treatment services with 90 percent of all admissions occurring in an
outpatient setting (SAMHSA, 2014). Therefore, estimating the effects separately for outpatient
and residential facilities would not be informative as residential and outpatient services are not
distinctly identified. As such, we combine outpatient and residential classifications using the total
count of establishments as an indicator for county-level provision of substance-abuse treatment.
       We merge CBP data with several independent data sources for drug abuse and criminal activity.
We first revisit the effect of SAT on drug abuse, as measured by drug-related deaths, using annual
county-level mortality data from the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) Multiple Cause
of Death Data. Drug-induced mortality is measured using causes of death with specific reference
to drug-induced poisoning, identified by International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes.14 To
calculate mortality rates and to create county-by-year controls for demographic characteristics,
we use population data from the National Cancer Institutes’s Surveillance Epidemiology and End
Results (Cancer-SEER) program.15
       To estimate the effect of treatment facilities on local-area crime we use the NCHS mortality
data, which provide a measure of homicides, and the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) which are
compilation of annual crime statistics reported by local law-enforcement agencies across the United
States to the FBI.16 Specifically, we use the offenses known data from the Offenses Known and
Cleared by Arrests UCR segment. These data, which we will refer to as UCR Offenses Known,
include the most commonly reported violent and property crimes including criminal homicide,
sexual assault, robbery, assault, burglary, larceny theft, and motor vehicle theft. We focus on known
offenses in order to capture crimes that come to the attention of law enforcement, as opposed to
alternative data sets that are available but are restricted to crimes that have been cleared by arrest.
In addition, we use the UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) to consider additional details
of the victims, offenders, and circumstances associated with homicides. The SHR is an incident-
  13
      The following six-digit NAICS codes identify treatment establishments: 621420 —“Outpatient mental health and
substance abuse centers” and 623220—“Residential mental health and substance abuse facilities.”
   14
      In particular, we use the following ICD-10 codes to measure drug-induced mortality: X40-X45, X60-X65, X85,
Y10-Y15.
   15
      As reported by Stevens et al. (2015), the Cancer-SEER population data are more accurate than data interpolated
from the Census because they “are based on an algorithm that incorporates information from Vital statistics, IRS
migration files, and the Social Security database.”
   16
      NCHS homicides include deaths by another person with the intent to injure or kill. They do not include homicides
due to legal intervention, operations of war, or homicides from the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks.



                                                          8
level dataset that includes detailed information on each homicide as voluntarily reported by agencies
participating in the UCR program. For agencies that do report homicides in the SHR, we impute
zeros by expanding the SHR to the same agency-years as our UCR Offenses Known sample. We
link the UCR agency-level data with county-level CBP data using the primary county in which
each municipality resides and calculate crime rates using the annual reported population covered
by each municipal agency.
         We restrict our analysis to U.S. counties with at least one treatment facility over the 1999-2012
time period and counties with available identifiers in the 48 contiguous states.17 The resulting
data include treatment facility, mortality, and crime data in 48 states, spanning 14 years.18 In
Table 1 we present summary statistics for our sample, weighted by the relevant populations. CBP
data indicate that counties have a population-weighted average of 49.5 SAT facilities. Importantly,
there is substantial variation in the number of facilities with the average county experiencing 5.8
net facility openings and 3.7 net closings from 1999 to 2012, where a net opening is an observed
increase in the number of facilities from one year to the next and a net closing is defined similarly.
For reference, Table 1 also shows summary statistics for each mortality and crime outcome used in
our analysis.


4         Empirical Approach

We identify the effects of SAT facilities using year-to-year variation within counties driven by
facility openings and closings, controlling for state-by-year shocks common to areas within a state
in addition to time-varying county characteristics. As we analyze both county and agency-level
outcomes, we operationalize this strategy using a regression model that includes either county or
agency fixed effects in addition to state-by-year fixed effects and county-year covariates:


                             yast = θF acilitiescs,t−1 + αas + αst + βXcst + ast ,
    17
     Specifically, we drop all counties in HI and AK and combine counties that experience boundary changes over
time. This involves combining Adams, Broomfield, Boulder, Jefferson, and Weld in Colorado; Prince George’s and
Montgomery in Maryland; Gallatin and Yellowstone National Park in Montana; Craven and Carteret in North
Carolina; Alleghany and Clifton Forge in Virginia; Augusta and Waynesboro in Virginia; Bedford and Bedfort City
in Virginia; Halifax and South Boston City in Virginia; Prince William and Manassas Park in Virginia; Southampton
and Franklin in Virginia; and York and Newport News in Virginia.
  18
     Over the same time-frame, the aggregate number of facilities increases from 12,428 to 16,959.




                                                       9
where yast represents outcomes in area a (either county or agency) in state s in year t. We use log
rates to measure drug abuse and crime outcomes. We add one to all counts before constructing log
rates to avoid dropping area-year observations for which the outcome would otherwise be undefined,
but we show that results of all of our analyses are similar if we instead simply focus on areas
that always have a positive count, with the sample being defined separately for each outcome
considered. In support of using the log transformation, we have verified that Poisson models (where
computationally feasible) yield very similar estimates. F acilitiescs,t−1 represents the number of
SAT facilities in county c in state s in year t-1, αas are area fixed effects, αst are state-by-year fixed
effects, and Xcst includes county unemployment rates, the number of firm births, number of law
enforcement officers per 100,000, and the fraction of the county population that is: white, black,
male, less than 10 years old, 10-19 years old, ... , 60-69 years old.19 Finally, ast is a random error
term that we allow to be correlated across time within a county and across all counties in any given
year by estimating two-way standard errors following Cameron et al. (2011).20 To be clear, our
measure of facilities is a county-level measure even when we are considering crimes at the agency
level. We also note that our main results are based on regressions that weight by the relevant
population size in order to improve efficiency.
       Our focus on within-area variation accounts for fixed characteristics of areas (both observable
and unobservable) that may be correlated with the number of SAT facilities in the county and
our outcomes of interest. For example, this approach will address the fact that there are inherent
differences between urban and rural counties. The inclusion of state-by-year fixed effects account
for aggregate time-varying shocks, such as aggregate economic conditions or changes in the national
drug-control strategy. They also control for state-specific shocks such as changes in state funding
for law enforcement services. The controls for unemployment rates and firm births account for
the possibility that our outcomes of interest and treatment facilities may both be related to local
economic conditions. The controls for demographics account for the possibility that compositional
changes in a county’s population may affect outcomes and investments in SAT facilities.
       Our empirical approach closely follows Swensen (2015), who also conducts several ancillary
analyses in support the validity of the research design. In particular, Swensen demonstrates that
  19
      County unemployment rates are from the BLS Local Area Unemployment Statistics. Firm births include all
county-level firm births reported by the U.S. Census Statistics of U.S. Businesses. The number of law-enforcement
officers per 100,000 residents are calculated using the UCR agency-specific employment reports available in the Law
Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted (LEOKA) database.
   20
      That is, we estimate two-way standard errors clustered on counties and years. This approach yields more
conservative estimates than estimates that solely cluster on counties, reflecting that there are unobserved shocks to
outcomes that span counties.



                                                         10
additional facilities lead to increases in treatment admissions and that the effects of additional
facilities are greatest for causes of death that are most closely related to drug abuse.21 Importantly,
a third of all treatment admission are court-ordered, often as an alternative to incarceration. As
such, increases in admissions due to an additional SAT facility may correspond with more drug
offenders in public, leading to estimates that understate any decreases in drug-related criminal
activity.
      To address concerns regarding reverse causality, Swensen plots drug-induced mortality rates
leading up to and following changes in the number of facilities and finds no evidence of systematic
deviations of drug-related mortality from expected levels prior to changes in the number of facili-
ties. Furthermore, his estimates from models that consider additional lags and leads of treatment
facilities show that the that previous- and current-year changes in the number of facilities is sig-
nificantly related to drug-induced mortality, but that drug-induced mortality is not related to the
number of facilities in future periods.22 In a similar fashion, we estimate a version of Eq. (1) that
also considers the effect of the number of facilities in the current, previous and subsequent years
on the outcomes that are the focus of this paper. The results of this analysis, discussed in more
detail below, indicate that changes in the number of treatment facilities are also not driven by
recent changes in drug abuse or crime. That said, we note that our estimates would understate the
benefits of SAT facilities if they opened in response to recent increases in drug abuse and related
crimes.


5      Results

5.1     Revisiting the Effects of SAT Facilities on Drug-Induced Mortality

We begin our analysis of the effects of SAT facilities by documenting their effects on serious drug
abuse measured by drug-induced mortality rates at the county level. Specifically, we expand on
Swensen’s (2015) analysis by adding four additional years of restricted-use NCHS mortality data
to bring it in line with the years of data used in our analysis of crime, which run through 2012.
   21
      Swensen uses data on admissions into facilities receiving public funding to offer “proof of concept” that increases in
treatment facilities leads to a change in an underlying factor associated with treatment. Notably, other mechanisms—
including perceptions toward treatment or factors influencing the quality and accessibility treatment—may also
contribute to declines in substance abuse as treatment services expand.
   22
      Swensen also estimates models using demand-side characteristics to predict treatment facility openings in order to
offer insight into the degree to which treatment provision responds to changes in the demand for addictive substances.
His results suggest that the number of treatment facilities varies directly with measures that proxy for the demand
for addictive substances, he argues that not adequately accounting for these correlations would understate the effect
of an additional treatment facility on drug-related mortality.



                                                            11
In Table 2, we show the results of this analysis, using logged drug-induced mortality rates as the
outcome. Columns 1–5 report the estimates from increasingly flexible specifications: Column 1
shows estimates based on a model that only includes county and year fixed effects; Column 2 shows
estimates that additionally control for state-by-year fixed effects; and Columns 3–5 show estimates
that additionally control for county-level time-varying measures of demographics, economic condi-
tions, and the size of the police force.23 With the exception of the Column 1 estimate, which omits
controls for state-by-year fixed effects, the estimates are precise and similar in magnitude across
specifications. They indicate a 0.50 percent decline in drug-induced mortality rates associated with
an additional SAT facility in a county.24 This estimate is very similar to the estimated effect of
0.42 percent reported in Swensen (2015).


5.2      Estimated Effects on Crime

5.2.1      Homicides

Before turning to estimates that are based on Uniform Crime Reports data, we begin our analysis
of crime by analyzing homicide deaths recorded in NCHS mortality data. Though these also include
justified homicides, 94 percent are unjustified criminal homicides and, as such, they can shed light
on the degree to which treatment interventions affect the most serious and costly form of criminal
activity.25 The results of this analysis, shown in the first panel of Table 3, provide causal evidence
that county-level homicide rates are reduced by SAT facilities. Specifically, the estimates indicate a
0.24 percent decline in intentional homicide death rates associated with an additional SAT facility.
       In the second and third panels of Table 3 we investigate the effects on homicide rates using
law-enforcement-agency-level data from the UCR’s Offenses Known and Supplemental Homicide
Reports databases, respectively. We continue to estimate the same models when using these data,
but use agency fixed effects instead of county fixed effects and use agency covered population as
the denominator to construct homicide rates. Analyses of these data continue to indicate that SAT
facilities significantly reduce homicides in areas covered by municipal law-enforcement agencies,
though the estimates are somewhat smaller, indicating a 0.18 percent decline in intentional homicide
death rates associated with an additional SAT facility.
  23
     Controls for county economic conditions are the unemployment rate and firm births; controls for demographics
are the fraction of the population that is white, fraction black, fraction male, fraction 0–9 years old, fraction 10–19
years old, ... , fraction 60–69 years old.
  24
     Percent effects are calculated as (eβ − 1) × 100%.
  25
     For a breakdown of justified and unjustified homicides in 2013, see https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-
in-the-u.s/2013/crime-in-the-u.s.-2013/offenses-known-to-law-enforcement/expanded-homicide



                                                          12
       As described in Section 4, in all of our analyses we add one to outcome counts before construct-
ing log rates to avoid dropping area-year observations for which the outcome would otherwise be
undefined. We acknowledge that this transformation could introduce bias, especially for an out-
come like the homicide rate which tends to be relatively low. Out of concern for this possibility, in
Section 5.4 we will present estimates for each outcome based on an alternative approach in which
we do not add one to outcome counts and we instead focus on areas for which outcome counts are
positive in every year. These estimates are almost identical to our main results for nearly all of the
outcomes we consider, including the overall homicide rate.


5.2.2      Homicides by Relationship

In Table 4, we report the results of analyses that exploit the details available in the SHR data to
separately consider homicides involving different victim-offender relationships. In particular, we
explore the degree to which the reduction in homicides associated with SAT facilities (reported
in Table 3) are driven by reductions in homicides committed by individuals who were friends or
acquaintances of the victim, homicides committed by strangers, homicides committed by family
members, and/or homicides in which the victim-offender relationship was not established by law
enforcement. Victim-offender relationships can provide useful information regarding the nature of
homicide incidents. For instance, investigators were unable to establish victim-offender relationships
in 43 percent of homicides in our sample. These “uncleared” incidents are more likely to be gang,
drug-related, and stranger homicides.26 When the victim-offender relationship is known, friend
groups account for 44 percent, strangers for 29 percent, and family for 27 percent of homicides.
       The results shown in Table 4 suggest that the effects of SAT facilities on homicides are con-
centrated among homicide incidents in which the relationship to the offender was unknown or in
which the offender was a friend. Specifically, these estimates indicate that an additional treatment
facility leads to a 0.14 percent decline in “uncleared” homicides and a 0.26 percent decline in homi-
cides where the offender was a friend of the victim. There is no evidence of effects on homicides
committed by family members.
  26
    The fraction of homicides with an “unknown” victim-offender relationship has steadily increased over the past
several decades which has been attributed to the changing nature of homicides. Drug-related homicides in particular
are less likely to be cleared (Riedel, 2008; Quinet and Nunn, 2014).




                                                        13
5.2.3      Violent Crimes More Broadly

Having established that SAT facilities reduce severe drug abuse and reduce the most costly of crimes
(homicides), we next consider the degree to which treatment facilities affect other types of violent
crimes. In Table 5 we show a detailed breakdown of the effects of SAT facilities on violent crimes
based on analyses of the UCR Offenses Known data. While we focus our discussion below on the
point estimates from models with the richest set of controls (Column 5), we note that the estimated
effects are similar across specifications once state-by-year fixed effects and demographic controls
are included as covariates. The estimates are not sensitive to the inclusion of other county-year
control variables.
       Across the first four panels of Table 5, we sequentially report the estimated effects on violent
crimes of decreasing severity according to social cost estimates reported in McCollister, French and
Fang (2010): homicides ($9,881,198 per incident), sexual assault ($264,854), aggravated assault
($117,722), and simple assault.27 We defer our consideration of robbery until the next section
where we focus on financially motivated crimes. As mentioned above, the estimated effect on
homicides indicates a significant reduction caused by SAT facilities. While the point estimate for
the effect on sexual assault is also negative, suggesting that SAT facilities reduce sexual assault
as well, it is not close to being statistically significant at conventional levels. The estimated effect
on aggravated assaults also suggests a reduction in crime associated with SAT facilities, though
this estimate is only marginally statistically significant. Finally, the estimates suggest no effect on
simple assaults.
       The mixed findings described above naturally raise the question of whether there is a “general
effect” of SAT facilities on violent crime, or whether the significant effects we document are a result
of random chance which becomes increasingly likely as one considers a larger set of outcomes. As
described in Anderson (2008), this issue can be addressed through the analysis of summary indices
that are invariant to the number of outcomes considered. We take this approach across the final
three panels of Table 5 as we consider violent crimes in the aggregate. First, we estimate the effect
on all violent crimes and do not find a significant effect. This is not surprising because we did not
find evidence of effects on simple assaults, which represent 77 percent of the crimes considered.
Second, we estimate the effect on all violent crimes that are typically considered felonies. This
approach amounts to excluding simple assaults from the analysis, which encompass any attempted
  27
    Note that we have adjusted the cost estimates for inflation to put the amounts in 2016 dollars. McCollister,
French and Fang (2010) do not include estimates for simple assault.




                                                      14
or completed physical contact with malicious intent that does not rise to the level of severity to
constitute an aggravated assault. The results of this analysis indicate a statistically significant
effect of SAT facilities on felony-type violent crimes.
       Finally, we estimate the effects on overall violent crime weighted by the social cost estimates
associated with each of the violent crimes considered. Specifically, we use the log of the inflation-
adjusted cost estimates put into 2016 dollars from McCollister, French, and Fang (2010). As
McCollister, French, and Fang (2010) do not estimate the social cost of simple assault, we calculate
the cost of simple assaults as 20 percent of the cost of aggravated assaults, which is consistent
with Cohen and Piquero (2009).28 The estimates indicate a 0.15 percent decline in the social costs
associated with violent crime (excluding robbery). A back-of the envelope calculation based on this
estimate suggests that an additional treatment facility decreases social costs associated with these
crimes by approximately $615,000 annually.29


5.2.4      Financially Motivated Crimes

Table 6 shows the estimated effects on financially motivated crimes. We again sequentially report
the estimated effects on crimes of decreasing severity according to social cost estimates: robbery
($46,541), motor vehicle theft ($11,849), burglary ($7,108), and larceny ($3,885). As with the
estimated effects on violent crimes, these estimates suggest more pronounced effects of SAT facilities
on relatively serious crimes. The point estimates indicate that a SAT facility reduces robbery by 0.11
percent, motor vehicle theft by 0.12 percent, burglary by 0.05 percent, and larceny by 0.04 percent.
The estimated effects on burglary and larceny are not statistically significant at conventional levels.
       Our estimates of financially motivated crimes in the aggregate provide further evidence that
SAT facilities reduce crime. The estimated effect on financially motivated crimes overall is almost
the same as the estimated effect on larceny, which is not surprising since these crimes represent 65
percent of the crimes considered, and yields a p-value of 0.0720. Excluding larceny theft, which is
often considered a misdemeanor offense, our estimates indicate that a SAT facility reduces finan-
cially motivated crimes by 0.08 percent (p-value = 0.0214). Finally and similar to our approach to
violent crimes, we consider the log of the social costs of financially motivated crimes as a dependent
variable. These estimates indicate that an additional SAT facility reduces social costs attributed
  28
     In Appendix Table A2, we show results that use a social cost of simple assault set at varying fractions of the
social cost of aggravated assault. Appendix Table A1 shows the corresponding summary statistics.
  29
     This calculation is based on average annual social costs of violent crime totaling $1,273,156 per 1,000 people each
year in the average agency jurisdiction and an average population covered of 321,685.




                                                          15
to financially motivated crime by 0.07 percent annually. In dollar terms, this estimate suggests an
approximate annual $60,000 decline in the social costs of financially motivate crimes.30


5.2.5    Analysis of All Crimes Combined

The estimates in Tables 5 and 6 provide evidence that county-level expansions in treatment fa-
cilities significantly reduce both violent and financially motivated crimes and that the effects are
concentrated among more serious types of these crimes. In Table 7 we present estimates that pool
violent and financially motivated crimes together so that the estimates reflect the effects on overall
crime. The first panel shows the effect of SAT facilities on all crime including the less serious crimes
of simple assault and larceny, which account for 68 percent of all crimes considered. The estimates
suggest a marginally significant 0.004 percent decline in crime associated with an additional SAT
facility. Considering all felony-type crimes in the second panel, which excludes simple assault and
larceny, the estimates indicate an effect of 0.010 percent. In the third panel, we report the estimated
effects on the log of the social costs of crime, which weights each crime by its estimated social cost
estimate as before. These estimates indicate that an additional SAT facility reduces social costs
attributed to all crime by 0.14 percent annually, which corresponds to approximately $700,000.31


5.3     Assessing Endogeneity and Lag Structure

As discussed in Section 4, the main threat to the validity of our empirical strategy is the possibility
that changes in the number of facilities in an area might be driven by trends in the outcomes
we consider (or the correlates thereof) and/or recent shocks to the outcomes we consider (or the
correlates thereof). To the degree to which such trends and/or shocks occur at the state level or
relate to changing demographics, economic conditions, or the size of police forces, they should be
captured by state-year fixed effects and the control variables included in our analysis. As this is
fundamentally untestable, we propose a test of the validity of our identification strategy based on
examining the lead and lag structure of the estimated effects. Specifically, we estimate versions of
Eq. (1) that consider the link between our outcome variables and the number of SAT facilities in
a county in a future year.
      We also expand on Eq. (1) to consider contemporaneous versus lagged measures of SAT fa-
  30
     This calculation is based on average annual social costs of financially-motivated crime totaling $278,382 per 1,000
people each year in the average agency jurisdiction and an average population covered of 321,685.
  31
     This calculation is based on average annual social costs of crime totaling $1,551,538 per 1,000 people each year
in the average agency jurisdiction and an average population covered of 321,685.




                                                          16
cilities. We do so in order to evaluate our choice to focus on the number of facilities in the prior
year as our main variable of interest, a choice we made to avoid attenuation bias that would likely
be caused by the fact that newly opened (or closed) facilities would only affect counties for some
fraction of the year.
      Table 8 shows estimates of this type for all of the outcomes considered across Tables 2 through
7. Specifically, it shows estimates based on our richest model while additionally considering the
number of facilities in the current year and in the future year. Across the 24 outcomes we consider,
the estimated effects of the number of facilities one year in the future is never statistically significant.
We interpret these results as evidence that reverse causality, or the possibility that changes in the
number of SAT facilities may be driven by recent changes in drug abuse and related outcomes, is
not a major concern. As such, these results provide support for a causal interpretation of our main
results.
      These results also provide support for our focus on the lagged measure of facilities. In particular,
where we see significant effects on outcomes, it is always the case that the number of treatment
facilities in the prior year has a stronger effect than the number of treatment facilities in a given
year. Moreover, the estimated effects of the number of treatment facilities in the current year is
usually not statistically significant.
      Further results along these lines are presented in Appendix Tables A3 through A8. In these
tables, we reproduce our main estimates in Column 1 for ease of comparison; in Column 2 we
simultaneously consider the estimated effects of the number of SAT facilities in the preceding two
years on current year outcomes; in Column 3 we simultaneously consider the estimated effects of
the number of SAT facilities in the current year and the prior year on current year outcomes; and
in Column 4, we simultaneously consider the estimated effects of the number of SAT facilities in
the prior year, current year, and one year in the future, on current year outcomes (as in Table
8). The results of these analyses lead to the same conclusions as before. We also note that they
sometimes indicate that the number of facilities two years prior is more strongly related to current
year outcomes than the number of facilities on year prior, which suggests an important avenue for
future work in exploring the effects of SAT facilities over time through alternative methodologies.


5.4     Alternative Empirical Approach

As an additional test of the robustness of our estimates, in Table 9 we show the estimated effects for
each outcome based on the subset of areas for which the log outcome rate can be defined in each year


                                                    17
without adding one.32 For nearly all of the outcomes we consider, these estimates are virtually the
same in both statistical and economic significance. The one exception is the homicide rate estimates
by victim-offender relationship. For these outcomes, this approach produces estimated effects
that are larger in magnitude for homicides in which the relationship is unknown and homicides
committed by friends. As before, these are statistically significant while the estimated effects on
homicides committed by strangers and family members are not.


6     Discussion and Conclusion

In the preceding sections, we document statistically and economically significant effects of SAT
facilities on drug-related mortality and on several categories of crime. The updated estimates
we provide for the effects on county-level drug-related mortality suggest that an additional SAT
facility reduces drug-related mortality by 0.50 percent annually. Based on a value of 7 to 8 million
dollars per expected life saved, the estimate implies a decline in a county’s annual drug-related
mortality costs by 4.2 to 4.8 million dollars.33,34 Our estimates of the effects on agency-level crime
indicate that an additional facility in a county reduces municipal felony-type crimes by 0.10 percent
annually. In conjunction with social-cost-of-crime estimates from McCollister, French, and Fang
(2010), our estimates indicate that an additional SAT facility in a county reduces municipal crime
costs by 0.14 percent annually, which corresponds to approximately $700,000 per municipality.
Given an average of 6 municipal governments in each county, this suggests a decline in annual costs
of county-level crime by approximately 4.2 million dollars for each additional facility. In total,
these cost calculations suggest that the county-level benefits of an additional facility—in terms of
drug-related mortality and criminal activity—are between 8.4 and 9 million dollars.
    To compare these benefits to the annual costs of treatment at each facility, we can consider
the average number of annual treatment admissions (255) from the National Survey of Substance
Abuse Treatment Services (N-SSATS), and treatment modality-specific cost estimates from French,
Popovici, and Tapsell (2008).35 A back-of-the-envelope calculation indicates that the annual costs
  32
     As such, the set of areas contributing to the estimates varies across outcomes, with fewer areas contributing to
the estimates focusing on rarer outcomes such as homicides.
  33
     This estimate is based on 10.9 drug-related deaths per 100,000 and an an average weighted county population of
1.09 million.
  34
     Kniesner et al. (2010) suggest a 7 to 8 million dollar value of a statistical life (VSL) for health and safety
regulation cost-benefit analyses, which is consistent with median VSL estimates from meta analysis of existing VSL
research (Viscusi and Aldy, 2003).
  35
     Estimates from French, Popovici, and Tapsell (2008) include all treatment delivery costs related to personnel,
supplies and materials, contracted services, buildings and facilities, equipment, and miscellaneous items.



                                                         18
of treatment for a SAT facility are approximately 1.1 million dollars.36 These calculations suggest
that the benefits of expanding treatment facilities far outweigh the associated treatment costs.
    While our data do not allow us to establish a direct link between substance-abuse treatment
and incidents, the results of our analyses provide support for the idea that there are broad-based
benefits of SAT facilities in terms of public safety. This evidence is in contrast to not-in-my-
backyard arguments that have been used to hinder attempts to expand access to SAT through
additional facilities. That said, an important limitation of our research design is that it identifies
effects of having an additional SAT facility in the county, which could mask heterogeneous effects
for areas in a county that are nearer versus farther from such a facility. Assessing whether such
heterogeneity exists would seem to be an important avenue for future research.




  36
     We use the annual number of treatment admissions reported in Swensen (2015) based on the 2002-2008 N-SSATS
data. More recent N-SSATS data do not include treatment admissions information. To calculate the total cost of
treatment at a SAT facility, we use the median of the cost bands reported for each modality in French Popovici,
and Tapsell weighted by the proportion of total admissions accounted for by each modality as reported in the 2013
N-SSATS reports.



                                                       19
References
Amato, L., M. Davoli, C. A. Perucci, M. Ferri, F. Faggiano, and R. P. Mattick
 (2005): “An Overview of Systematic Reviews of the Effectiveness of Opiate Maintenance Thera-
 pies: Available Evidence to Inform Clinical Practice and Research,” Journal of Substance Abuse
 Treatment, 28(4), 321–329.

Anderson, M. L. (2008): “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
 Intervention: A Revaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects,”
 Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(484), 1481–1495.

Appel, P. W., A. A. Ellison, H. K. Jansky, and R. O. Oldak (2004): “Barriers to Enrollment
 in Drug Abuse Treatment and Suggestions for Reducing Them: Opinions of Drug Injecting Street
 Outreach Clients and Other System Stakeholders,” American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse,
 30(1), 129–153.

Beronio, K., S. Glied, and R. Frank (2014): “How the Affordable Care Act and Mental Health
 Parity and Addiction Equity Act Greatly Expand Coverage of Behavioral Health Care,” Journal
 of Behavioral Health Services & Research, 41(4), 410–428.

Buck, J. A. (2011): “The Looming Expansion and Transformation of Public Substance Abuse
 Treatment under the Affordable Care Act,” Health Affairs, 30(8), 1402–1410.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2011): “Robust Inference with Multi-Way
 Clustering,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29(2), 238–249.

Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality (CBHSQ) (2015): “Behavioral
 Health Trends in the United States: Results from the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and
 Health,” HHS Publication No. SMA 15-4927, NSDUH Series H-50.

Cohen, M. A., and A. R. Piquero (2009): “New Evidence on the Monetary Value of Saving a
 High-Risk Youth,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 25, 25–49.

Cunningham, J. K., and L. Liu (2003): “Impacts of Federal Ephedrine and Pseudoephedrine
 Regulations on Methamphetamine-related Hospital Admissions,” Addiction, 98(9), 1229–1237.

Cunningham, S., and K. Finlay (2013): “Parental Substance Use and Foster Care: Evidence
 from Two Methamphetamine Supply Shocks,” Economic Inquiry, 51(1), 764–782.

Dave, D., and S. Mukerjee (2011): “Mental Health Parity Legislation, Cost-Sharing and Sub-
 stance Abuse Treatment Admissions,” Health Economics, 20(2), 161–183.

DiNardo, J. (1993): “Law Enforcement, the Price of Cocaine and Cocaine Use,” Mathematical
  and Computer Modelling, 17(2), 53–64.

Dobkin, C., and N. Nicosia (2009): “The War on Drugs: Methamphetamine, Public Health,
 and Crime,” The American Economic Review, 99(1), 324–349.

Dobkin, C., N. Nicosia, and M. Weinberg (2014): “Are Supply-Side Drug Control Efforts
 Effective? Evaluating OTC Regulations Targeting Methamphetamine Precursors,” Journal of
 Public Economics, 120, 48–61.




                                              20
Egli, N., M. Pina, P. S. Christensen, M. Aebi, and M. Killias (2009): “Effects of Drug
 Substitution Programs on Offending Among Drug-Addicts,” Campbell Systematic Reviews.

Evans, W. N., C. Garthwaite, and T. J. Morre (2012): “The White/Black Educational
 Gap, Stalled Progress, and the Long Term Consequences of the Emergence of Crack Cocaine
 Markets,” NBER Working Paper #18437.

French, M. T., I. Popovici, and L. Tapsell (2008): “The Economic Costs of Substance Abuse
 Treatment: Updated Estimates and Cost Bands for Program Assessment and Reimbursement,”
 Journal of substance abuse treatment, 35(4), 462–469.

Friedmann, P. D., S. C. Lemon, M. D. Stein, and T. A. D’Aunno (2003): “Accessibility of
 Addiction Treatment: Results from a National Survey of Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment
 Organizations,” Health Services Research, 38, 887–903.

Fryer, R. G., P. S. Heaton, S. D. Levitt, and K. M. Murphy (2013): “Measuring Crack
  Cocaine and its Impact,” Economic Inquiry, 51(3), 1651–1681.

Goldstein, P. J. (1985): “The Drugs/Violence Nexus: A Tripartite Conceptual Framework,”
 Journal of Drug Issues, 39, 143–174.

Hoaken, P. N. S., and S. H. Stewart (2003): “Drugs of Abuse and the Elicitation of Human
 Aggressive Behavior,” Addictive Behaviors, 28(9), 1533–1554.

Holloway, K. R., T. H. Bennett, and D. P. Farrington (2006): “The Effectiveness of Drug
 Treatment Programs in Reducing Criminal Behavior: A Meta-Analysis,” Psicothema, 18(3),
 620–629.

Horgan, C. M., and E. L. Merrick (2001): “Financing of Substance Abuse Treatment Ser-
 vices,” vol. 15 of Recent Developments in Alcoholism, chap. 10, pp. 229–252.

Kniesner, T. J., W. K. Viscusi, and J. P. Ziliak (2010): “Policy Relevant Heterogeneity in
 the Value of Statistical Life: New Evidence from Panel Data Quantile Regressions,” Journal of
 Risk and Uncertainty, 40(1), 15–31.

Kuziemko, I., and S. D. Levitt (2004): “An Empirical Analysis of Imprisoning Drug Offenders,”
 Journal of Public Economics, 88(9), 2043–2066.

Lavine, R. (1997): “Psychopharmacological Treatment of Aggression and Violence in the Sub-
  stance Using Population,” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 29(4), 320–329.

Marcotte, D. M., and S. J. Markowitz (2011): “A Cure for Crime? Psycho-Pharmaceuticals
 and Crime Trends,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(1), 29–56.

Markowitz, S. (2001): “The Role of Alcohol and Drug Consumption in Determining Physical
 Violence and Weapon Carrying by Teenagers,” Eastern Economic Journal, 27(4), 409–432.

Markowitz, S. (2005): “Alcohol, Drugs, and Violent Crime,” International Review of Law and
 Economics, 25(1), 20–44.

Mattick, R. P., C. Breen, J. Kimber, and M. Davoli (2014): “Buprenorphine Maintenance
 Versus Placebo or Methadone Maintenance for Opioid Dependence,” The Cochrane Library.



                                             21
McCollister, K. E., M. T. French, and H. Fang (2010): “The Cost of Crime to Society:
 New Crime-Specific Estimates for Policy and Program Evaluation,” Drug Alcohol Dependence,
 108(1–2), 98–109.

Miron, J. A. (2003): “The Effect of Drug Prohibition on Drug Prices: Evidence from the Markets
 for Cocaine and Heroin,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(3), 522–530.

Mitchell, O., D. B. Wilson, and D. L. MacKenzie (2012): “The Effectiveness of
 Incarceration-Based Drug Treatment on Criminal Behavior: A Systematic Review,” Campbell
 Systematic Reviews.

National Center for Statistics and Analysis (NCSA) (2015): “2014 Crash Data Key
 Findings,” Traffic Safety Facts Crash–Stats. Report No. DOT HS 812 219.

Olmstead, T., W. D. White, and J. Sindelar (2004): “The Impact of Managed Care on
 Substance Abuse Treatment Services,” Health Services Research, 39(2), 319–344.

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) (2014): “National Drug Control Strat-
 egy 2014,” Washington D.C.: Office of National Drug Control Policy.

Pollini, R. A., L. McCall, S. H. Mehta, D. Vlahov, and S. A. Strathdee (2006): “Non-
 fatal Overdose and Subsequent Drug Treatment Among Injection Drug Users,” Drug and Alcohol
 Dependence, 83(2), 104–110.

Prendergast, M. L., D. Podus, E. Chang, and D. Urada (2002): “The Effectiveness of
 Drug Abuse Treatment: A Meta-Analysis of Comparison Group Studies,” Drug and Alcohol
 Dependence, 67(1), 53–72.

Quinet, K., and S. Nunn (2014): “Establishing the VictimOffender Relationship of Initially
 Unsolved Homicides Partner, Family, Acquaintance, or Stranger?,” Homicide Studies, 18(3),
 271–297.

Riedel, M. (2008): “Homicide Arrest Clearances: A Review of the Literature,” Sociology
  Compass, 2(4), 1145–1164.

Rudd, R. A., N. Aleshire, J. E. Zibbell, and R. M. Gladden (2016): “Increases in Drug and
 Opioid Overdose Deaths United States, 20002014,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
 64(50–51), 1378–1382.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) (2011): “The
  N-SSATS Report: Acceptance of Private Health Insurance in Substance Abuse Treatment Facil-
  ities (January 6, 2011),” .

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) (2014): “Na-
  tional Survey of Substance Abuse Treatment Services (N-SSATS): 2013. Data on Substance Abuse
  Treatment Facilities,” BHSIS Series S-73, HHS Publication No. (SMA) 14-4890. Rockville, MD.

Stevens, A. H., D. L. Miller, M. E. Page, and M. Filipski (2015): “The Best of Times,
  the Worst of Times: Understanding Pro-Cyclical Mortality,” American Economic Journals:
  Economic Policy, 7(4), 279–311.

Swensen, I. D. (2015):      “Substance-Abuse Treatment and Mortality,” Journal of Public
 Economics, 122, 13–30.


                                             22
Viscusi, W. K., and J. E. Aldy (2003): “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of
  Market Estimates Throughout the World,” Journal of risk and uncertainty, 27(1), 5–76.

Wen, H., J. Hockenberry, and J. Cummings (2014): “The Effect of Substance Use Disorder
 Treatment Use on Crime: Evidence from Public Insurance Expansions and Health Insurance
 Parity Mandates,” NBER Working Paper #20537.

Wilson, D. B., O. Mitchell, and D. L. MacKenzie (2006): “A Systematic Review of Drug
 Court Effects on Recidivism,” Journal of Experimental Criminology, 2, 459–487.

Yuan, Y., and J. P. Caulkins (1998): “The Effect of Variation in High-Level Domestic Drug
 Enforcement on Variation in Drug Prices,” Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 32(4), 265–276.




                                             23
                                                     Table 1
                                                 Summary Statistics


                                                                                                 Mean       Std Dev

     Substance Abuse Treatment Facilities (2,454 counties)
     Total                                                                                        49.5        90.0
     Net Openings                                                                                 5.8         10.1
     Net Closings                                                                                 3.7          4.4
     Facilities per 100,000                                                                       5.0          3.6

     NCHS Mortality Files (2,454 counties)
     Drug Deaths per 100,000                                                                      10.9         6.7
     Homicides per 100,000                                                                         5.9         5.2

     UCR Offenses Known Database (2,156 counties, 9,139 agencies)
     Violent Crimes per 100,000                                1461.8                                       1074.5
     Felony-Type Violent Crimes per 100,000                     343.3                                        301.0
     Financially-Motivated Crimes per 100,000                  3867.8                                       21.96.3
     Felony-Type Financially-Motivated Crimes per 100,000      1343.1                                        992.4
     Homicides per 100,000                                        5.7                                         8.3
     Sexual Assaults per 100,000                                 31.9                                        26.6
     Aggravated Assaults per 100,000                            232.5                                        421.8
     Robbery per 100,000                                        164.5                                        178.3
     Simple Assaults per 100,000                               1118.6                                        872.9
     Burglary per 100,000                                       757.7                                        517.5
     Larceny per 100,000                                       2524.7                                       1450.7
     Motor Vehicle Theft per 100,000                            420.9                                        456.4

     UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports (1,764 counties, 5,202                                   agencies)
     Homicides per 100,000                                                                        6.2      8.7
     Homicides with unknown victim-perpetrator relationship per 100,000                           2.6      5.3
     Homicides committed by friend groups per 100,000                                             1.5      2.8
     Homicides committed by strangers per 100,000                                                 1.0      1.8
     Homicides committed by family members per 100,000                                            0.9      2.0



Notes: These data span 1999-2012. The means and standard deviations for the substance-abuse treatment facilities are derived
from the NCHS Mortality sample. The reported facility statistics are similar when using the UCR Known Offenses sample and
the UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports sample. The means and standard deviations from the NCHS Restricted Mortality
Files represent rates per 100,000 residents in each county and are weighted by county population. The means and standard
deviations for the UCR Offenses Known Database and UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports represent rates per 100,000
residents covered by the municipal law enforcement agency and are weighted by agency population coverage.




                                                            24
                                                 Table 2
                Estimated Effects of SAT Facilities on Log Drug-Related Mortality Rates


                                                       (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)

                Facilities Last Year                -0.0029*    -0.0051***    -0.0051***     -0.0050***    -0.0050***
                                                    (0.0013)     (0.0010)      (0.0011)       (0.0010)      (0.0010)

                County and Year Fixed Effects          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
                State-by-year Fixed Effects            No           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
                Demographic Controls                   No           No            Yes            Yes          Yes
                Economic Controls                      No           No            No             Yes          Yes
                Officer Rate per 1,000                 No           No            No             No           Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on 31,882 county-year observations. Demographic control variables include the fraction of the
population that are: white, black, male, ages 0–9, ages 10–19, ages 20–29, ages 30–39, ages 40–49, ages 50–59, and ages 60–69.
Controls for economic conditions include the county unemployment rate and number of firm births. Robust standard errors
two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by county population.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 25
                                                   Table 3
                          Estimated Effects of SAT Facilities on Log Homicide Rates


                                                            (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)

              Homicide Data: NCHS Restricted Mortality Files
              Facilities Last Year                      -0.0025***     -0.0031***   -0.0026***   -0.0024***   -0.0024***
                                                         (0.0007)       (0.0005)     (0.0005)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)


              Homicide Data: UCR Offenses Known Database
              Facilities Last Year                      -0.0023***     -0.0024***   -0.0018***   -0.0018***   -0.0018***
                                                         (0.0005)       (0.0005)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)


              Homicide Data: UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports
              Facilities Last Year                      -0.0023***     -0.0024***   -0.0018***   -0.0017***   -0.0018***
                                                         (0.0005)       (0.0003)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)


              County/Agency and Year Fixed Effects          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
              State-by-year Fixed Effects                   No            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
              Demographic Controls                          No            No           Yes          Yes          Yes
              Economic Controls                             No            No           No           Yes          Yes
              Officer Rate per 1,000                        No            No           No           No           Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on 31,882 county-year observations for the NCHS Restricted Mortality Files, 92,145 agency-year
observations for the UCR Offenses Known Database, and 57,609 agency-year observations for the UCR Supplementary Homicide
Reports. Demographic control variables include the fraction of the population that are: white, black, male, ages 0–9, ages 10–
19, ages 20–29, ages 30–39, ages 40–49, ages 50–59, and ages 60–69. Controls for economic conditions include the county
unemployment rate and number of firm births. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year levels are
shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by county population when using the NCHS Mortality data and are weighted
by agency population coverage when using the UCR Offenses Known data and the UCR Supplementary Homicide Reports.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                  26
                                                 Table 4
               Estimated Effects of SAT Facilities on Log Homicide Rates by Relationship


                                                       (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)

              Unknown victim-perpetrator relationship
              Facilities Last Year      -0.0018*** -0.0022***                   -0.0015**      -0.0014**   -0.0014**
                                          (0.0005)    (0.0006)                   (0.0006)       (0.0006)    (0.0006)


              Homicides committed by friend groups
              Facilities Last Year       -0.0028*** -0.0031***                  -0.0024***    -0.0025***   -0.0026***
                                          (0.0004)   (0.0005)                    (0.0005)      (0.0005)     (0.0005)


              Homicides committed by strangers
              Facilities Last Year       -0.0019***               -0.0014**       -0.0009       -0.0008      -0.0009
                                          (0.0005)                 (0.0006)      (0.0006)      (0.0006)     (0.0006)


              Homicides committed by family members
              Facilities Last Year        -0.0007   -0.0004                       -0.0001       -0.0000      -0.0001
                                         (0.0011)  (0.0005)                      (0.0006)      (0.0006)     (0.0006)

              Agency and Year Fixed Effects            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
              State-by-year Fixed Effects              No             Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
              Demographic Controls                     No             No            Yes           Yes         Yes
              Economic Controls                        No             No            No            Yes         Yes
              Officer Rate per 1,000                   No             No            No            No          Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on 57,609 agency-year observations. Demographic control variables include the fraction of the
population that are: white, black, male, ages 0–9, ages 10–19, ages 20–29, ages 30–39, ages 40–49, ages 50–59, and ages 60–69.
Controls for economic conditions include the county unemployment rate and number of firm births. Robust standard errors
two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by agency population
coverage.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 27
                                                  Table 5
                       Estimated Effects of SAT Facilities on Log Violent Crime Rates


                                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)

                  Homicides
                  Facilities Last Year              -0.0023***    -0.0024***   -0.0018***   -0.0018***     -0.0018***
                                                     (0.0005)      (0.0005)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)       (0.0004)


                  Sexual Assaults
                  Facilities Last Year               -0.0011**      -0.0005      -0.0005       -0.0005       -0.0006
                                                      (0.0004)     (0.0004)     (0.0005)      (0.0005)      (0.0005)


                  Aggravated Assaults
                  Facilities Last Year              -0.0034***    -0.0023***    -0.0013*     -0.0013*       -0.0014*
                                                     (0.0009)      (0.0007)     (0.0006)     (0.0006)       (0.0006)


                  Simple Assaults
                  Facilities Last Year                 -0.0004      0.0005       0.0001        0.0001        0.0000
                                                      (0.0005)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)      (0.0004)      (0.0004)


                  All Violent Crimes
                  Facilities Last Year              -0.0015***      -0.0006      -0.0004       -0.0004       -0.0005
                                                     (0.0005)      (0.0004)     (0.0004)      (0.0004)      (0.0004)


                  Felony-type Violent Crimes
                  Facilities Last Year              -0.0032***    -0.0022***    -0.0013**    -0.0013**     -0.0014**
                                                     (0.0008)      (0.0007)      (0.0006)     (0.0006)      (0.0006)


                  Estimated Social Costs Associated with All Violent Crimes
                  Facilities Last Year         -0.0025*** -0.0020*** -0.0015***             -0.0015***     -0.0015***
                                                (0.0005)   (0.0004)   (0.0004)               (0.0004)       (0.0004)

                  Agency and Year Fixed Effects         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                  State-by-year Fixed Effects           No            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                  Demographic Controls                  No            No           Yes          Yes           Yes
                  Economic Controls                     No            No           No           Yes           Yes
                  Officer Rate per 1,000                No            No           No           No            Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on 92,145 agency-year observations. Social costs for homicides, sexual assault, and aggravated
assault come from McCollister, French, and Fang (2010). We set the cost of simple assaults equivalent to 20% of the cost
of aggravated assaults consistent with Cohen and Piquero (2009). Demographic control variables include the fraction of the
population that are: white, black, male, ages 0–9, ages 10–19, ages 20–29, ages 30–39, ages 40–49, ages 50–59, and ages 60–69.
Controls for economic conditions include the county unemployment rate and number of firm births. Robust standard errors
two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by agency population
coverage.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 28
                                                 Table 6
             Estimated Effects of SAT Facilities on Log Financially-Motivated Crime Rates


                                                       (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)

              Robbery Total
              Facilities Last Year                 -0.0015***    -0.0019***     -0.0012***    -0.0011***   -0.0011***
                                                    (0.0003)      (0.0003)       (0.0003)      (0.0002)     (0.0002)


              Motor Vehicle Theft
              Facilities Last Year                   -0.0007     -0.0020***     -0.0013**      -0.0012**   -0.0012**
                                                    (0.0009)      (0.0006)       (0.0005)       (0.0005)    (0.0005)


              Burglary Total
              Facilities Last Year                 -0.0012***    -0.0010***      -0.0006*       -0.0005      -0.0005
                                                    (0.0002)      (0.0003)       (0.0003)      (0.0003)     (0.0003)


              Larceny Theft
              Facilities Last Year                   -0.0004        0.0001        -0.0004       -0.0004      -0.0004
                                                    (0.0005)       (0.0005)      (0.0005)      (0.0005)     (0.0005)


              All Financially-Motivated Crimes
              Facilities Last Year         -0.0006*               -0.0007**      -0.0004*      -0.0004*     -0.0004*
                                           (0.0003)                (0.0002)      (0.0002)      (0.0002)     (0.0002)


              Felony-type Financially-Motivated Crimes
              Facilities Last Year         -0.0013* -0.0015***                  -0.0009**      -0.0008**   -0.0008**
                                           (0.0006)  (0.0004)                    (0.0003)       (0.0003)    (0.0003)


              Estimated Social Costs Associated with All Financially-Motivated Crimes
              Facilities Last Year        -0.0009** -0.0012*** -0.0007*** -0.0007*** -0.0007***
                                           (0.0003)   (0.0003)   (0.0002)   (0.0002)  (0.0002)

              Agency and Year Fixed Effects            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
              State-by-year Fixed Effects              No             Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
              Demographic Controls                     No             No            Yes           Yes         Yes
              Economic Controls                        No             No            No            Yes         Yes
              Officer Rate per 1,000                   No             No            No            No          Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on 92,145 agency-year observations. We use social costs from McCollister, French, and Fang (2010).
Demographic control variables include the fraction of the population that are: white, black, male, ages 0–9, ages 10–19, ages
20–29, ages 30–39, ages 40–49, ages 50–59, and ages 60–69. Controls for economic conditions include the county unemployment
rate and number of firm births. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses.
The regressions are weighted by agency population coverage.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 29
                                                 Table 7
                   Estimated Effects of SAT Facilities on Log of Combined Crime Rates


                                                        (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)

                  All Crimes
                  Facilities Last Year               -0.0008**    -0.0006**      -0.0004      -0.0003       -0.0004*
                                                      (0.0003)     (0.0002)     (0.0002)     (0.0002)       (0.0002)


                  Felony-Type Crimes
                  Facilities Last Year              -0.0017***   -0.0017***    -0.0010***   -0.0010***     -0.0010***
                                                     (0.0003)     (0.0003)      (0.0003)     (0.0003)       (0.0003)


                  Estimated Social Costs Associated with All Crimes
                  Facilities Last Year        -0.0022*** -0.0019*** -0.0014***              -0.0014***     -0.0014***
                                               (0.0004)   (0.0004)   (0.0003)                (0.0003)       (0.0003)

                  Agency and Year Fixed Effects         Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
                  State-by-year Fixed Effects           No            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
                  Demographic Controls                  No            No          Yes           Yes           Yes
                  Economic Controls                     No            No          No            Yes           Yes
                  Officer Rate per 1,000                No            No          No            No            Yes


Notes: All crimes consists of homicide, sexual assaults, aggravated assaults, simple assaults, robbery, larceny, burglary, motor
vehicle theft and attempts to commit said crimes. Felony-type crimes consists of homicide, sexual assaults, aggravated assaults,
robbery, burglary, motor vehicle theft and attempts. We use social costs from McCollister, French, and Fang (2010). We set
the social cost of simple assault equivalent to 20% the cost of aggravated assaults consistent with Cohen and Piquero (2009).
Estimates are based on 92,145 agency-year observations. Demographic control variables include the fraction of the population
that are: white, black, male, ages 0–9, ages 10–19, ages 20–29, ages 30–39, ages 40–49, ages 50–59, and ages 60–69. Controls
for economic conditions include the county unemployment rate and number of firm births. Robust standard errors two-way
clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by agency population coverage.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 30
                                                                              Table 8
                                        Expanding Model To Additionally Consider Contemporaneous and Future Facility Counts


                                         Drug-                                               Homicide   Homicide     Homicide    Homicide                                                All
                                        Related       Homicide      Homicide     Homicide    Unknown     Friend      Stranger     Family       Sexual       Aggravated   Simple        Violent
                                        Mortality   (NCHS Data)    (UCR Data)   (SHR Data)   Offender   Offender     Offender    Offender      Assault       Assault     Assault       Crimes


                 Facilities Last Year   -0.0030**     -0.0014*      -0.0018**   -0.0021***    -0.0014   -0.0032***    -0.0011     -0.0001      -0.0008      -0.0020**     -0.0000     -0.0007*
                                         (0.0010)     (0.0007)       (0.0007)    (0.0005)    (0.0012)    (0.0008)    (0.0010)    (0.0011)     (0.0006)       (0.0007)    (0.0004)     (0.0004)
                 Facilities This Year     -0.0024      -0.0006         0.0004      0.0005     -0.0003     0.0017      -0.0000     -0.0001      -0.0001        0.0014      -0.0003      0.0004
                                         (0.0013)     (0.0010)       (0.0008)    (0.0007)    (0.0011)    (0.0016)    (0.0011)    (0.0013)     (0.0006)       (0.0008)    (0.0004)     (0.0004)
                 Facilities Next Year     -0.0007      -0.0010        -0.0006     -0.0001     -0.0005     -0.0016     -0.0004     0.0002        0.0005        -0.0011      0.0004      -0.0003
                                         (0.0014)     (0.0009)       (0.0008)    (0.0008)    (0.0010)    (0.0017)    (0.0011)    (0.0013)     (0.0006)       (0.0007)    (0.0004)     (0.0003)


                                         Felony     Social Costs                  Motor                                 All       Felony     Social Costs                  All       Social Costs
                                         Violent     of Violent                   Vehicle                Larceny     Financial   Financial   of Financial     All         Felony        of All
                                         Crimes       Crimes        Robbery        Theft     Burglary     Theft       Crimes      Crimes        Crimes       Crimes       Crimes       Crimes


                 Facilities Last Year   -0.0020**    -0.0017***    -0.0011***     -0.0009    -0.0007*     -0.0011    -0.0004*    -0.0009*     -0.0007**     -0.0005**    -0.0012**   -0.0015***
                                         (0.0007)     (0.0005)      (0.0003)     (0.0007)    (0.0004)    (0.0014)    (0.0002)    (0.0004)      (0.0003)      (0.0002)     (0.0004)    (0.0004)
                 Facilities This Year      0.0012      0.0006         0.0003      -0.0002      0.0004      0.0000     -0.0000      0.0002        0.0001       0.0000       0.0004      0.0005
                                         (0.0008)     (0.0005)      (0.0004)     (0.0009)    (0.0004)    (0.0016)    (0.0003)    (0.0006)      (0.0004)      (0.0003)     (0.0006)    (0.0005)
31




                 Facilities Next Year     -0.0010      -0.0007       -0.0004      -0.0007     -0.0003      0.0011      0.0001     -0.0004       -0.0002       -0.0000      -0.0005     -0.0006
                                         (0.0006)     (0.0006)      (0.0004)     (0.0006)    (0.0003)    (0.0016)    (0.0003)    (0.0004)      (0.0003)      (0.0002)     (0.0003)     0.0005



     Notes: Outcomes are in log rates. All estimates control for county fixed effects, year fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, demographic controls, economic controls, and the
     size of the police force in the area. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by the
     population represented by each cell.
     *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.
                                                                                     Table 9
                                                   Estimates Restricting Sample to Areas Reporting Positive Counts in All Years


                                         Drug-                                                 Homicide    Homicide    Homicide    Homicide                                                All
                                        Related        Homicide       Homicide     Homicide    Unknown      Friend     Stranger     Family       Sexual       Aggravated   Simple        Violent
                                        Mortality    (NCHS Data)     (UCR Data)   (SHR Data)   Offender    Offender    Offender    Offender      Assault       Assault     Assault       Crimes


                 Facilities Last Year   -0.0055***    -0.0023***     -0.0019***    -0.0017*    -0.0032**   -0.0040**    0.0022      -0.0008      -0.0007      -0.0014**     0.0002       -0.0005
                                         (0.0012)      (0.0004)       (0.0006)     (0.0008)     (0.0011)    (0.0018)   (0.0034)    (0.0035)     (0.0006)       (0.0006)    (0.0004)     (0.0004)



                                         Felony       Social Costs                  Motor                                 All       Felony     Social Costs                  All       Social Costs
                                         Violent       of Violent                   Vehicle                Larceny     Financial   Financial   of Financial     All         Felony        of All
                                         Crimes         Crimes        Robbery        Theft     Burglary     Theft       Crimes      Crimes        Crimes       Crimes       Crimes       Crimes


                 Facilities Last Year   -0.0013**     -0.0015***     -0.0010***    -0.0012**    -0.0005     -0.0001    -0.0004*    -0.0008**    -0.0007**       -0.0004    -0.0010**   -0.0014***
                                         (0.0006)      (0.0004)       (0.0002)      (0.0005)   (0.0003)    (0.0002)    (0.0002)     (0.0004)     (0.0002)      (0.0002)     (0.0003)    (0.0003)



     Notes: Outcomes are in log rates. All estimates control for county fixed effects, year fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, demographic controls, economic controls, and the
     size of the police force in the area. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by the
32




     population represented by each cell.
     *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.
Appendix


                                                 Table A1
                              Summary Statistics for the Social Costs of Crimes


                                                       Mean             St Dev          Cost per Crime (2016 dollars)

 UCR Offenses Known Database (2,156 counties, 9,139 agencies)
 Homicides                           565,481      822,074                                           9,881,197
 Sexual Assaults                      84,523       70,433                                            264,853
 Aggravated Assaults                 359,777      331,942                                            117,722
 Robbery                              76,557       82,994                                            46,541
 Simple Assaults                     263,375      205,508                                         117,722 × 0.2
 Burglary                             53,862       36,788                                             7,108
 Larceny                              98,090       56,363                                             3,885
 Motor Vehicle Theft                 49,873        54,081                                            11,849

 All Crimes                                          1,551,538        1,349,029
 Violent Crimes                                      1,273,156        1,195,357
 Felony-Type Violent Crimes                          1,009,781        1,082,884
 Financially-Motivated Crimes                         278,382          188,874
 Felony-Type Financially-Motivated Crimes             180,292          153,461



Notes: We use social costs from McCollister, French, and Fang (2010). We set the social cost of simple assault equivalent to
20% the cost of aggravated assaults consistent with Cohen and Piquero (2009). The means and standard deviations represent
rates per 1,000 agency population coverage-year and are weighted by agency population coverage.




                                                            33
                                           Table A2
Estimated Effects on the Log of Violent Crime Costs Using Alternative Costs for Simple Assaults


                                                        (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)

                  Simple Assault Social Cost = 40% of Aggravated Assaults Social Cost
                  Facilities Last Year        -0.0023*** -0.0017*** -0.0013*** -0.0013***                  -0.0014***
                                               (0.0005)   (0.0004)   (0.0004)   (0.0004)                    (0.0004)


                  Simple Assault Social Cost = 20% of Aggravated Assaults Social Cost
                  Facilities Last Year        -0.0025*** -0.0020*** -0.0015*** -0.0015***                  -0.0015***
                                               (0.0005)   (0.0004)   (0.0004)   (0.0004)                    (0.0004)


                  Simple Assault Social Cost = 0% of Aggravated Assaults Social Cost
                  Facilities Last Year        -0.0026*** -0.0023*** -0.0016*** -0.0016***                  -0.0017***
                                               (0.0006)   (0.0005)   (0.0005)   (0.0005)                    (0.0005)

                  Agency and Year Fixed Effects         Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
                  State-by-year Fixed Effects           No            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
                  Demographic Controls                  No            No          Yes           Yes           Yes
                  Economic Controls                     No            No          No            Yes           Yes
                  Officer Rate per 1,000                No            No          No            No            Yes


Notes: McCollister, French, and Fang (2010) do not estimate a social cost estimate for simple assaults. This table considers
alternative measures for costs of simple assaults. Cohen and Piquero (2009) estimated simple assaults to have a social cost of
20% of aggravated assaults. Estimates are based on 92,145 agency-year observations. Demographic control variables include
the fraction of the population that are: white, black, male, ages 0–9, ages 10–19, ages 20–29, ages 30–39, ages 40–49, ages
50–59, and ages 60–69. Controls for economic conditions include the county unemployment rate and number of firm births.
Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted
by agency population coverage.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 34
                                              Table A3
               Estimated Effects on Log of Drug-Related Mortality Rates, Lags and Lead


                                                           (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)

                            Facilities 2 Years Ago                      -0.0008
                                                                       (0.0011)
                            Facilities Last Year      -0.0050***      -0.0046**   -0.0032***    -0.0030**
                                                       (0.0010)        (0.0016)     (0.0009)     (0.0010)
                            Facilities This Year                                   -0.0024**      -0.0024
                                                                                    (0.0011)     (0.0013)
                            Facilities Next Year                                                  -0.0007
                                                                                                 (0.0014)

                            N                            31882         29424        31882         29423


Notes: Column 1 reproduces the estimate shown in Column 5 of Table 2. Columns 2–4 are based on the same model with the
inclusion of the additional variables highlighted in the table. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year
levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by county population.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 35
                                                  Table A4
                           Estimated Effects on Log Homicide Rates, Lags and Lead


                                                         (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)

                           NCHS Restricted Mortality Files
                           Facilities 2 Years Ago              -0.0008
                                                              (0.0006)
                           Facilities Last Year   -0.0024*** -0.0017**            -0.0016**      -0.0014*
                                                   (0.0004)   (0.0007)             (0.0005)      (0.0007)
                           Facilities This Year                                   -0.0011**       -0.0006
                                                                                   (0.0004)      (0.0010)
                           Facilities Next Year                                                   -0.0010
                                                                                                 (0.0009)

                           N                            31882          29424        31882          29423


                           UCR Offenses Known Database
                           Facilities 2 Years Ago                    -0.0003
                                                                    (0.0005)
                           Facilities Last Year      -0.0018***    -0.0017***     -0.0019***     -0.0018**
                                                      (0.0004)      (0.0005)       (0.0006)       (0.0007)
                           Facilities This Year                                     0.0001          0.0004
                                                                                   (0.0005)       (0.0008)
                           Facilities Next Year                                                    -0.0006
                                                                                                  (0.0008)

                           N                            92145          80050        92145          80118


                           UCR Supplementary Homicide Report
                           Facilities 2 Years Ago              -0.0001
                                                              (0.0005)
                           Facilities Last Year   -0.0018*** -0.0017***           -0.0020***    -0.0021***
                                                   (0.0004)   (0.0004)             (0.0005)      (0.0005)
                           Facilities This Year                                     0.0004         0.0005
                                                                                   (0.0004)      (0.0007)
                           Facilities Next Year                                                   -0.0001
                                                                                                 (0.0008)

                           N                            57609          53777        57609          52846



Notes: Column 1 reproduces the estimate shown in Column 5 of Table 3. Columns 2–4 are based on the same model with
the inclusion of the additional variables highlighted in the table. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and
year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by county population for the NCHS Mortality Files and
are weighted by agency population coverage for the UCR Offenses Known Database and the UCR Supplementary Homicide
Report.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                  36
                                             Table A5
               Estimated Effects on Log Homicide Rates by Relationship, Lags and Lead


                                                        (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)

                               Unknown victim-perpetrator relationship
                               Facilities 2 Years Ago            0.0004
                                                                (0.0010)
                               Facilities Last Year   -0.0014**  -0.0018      -0.0014      -0.0014
                                                       (0.0006) (0.0012)     (0.0010)     (0.0012)
                               Facilities This Year                           0.0001       -0.0003
                                                                             (0.0008)     (0.0011)
                               Facilities Next Year                                        0.0005
                                                                                          (0.0010)

                               Homicides committed by friend groups
                               Facilities 2 Years Ago             -0.0013
                                                                 (0.0012)
                               Facilities Last Year   -0.0026***  -0.0015   -0.0034***   -0.0032***
                                                       (0.0005)  (0.0011)    (0.0008)     (0.0008)
                               Facilities This Year                           0.0012       0.0017
                                                                             (0.0008)     (0.0016)
                               Facilities Next Year                                        -0.0016
                                                                                          (0.0017)

                               Homicides committed by strangers
                               Facilities 2 Years Ago           -0.0008
                                                               (0.0015)
                               Facilities Last Year    -0.0009  -0.0002       -0.0011      -0.0011
                                                      (0.0006) (0.0016)      (0.0008)     (0.0010)
                               Facilities This Year                           0.0003       -0.0000
                                                                             (0.0007)     (0.0011)
                               Facilities Next Year                                        0.0004
                                                                                          (0.0011)

                               Homicides committed by family members
                               Facilities 2 Years Ago           -0.0001
                                                               (0.0009)
                               Facilities Last Year    -0.0001   0.0001        0.0002      -0.0001
                                                      (0.0006) (0.0010)      (0.0010)     (0.0011)
                               Facilities This Year                           -0.0004      -0.0001
                                                                             (0.0008)     (0.0013)
                               Facilities Next Year                                        0.0002
                                                                                          (0.0013)
                               N                       57609        53777     57609         52846


Notes: Column 1 reproduces the estimate shown in Column 5 of Table 4. Columns 2–4 are based on the same model with the
inclusion of the additional variables highlighted in the table. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year
levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted by agency population coverage.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                               37
                                               Table A6
                      Estimated Effects on Log Violent Crime Rates, Lags and Lead


                                                            (1)              (2)         (3)          (4)

                                Homicides
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                   -0.0003
                                                                        (0.0005)
                                Facilities Last Year     -0.0018***    -0.0017***     -0.0019***   -0.0018**
                                                          (0.0004)      (0.0005)       (0.0006)     (0.0007)
                                Facilities This Year                                    0.0001        0.0004
                                                                                       (0.0005)     (0.0008)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                 -0.0006
                                                                                                    (0.0008)

                                Sexual Assaults
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                      -0.0001
                                                                           (0.0007)
                                Facilities Last Year       -0.0006          -0.0003     -0.0006     -0.0008
                                                          (0.0005)         (0.0008)    (0.0006)    (0.0006)
                                Facilities This Year                                     0.0001     -0.0001
                                                                                       (0.0005)    (0.0006)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                0.0005
                                                                                                   (0.0006)

                                Aggravated Assaults
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                 -0.0017**
                                                                        (0.0007)
                                Facilities Last Year      -0.0014*       0.0001         -0.0013    -0.0020**
                                                          (0.0006)      (0.0004)       (0.0007)     (0.0007)
                                Facilities This Year                                    -0.0001       0.0014
                                                                                       (0.0006)     (0.0008)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                 -0.0011
                                                                                                    (0.0007)

                                Simple Assaults
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                      0.0002
                                                                           (0.0004)
                                Facilities Last Year       0.0000           0.0001       0.0002     -0.0000
                                                          (0.0004)         (0.0005)    (0.0004)    (0.0004)
                                Facilities This Year                                    -0.0002     -0.0003
                                                                                       (0.0004)    (0.0004)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                0.0004
                                                                                                   (0.0004)

                                All Violent Crimes
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                 -0.0006**
                                                                        (0.0002)
                                Facilities Last Year       -0.0005       0.0002         -0.0003    -0.0007*
                                                          (0.0004)      (0.0005)       (0.0004)    (0.0004)
                                Facilities This Year                                    -0.0002      0.0004
                                                                                       (0.0004)    (0.0004)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                -0.0003
                                                                                                   (0.0003)

                                Felony-Type Violent Crimes
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                 -0.0017**
                                                                        (0.0006)
                                Facilities Last Year     -0.0014**       0.0001        -0.0013*    -0.0020**
                                                          (0.0006)      (0.0004)       (0.0007)     (0.0007)
                                Facilities This Year                                    -0.0001       0.0012
                                                                                       (0.0005)     (0.0008)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                 -0.0010
                                                                                                    (0.0006)

                                Estimated Social Costs Associated with All Violent Crimes
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago            -0.0008**
                                                                   (0.0003)
                                Facilities Last Year   -0.0015*** -0.0009** -0.0015**  -0.0017***
                                                        (0.0004)   (0.0003)  (0.0005)   (0.0005)
                                Facilities This Year                          -0.0000     0.0006
                                                                             (0.0003)   (0.0005)
                                Facilities Next Year                                     -0.0007
                                                                                        (0.0006)
                                N                         92145     80050      92145      80118


Notes: Column 1 reproduces the estimate shown in Column 5 of Table 5. Columns 2–4 are based on the same model with the
inclusion of the additional variables highlighted in the table. We use social costs from McCollister, French, and Fang (2010).
We set the social cost of simple assault equivalent to 20% the cost of aggravated assaults consistent with Cohen and Piquero
(2009). Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are
weighted by agency population coverage.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.
                                                                      38
                                              Table A7
             Estimated Effects on Log Financially-Motivated Crime Rates, Lags and Lead


                                                            (1)              (2)         (3)          (4)

                                Robbery Total
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                 -0.0016***
                                                                        (0.0003)
                                Facilities Last Year     -0.0011***      0.0003       -0.0011***   -0.0011***
                                                          (0.0002)      (0.0003)       (0.0003)     (0.0003)
                                Facilities This Year                                    -0.0001       0.0003
                                                                                       (0.0003)     (0.0004)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                 -0.0004
                                                                                                    (0.0004)

                                Motor Vehicle Theft
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                      -0.0003
                                                                           (0.0005)
                                Facilities Last Year     -0.0012**          -0.0009     -0.0006      -0.0009
                                                          (0.0005)         (0.0005)    (0.0007)     (0.0007)
                                Facilities This Year                                    -0.0009      -0.0002
                                                                                       (0.0008)     (0.0009)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                 -0.0007
                                                                                                    (0.0006)

                                Burglary Total
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                      -0.0004
                                                                           (0.0004)
                                Facilities Last Year       -0.0005          -0.0001     -0.0005     -0.0007*
                                                          (0.0003)         (0.0003)    (0.0003)     (0.0004)
                                Facilities This Year                                    -0.0000       0.0004
                                                                                       (0.0003)     (0.0004)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                 -0.0003
                                                                                                    (0.0003)

                                Larceny Theft (no MVT)
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago                      -0.0008
                                                                           (0.0010)
                                Facilities Last Year       -0.0004           0.0004     -0.0010      -0.0011
                                                          (0.0005)         (0.0012)    (0.0014)     (0.0014)
                                Facilities This Year                                     0.0008       0.0000
                                                                                       (0.0016)     (0.0016)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                 0.0011
                                                                                                    (0.0016)

                                All Financially-Motivated Crimes
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago           -0.0004*
                                                                 (0.0002)
                                Facilities Last Year   -0.0004*   0.0001                -0.0003     -0.0004*
                                                       (0.0002)  (0.0003)              (0.0002)     (0.0002)
                                Facilities This Year                                    -0.0001      -0.0000
                                                                                       (0.0003)     (0.0003)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                 0.0001
                                                                                                    (0.0003)

                                Felony-Type Financially-Motivated Crimes
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago           -0.0006*
                                                                 (0.0003)
                                Facilities Last Year   -0.0008**  -0.0003               -0.0007     -0.0009*
                                                        (0.0003) (0.0003)              (0.0004)     (0.0004)
                                Facilities This Year                                    -0.0002       0.0002
                                                                                       (0.0005)     (0.0006)
                                Facilities Next Year                                                 -0.0004
                                                                                                    (0.0004)

                                Estimated Social Costs for All Financially-Motivated Crimes
                                Facilities 2 Years Ago            -0.0006**
                                                                   (0.0002)
                                Facilities Last Year   -0.0007***   -0.0001  -0.0005*   -0.0007**
                                                        (0.0002)   (0.0002)  (0.0003)    (0.0003)
                                Facilities This Year                          -0.0002      0.0001
                                                                             (0.0003)    (0.0004)
                                Facilities Next Year                                      -0.0002
                                                                                         (0.0003)
                                N                         92145      80050     92145       80118


Notes: Column 1 reproduces the estimate shown in Column 5 of Table 6. Columns 2–4 are based on the same model with the
inclusion of the additional variables highlighted in the table. We use social costs from McCollister, French, and Fang (2010).
Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions are weighted
by agency population coverage.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.

                                                                      39
                                                Table A8
                    Estimated Effects on Log of Combined Crime Rates, Lags and Lead


                                                               (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)

                                   All Crimes
                                   Facilities 2 Years Ago                 -0.0004**
                                                                           (0.0001)
                                   Facilities Last Year      -0.0004*       0.0001     -0.0002    -0.0005**
                                                             (0.0002)      (0.0002)   (0.0002)     (0.0002)
                                   Facilities This Year                                -0.0002      0.0000
                                                                                      (0.0002)     (0.0003)
                                   Facilities Next Year                                             -0.0000
                                                                                                   (0.0002)


                                   Felony-Type Crimes
                                   Facilities 2 Years Ago                 -0.0008**
                                                                           (0.0003)
                                   Facilities Last Year     -0.0010***      -0.0002   -0.0009**   -0.0012**
                                                             (0.0003)      (0.0003)    (0.0003)    (0.0004)
                                   Facilities This Year                                 -0.0002     0.0004
                                                                                       (0.0004)    (0.0006)
                                   Facilities Next Year                                             -0.0005
                                                                                                   (0.0003)


                                   Estimated Social Costs Associated with All Crimes
                                   Facilities 2 Years Ago            -0.0008**
                                                                      (0.0003)
                                   Facilities Last Year   -0.0014*** -0.0007** -0.0013***         -0.0015***
                                                           (0.0003)   (0.0003)  (0.0004)           (0.0004)
                                   Facilities This Year                          -0.0001            0.0005
                                                                                (0.0003)           (0.0005)
                                   Facilities Next Year                                             -0.0006
                                                                                                   (0.0005)


                                   N                          92145           80050    92145        80118



Notes: All crimes consists of homicide, sexual assaults, aggravated assaults, simple assaults, robbery, larceny, burglary, and
motor vehicle theft. Felony-type crimes consists of homicide, sexual assaults, aggravated assaults, robbery, burglary, and motor
vehicle theft. We use social costs from McCollister, French, and Fang (2010). We set the social cost of simple assault equivalent
to 20% the cost of aggravated assaults consistent with Cohen and Piquero (2009). Column 1 reproduces the estimate shown in
Column 5 of Table 7. Columns 2–4 are based on the same model with the inclusion of the additional variables highlighted in
the table. Robust standard errors two-way clustered at the county and year levels are shown in parentheses. The regressions
are weighted by agency population coverage.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                         40
