                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    FIRMS’ MANAGEMENT OF INFREQUENT SHOCKS

                                     Benjamin L. Collier
                                    Andrew F. Haughwout
                                    Howard C. Kunreuther
                                   Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan
                                      Michael A. Stewart

                                      Working Paper 22612
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22612


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 2016, Revised April 2017




Previously circulated as "Firm Age and Size and the Financial Management of Infrequent
Shocks." We thank James Orr for facilitating the research collaboration, Gregory Niehaus and
Vish Viswanathan for helpful comments and suggestions, Nima Dahir and Juan Zhan for their
research assistance, the Outreach and Education Function at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York for providing the data, and the U.S. Small Business Administration for its data and insights.
This work is partially supported by the Zurich Insurance Foundation, the Center for Risk and
Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events (CREATE) at the University of Southern California
(U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Center of Excellence), the Travelers-Wharton
Partnership for Risk Management Fund, and the Wharton Risk Management and Decision
Processes Center. The views and opinions presented here are those of the authors, and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Benjamin L. Collier, Andrew F. Haughwout, Howard C. Kunreuther, Erwann O.
Michel-Kerjan, and Michael A. Stewart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Firms’ Management of Infrequent Shocks
Benjamin L. Collier, Andrew F. Haughwout, Howard C. Kunreuther, Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan,
and Michael A. Stewart
NBER Working Paper No. 22612
September 2016, Revised April 2017
JEL No. D22,G22,G28,G32,L25,Q54

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine businesses’ financial management of a rare, severe event using detailed firm-level
data collected following Hurricane Sandy in the New York area. Credit played a prominent role
in financing recovery; more negatively affected firms took on debt because of Sandy (38%) than
received insurance payments (15%) in our data. Negatively affected firms were often credit
constrained after the shock. While firms’ demand for insurance is often explained by financing
frictions, we find that the most credit constrained firms after the event, younger firms and smaller
firms, were the least likely to insure before it.


Benjamin L. Collier                              Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan
Department of Risk, Insurance,                   The Wharton School
 and Healthcare Management                       University of Pennsylvania
Fox School of Business                           Center for Risk Management
1801 Liacouras Walk                              3730 Walnut Street, 556 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19122                           Philadelphia, PA 19104-6340
collier@temple.edu                               erwannmk@wharton.upenn.edu

Andrew F. Haughwout                              Michael A. Stewart
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                 Federal Reserve Bank of NY
33 Liberty Street                                33 Liberty St.
New York, NY 10045                               New York, NY 10045
andrew.haughwout@ny.frb.org                      mstewart141@gmail.com

Howard C. Kunreuther
Operations and Information Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street, 500 JMHH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuther@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                                             Firms and Infrequent Shocks            1




1    Introduction

We examine businesses’ financial management decisions regarding an infrequent, severe risk.
Hurricane Sandy struck the New York area in the fall of 2012, and our data were collected one
year after the event in the affected area through a survey of businesses, which comprised detailed
questions regarding firms’ insurance and credit decisions. The surveyed businesses are small and
medium enterprises (SMEs), firms with 500 employees or fewer, and the data collection
procedures used stratified sampling by age, size, and industry so that the businesses in our
sample reflect the profile of firms in the New York area. We specifically consider how these
businesses financed losses from the event: whether they were insured, if the event increased their
demand for credit, and whether they could access credit. We find that the storm proved a
financial challenge for many firms with smaller firms and younger firms disproportionately
bearing the costs of the disaster.

SMEs play an important economic role. In the U.S., these businesses account for 50 percent of
employment (Caruso, 2015) and 45 percent of GDP (Kobe, 2012). 2 Recent media reports
highlight the vulnerability of these businesses to severe events (e.g., to major floods in North
Carolina, Price, 2016; in Louisiana, McWhirter and Simon, 2016; in the United Kingdom, BBC,
2015; and in Chennai, Ghosh and Kondapalli, 2016). Such cases are concerning not only for
these affected communities, but also because the frequency and severity of these events are
increasing.3 Severe weather risks may play a more prominent role in the success and failure of
SMEs in the future.



2
  SMEs are often called “small businesses” in the U.S. and commonly classified as businesses with fewer than 500
employees (SBA, 2014). All the businesses in our study and 99.7 percent of U.S. businesses fall into this category
(Caruso, 2015).
3
  Globally, natural disasters have caused $2.11 trillion in economic losses and 760,000 fatalities in the last decade
(2004 – 2013, Aon Benfield, 2015). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2013) cites increasing
evidence that extreme events including heat waves, severe rainfall, drought, and tropical cyclones are all expected to
increase by the late 21st century. Cummins, Suher, and Zanjani (2010) estimate that over the next 75 years the U.S.
government’s exposure alone to the cost of catastrophes could reach $7 trillion. Sandy caused more than $70 billion
                                                                           Firms and Infrequent Shocks          2




Several aspects of the enterprise would seem to motivate SMEs to finance severe risks through
insurance; however, research on the topic is surprisingly limited. First, while bankruptcy laws
transfer some of the consequences of failure from the owner, the wealth and livelihoods of many
SME owners are frequently tied to the well-being of the business (Herranz, Krasa, and Villamil,
2015). Thus, the firm’s risk management decisions may be heavily influenced by the owner’s
personal financial considerations, which we would expect to be guided by risk aversion. Second,
while large corporations are typically assumed to be risk-neutral, they often manage risk through
hedging and/or insuring, a practice that is frequently explained by financial frictions (e.g., higher
external financing costs in unfavorable states of the world, Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein, 1993;
Bolton, Chen, Wang, 2011; Amaya, Gauthier, and Léautier, 2015). Such financial frictions are
almost certainly greater for SMEs than large corporations and so would be expected to increase
their demand for insurance.4

We find that much of businesses’ losses from Sandy were not financed through insurance.
Hurricane Sandy had a negative financial impact on about one-third of the firms in our data. The
event damaged firms’ assets and disrupted their operations (e.g., through utilities outages and
customer relocation). Many negatively affected firms were uninsured: 29 percent had no
insurance of any kind. Moreover, insured businesses often did not have coverage for the kinds of
losses that Sandy created: 74 percent of businesses with property insurance, 72 percent with
business interruption insurance, and 52 percent of businesses with flood insurance reported that
none of their losses from the event had been covered by their insurance.

Credit played a prominent role in financing recovery for firms negatively affected by Sandy in
our data; more negatively affected firms took on debt because of Sandy (38 percent) than


in damages, making it the second costliest natural catastrophe in U.S. history, after Hurricane Katrina (NOAA HRD,
2014).
4
  For example, Khwaja and Mian (2008) assess businesses’ access to credit following an unanticipated liquidity
shortage: the government of Pakistan restricted withdrawals of dollar-denominated deposits following its nuclear
tests in 1998. Dollarized banks reduced lending. Large firms responded by finding credit at less affected banks;
however, smaller firms were generally unable to manage this transition and so borrowed less.
                                                                      Firms and Infrequent Shocks     3




received insurance payments (15 percent). Negatively affected firms were about twice as likely
as unaffected firms to apply for credit following the storm and exerted more effort, spending
more time completing credit applications. Businesses incurring large losses that were not
financed by insurance were significantly more likely to apply for credit than their counterparts
who received insurance payments.

We also find that Sandy tightened credit constraints: negatively affected firms were twice as
likely to report that their access to financing had decreased relative to the previous year. They
were 73 percent more likely to be required to secure loans with collateral and 2.5 times as likely
to experience interest rate increases as unaffected firms.

Thus, we find evidence of the financial frictions following Sandy that have been used to explain
why large corporations insure, but do not find that ex ante those frictions led SMEs to insure
against the risk of a severe storm. Recent research posits that it is opportunity costs rather than
financial frictions that most saliently explain firms’ risk management decisions (e.g., Rampini
and Viswanathan, 2010, 2013). Specifically in our context, insurance premiums dedicate firm
resources to managing a specific risk (e.g., property damage from a named peril) that preclude
their use in production or to manage other risks. The opportunity costs of insuring against rare
events are likely highest for smaller firms, which tend to be more productive than larger ones,
and for younger firms, which are exposed to many risks.5 Financial frictions also tend to be
greater for smaller firms and younger firms (e.g., Demirguc-Kunt, Love, and Maksimovic, 2006)
and so these two mechanisms create competing hypotheses regarding who is most likely to
insure – frictions predict that the small/young would insure while opportunity costs predict the
large/old. We exploit cross-firm variation in our data along the dimensions of age and size to
gain additional insights regarding firms’ risk management strategies.




5
 Young firms are often small (Caves, 1998); we find a Pearson correlation       between a firms’ age and
number of employees in our data.
                                                                            Firms and Infrequent Shocks           4




Size proxies a firm’s marginal productivity: controlling for age, smaller firms grow faster than
larger ones (Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson, 1989; Evans, 1987a, b). Rampini and Viswanathan
(2010) argue that more productive firms tend to curtail risk management in order to operate more
intensively, noting that “smaller firms, which are likely to be financially constrained, hedge less”
(p. 2294). Consequently, we predict that in our data, smaller firms will 1) be less likely to insure
and 2) have greater credit demand than larger firms, but also 3) face greater credit constraints
following a shock as they have less uncommitted capital.

Age proxies earnings uncertainty: young firms grow faster but also fail at higher rates than older
firms (Caves, 1998; Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2013; Thornhill and Amit, 2003). Young
firms face many existential threats related to managing internal financial and human resources
and external relationships with customers, suppliers, investors, and competitors (Thornhill and
Amit, 2003). We adopt Jovanovic’s (1982) learning model to explain how a firm’s earnings
expectations evolve. New firms do not know how profitable they will be relative to other firms;
however, experience over time clarifies these expectations thus reducing firms’ uncertainty. We
posit that younger firms will choose not to insure against rare events, which increases the
resources available to address the many, frequent risks that they face.6 The riskiness of young
firms may also affect their credit demand following a crisis: the prospect of a highly successful
start-up increases their willingness to borrow relative to their older counterparts, yet the greater
possibility of their failure decreases lenders’ willingness to fund them. Thus, we predict that
younger firms will 1) insure against rare events less often than older firms, 2) have greater credit
demand, and 3) face greater credit constraints.

We find that younger firms and smaller firms are significantly less likely than older firms and
larger firms to purchase insurance. For example, half of firms that were less than five years old


6
  Our predictions are consistent with Rochet and Villeneueve (2011) who develop a dynamic, theoretical model to
examine the liquidity risk of a firm with costly external financing and exposure to two risks, a Brownian risk that
can be hedged and a Poisson risk that can be insured. They show that firms that are vulnerable to liquidation due to
both risks will tend to hedge but not insure. Our theory adds to this by positing that the firm’s risk distribution
evolves systematically with age due to the dynamics identified by Jovanovic.
                                                                              Firms and Infrequent Shocks            5




reported having no insurance of any kind. Younger firms and larger firms are more likely to
apply for credit.7 Our results are generally consistent with predictions that younger firms and
smaller firms are more likely to experience financial frictions, though we find that age and size
affect different credit constraints. Larger, negatively affected firms are more likely than smaller
ones to receive all the credit that they requested, which seems to be explained, at least in part, by
their ability to secure loans with collateral. Younger, negatively affected firms are significantly
more likely than older ones to report higher external financing costs as their interest rates had
increased relative to the previous year. In sum, our findings on differences in insurance demand
across firms are more consistent with opportunity costs theory (Rampini and Viswanathan, 2010)
than financial frictions theory (Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein, 1993): the most financially
constrained firms after the event were the least likely to insure before it.

Our primary contribution is empirical: we provide detailed results on firms’ management of a
rare, severe event. The richness of our data allows for a more nuanced assessment than is
typically possible of how firms address their risk financing needs and how constraints differ after
a shock depending on firms’ characteristics. Moreover, our sample of SMEs comprises a distinct
group from the corporations typically studied regarding firms’ risk management. Our results add
to research on the opportunity costs of managing risk, finding size effects that have been shown
in other contexts8 and identifying age effects that help explain firms’ risk management decisions.
The age versus size distinction that we identify also complement recent findings on firms and


7
  We find one important deviation from model predictions: smaller, negatively affected firms are less likely to apply
for credit than larger ones in our sample. The empirical findings of Hurst and Pugsley (2011) provide a potential
explanation as they note that small firms comprise a combination of younger firms, some of which will grow
quickly, and a set of firms with owners for whom growth is not a priority. Rather than maximizing expected returns,
the behavior of this latter group, sometimes called “lifestyle firms,” is consistent with a risk averse owner. We show
that even these risk averse lifestyle firms may not insure against rare events since it reduces the financial resources
available to address more frequent shocks. Indeed, we find empirically that small, old firms, which act as a proxy for
lifestyle firms, are not more likely than other old firms to insure against catastrophes.
8
  For example, Nance, Smith, and Smithson (1993) use a survey of CEOs of Fortune 500 and S&P 400 firms and
COMPUSTAT data and find that the likelihood that firm uses financial hedges is increasing in size. Rampini, Sufi,
and Viswanathan (2014) examine fuel price hedging in the airline industry. They show in both between-firm and
within-firm models that hedging is increasing in an airline’s net worth.
                                                                 Firms and Infrequent Shocks       6




growth, which shows that young firms play a critical role in increasing economic productivity
and employment (e.g., Adelino, Ma, and Robinson, 2017; Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson,
2008, 2016; Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2013; Hurst and Pugsley, 2011). While much of
United States public policy has targeted firms by size, appropriate policies for the young may
differ from those of the small. For example, current U.S. disaster assistance to firms typically
occurs through ex post lending from the Small Business Administration (SBA), yet the volatile
earnings of young firms may preclude financing recovery through debt. Our results suggest that
the public sector could better meet firms’ needs through recognition of these distinctions, and we
conclude with several policy recommendations.


2     Theoretical Model and Hypotheses

We develop specific hypotheses on firms’ financial preparation for and management of
Hurricane Sandy. Here, we model a representative firm’s decision to insure against natural
disasters and expand this model in the Online Appendix to consider the firm’s borrowing
decisions. The firm is vulnerable to natural disaster losses as well as background risks, which for
concreteness we model as price risk, fluctuations in the price at which the firm can sell its goods.
Our model leverages the work of Jovanovic (1982) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2010) among
others but uses some simplifications tailored to our research questions. While we consider the
specific case of a severe disaster risk, our predictions related to firm size follow Rampini and
Viswanathan’s (2010) more general results. We extend Jovanovic’s model by showing that as
firms’ earnings uncertainty falls, their demand for insurance against rare events increases.

2.1    Model Setup

A representative firm is endowed with an initial stock of equity         and a unique production
technology        that is increasing and concave (                . The firm is a price taker, facing
demand risk as it sells its output at price      , which is unknown to the firm when it makes its
production decisions. The price is drawn randomly and follows the stationary probability density
function     . The firm does not observe its firm-specific price distribution, but observes market
                                                                           Firms and Infrequent Shocks          7




prices for a broad class of similar goods.9 The stationary distribution of market prices is                 , and
the variance of these market prices is greater than the variance of the firm’s price distribution.
Beginning with this market distribution as a prior, the firm updates its estimate of its price
distribution      as it observes draws from its actual price distribution              . The firm’s price and
market prices are normally distributed and truncated at zero. The firm also incurs a fixed
operating cost .

Besides price risk, the firm is also vulnerable to natural disasters, leading to losses . This
variable represents all losses from the disaster – property damage and business interruptions
(including effects on prices). Consequently, this disaster risk should be understood as
independent of the non-disaster price risk already discussed. The firm’s disaster risk distribution
is known and provided to the firm. The firm can insure an amount                  against the disaster, paying
premiums           for a contract with payout function                  . Any resources used to purchase
insurance cannot be used in production, leading to the constraint                                where     is the
assets used in production.

Firm rewards are positive if firm equity, revenues, and insurance payments are greater than the
firm’s costs and losses,                                     . If not, the firm is insolvent, declares
bankruptcy, and closes. The firm selects a sum insured to maximize the expectation of its value
function




9
  The observed market prices include businesses that have exited the market because the demand for their goods was
too low.
                                                                      Firms and Infrequent Shocks       8




Where               is the joint density of the firm’s estimated price distribution and the disaster loss
distribution. The critical price      is the price below which the firm would be insolvent. Similarly,
the critical loss     is the loss above which the firm would be insolvent.

2.2   Modeling Size and Age

Let a firm’s size be measured by its equity endowment so that a large firm has equity
where      is the endowment of the average sized firm. Let a firm’s age be measured by the
number of price draws that it has observed. A young firm, which has observed few price draws,
has an estimated price distribution closely resembling the market distribution,                     . An
older firm, which has observed more price draws, has an estimated price distribution             , which
is converging toward its actual price distribution                           . Thus, the estimated price
variance for the younger firm is greater than that of the older firm,                          . Assume
for comparison that the old firm is the average firm in the market such that the young and old
firm have the same expected price,                                .

2.3   First Order Condition

The representative firm’s first order condition is




It identifies three effects of the disaster insurance. In the first term, the firm considers the
marginal benefits relative to the marginal cost of insuring. This marginal cost includes premiums
(     and foregone investments (            ). The second and third terms show that insuring also
changes the firm’s expected value by affecting the critical disaster loss          and critical price   .
The intuitive result emerging from the second term is that increasing the sum insured allows the
                                                                                Firms and Infrequent Shocks              9




firm to survive a more severe disaster due to insurance payments. 10 The third term indicates that
insuring also reduces the firm’s resources available to manage price shocks; the critical price is
increasing in the coverage limit of the disaster insurance. 11 Thus, purchasing natural disaster
insurance increases the likelihood that the firm will become insolvent from a price shock.

2.4     Hypotheses

The presented model guides the three insurance-related hypotheses.

H1: Firms were insured against losses created by Hurricane Sandy. The first and second terms
of the model’s first order condition suggest that SMEs are likely to insure, with some caveats.
SMEs have several reasons to act as if they are risk averse such as the close connection between
the personal finances of the owner and those of the SME and because of financial frictions that
lead to risk averse actions in larger corporations. Still, risk aversion may be insufficient to
motivate insuring against disasters due to the third term, which shows that purchasing disaster
insurance increases its vulnerability to background risks such as the price shock. To illustrate,
consider the following value function, which is in the spirit of Roy’s (1952) safety-first criterion




where                    and         . This value function is concave in returns , but results in a
disutility if the firm fails. If this disutility of failure is large, whether the firm will insure against


10
     By the implicit function theorem,                                where                           from Equation 1d.

This derivative is positive when evaluated at the critical loss,                   . The numerator is negative: for an
outcome with a large disaster loss ( ), increasing the sum insured would increase insurance indemnities ( ) at a
greater rate than insurance premiums ( ). The denominator is also negative: a one-unit increase in the critical loss
will not result in an increase in insurance indemnities that is greater than one.

11
     From Equation 1c,                     . As ,    , and    are positive, this derivative is also positive as long as any
increase in the sum insured is priced at or above the actuarially fair rate.
                                                                 Firms and Infrequent Shocks       10




the disaster largely depends on the likelihood of failure due to a disaster relative to the likelihood
of failure due to background risks – a firm with large disaster exposures relative to other risks
would be likely to insure while others would not.

While frictions in the form of higher external financing costs during unfavorable states of the
world are perhaps the most commonly cited explanation for why firms insure, another important
literature notes that a firm’s debtholders may induce the firm to insure (e.g., Mayers and Smith,
1987; Caillaud, Dionne, and Jullien, 2000). Thus, a firm’s insurance purchases might not reflect
the risk management decisions of its owners, but serve as a financing requirement. Consequently,
we examine several types of insurance coverage: property, flood, and business interruption.
While mortgages and equipment loans often require property insurance on financed asset, we are
unaware of any borrowing requirements that firms insure against business interruptions.

H1a: Insuring against disasters is increasing in firm size. From the theoretical model, marginal
returns to production (     are larger for smaller firms, due to the concavity of the production
function, and so the first term in the first order condition replicates previous findings that smaller
firms have a higher opportunity cost of investing in risk management (Rampini and
Viswanathan, 2010).

H1b: Insuring against disasters is increasing in firm age. As younger firms experience greater
likelihood of failure due to many risks (Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2013; Thornhill and
Amit, 2003), we predict that younger firms are less likely to insure against infrequent events.
Doing so reduces their capacity to address more frequent shocks. In the theoretical model, the
probability of experiencing the critical price is higher for younger firms. Consequently, insuring
against natural disasters more meaningfully influences the likelihood of failure from a price
shock for younger firms than older ones.

We extend the presented model to consider the firm’s demand for credit and the lender’s
problem. While many readers may find these extensions intuitive from the mechanics described
above, we provide a detailed exposition in the Online Appendix.
                                                                Firms and Infrequent Shocks     11




H2: Sandy increased credit demand among negatively affected firms. As measures of credit
demand, we assess whether firms searched for credit, applied for credit, the types of products for
which they applied, and the time spent applying.

We predict that Sandy increased demand for credit as it provides a means to finance recovery.
Our model shows that firms borrow to replace assets that were lost in the disaster. Previous
research also indicates that disasters increase demand for credit among firms: Berg and Schrader
(2012) find that loan applications increased for an SME lender in Ecuador following volcanic
activity, and Chavaz (2015) finds that local banks increase SME lending in communities affected
by hurricanes in the United States.

H2a: Credit demand is decreasing in firm size. We predict that smaller, negatively affected firms
will have a greater demand for credit due to their higher marginal productivity relative to larger
ones.

H2b: Credit demand is decreasing in firm age. We predict that younger, negatively affected
firms will have a greater demand for credit than older ones. This demand among younger firms is
due to their greater perceived earnings risk. At a given interest rate, younger firms’ potential
success combined with bankruptcy protections if they fail increase the expected returns on
borrowing for younger firms relative to older ones.

H3: Sandy increased credit constraints among negatively affected firms. As measures of credit
constraints, we assess whether firms perceive that their access to financing had changed relative
to the previous year, their interest rates had increased during this time, they were required to
secured loans with collateral, and they received all the financing that they had requested.

In the lender’s problem, Sandy increases the default risk of negatively affected firms as it
reduces their income and assets. We also consider the potential of a delay in the information
available to the lender (e.g., it is using the firm’s most recent earnings reports or tax filings),
leading to informational asymmetries. The disaster may have affected firms in ways difficult for
lenders to assess, thereby increasing informational asymmetries. Lenders wanting to monitor
                                                                          Firms and Infrequent Shocks           12




borrowers more closely may also increase their use of collateral to achieve this objective (Rajan
and Winton, 1995). For example, Cerquiero, Ongena, and Roszbach (2016) find that, in response
to a reduction in the value of collateral, lenders monitor borrowers less, reduce the amount that
they lend to them, and increase their interest rates. Following these results, we posit that
negatively affected firms will increase their use of collateral to secure loans.12

H3a: Credit constraints are decreasing in firm size. We predict that smaller, negatively affected
firms will have less capacity to borrow than older firms. This prediction is also a result of the
higher marginal productivity of smaller firms, which motivates them to operate more intensively.
Larger firms are less likely to exhaust their debt capacity and so will be better able to borrow
after a shock.

H3b: Credit constraints are decreasing in firm age. We predict that younger, negatively affected
firms will experience greater credit constraints. The greater earnings risks of young firms reduce
their access to credit. Young firms are also especially prone to the information asymmetries that
we model, increasing credit constraints. Our disaster-specific predictions follow more general,
established theoretical findings (e.g., Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981) and are consistent with empirical
research suggesting that younger businesses are more sensitive to changes in credit market
conditions (Fort et al., 2013).




12
  Lenders might also lend less following disaster due to capital or liquidity constraints; however, recent evidence
suggests that local lenders in U.S markets are able to adjust to increase lending in affected markets (Chavaz, 2015;
Cortés and Strahan, 2015). For example, Cortés and Strahan (2015) examine mortgage lending following natural
disasters and find that banks increase mortgage lending in affected counties by adjusting in unaffected counties
where their market shares are low. These adjustments include lending less, increasing securitization of new
mortgages, and increasing short-term interest rates on deposits in unaffected counties.
                                                              Firms and Infrequent Shocks     13




3     Methods

3.1   Data

Our data comprise a cross-sectional survey of firms performed by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York (FBNY, 2014). Since 2010, the FBNY has conducted periodically the Small Business
Credit Survey, polling businesses with fewer than 500 employees in the New York area about
their financing. The survey included a series of questions regarding Hurricane Sandy in
November 2013, roughly one year after the event. The survey was administered online and
distributed by civic and non-profit institutions such as chambers of commerce. Respondents were
in Connecticut, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania. The survey and additional details on
the data collection methodology are available from the FBNY (2014). We include the specific
survey question in a footnote for each dependent variable that we assess below.

On October 29, 2012, Sandy made landfall along the New Jersey coast as a post-tropical storm.
The storm caused more than $70 billion in damages, becoming the second costliest such event in
U.S. history after Hurricane Katrina (NOAA HRD, 2014; see the Online Appendix for more on
the effects of Hurricane Sandy). We limit our focus to respondents in the disaster areas declared
by the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), counties that qualify for
individual and public assistance from the federal government. All New Jersey, New York City,
counties in the southeast of Hudson Valley, and the coastal counties in Connecticut were
considered disaster areas, a total of 38 counties overall. In these counties, 949 firms completed
the survey.

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics, comparing our sample to the population of firms in the
survey area (which includes both disaster and nondisaster counties). The degree to which our
sample represents the population of firms in the affected region is unclear and so warrants
additional consideration with respect to how our results generalize. The surveyors were largely,
but not fully, able to stratify the sample with respect to the distribution of age, size (in
employees), and industry of firms in the area. Firm participation may have been influenced by
the data collection process, as surveys were distributed by organizations such as chambers of
                                                              Firms and Infrequent Shocks    14




commerce and business and industry associations and participating firms were told that the
FBNY administered the survey. Also, the sample includes only firms that survived Sandy, as the
survey was conducted after the event. To the extent that Sandy caused firms to exit, our results
would tend to underestimate its effect.
                                                                          Firms and Infrequent Shocks          15




Table 1. Selected Characteristics of Firms in the Sample Compared to the Population of Firms in the Region, Fall
2013

                                                           Disaster County     Total Weighted
                                                               Sample            Population
                      Firm Count                                 949              1,129,211
                      Firm Age
                           0-2 years                            15.6%               22.4%
                           3-5 years                            14.4%               16.7%
                           6-10 years                           19.1%               20.0%
                           11-20 years                          22.2%               23.4%
                           20+ years                            28.7%               17.6%
                      Firm Size
                           1-4 employees                        50.8%               57.3%
                           5-9 employees                        18.9%               18.0%
                           10-19 employees                      13.7%               12.0%
                           20-99 employees                      14.9%               10.7%
                           100-499 employees                    1.8%                2.0%
                      Industry
                           Agriculture                          0.2%                0.1%
                           Construction                         16.1%               8.8%
                           Manufacturing                        6.4%                3.8%
                           Retail                               9.6%                14.7%
                           Wholesale/Transportation             8.6%                8.5%
                           Information/Media/Telecom            4.2%                1.9%
                           Finance/Insurance/Real Estate        5.4%                10.3%
                           Professional & Business              20.4%               11.3%
                      Services
                           Personal Services                     3.0%               10.8%
                           Education/Healthcare & Soc.           6.8%               12.8%
                      Assist.
                           Leisure & Hospitality                7.1%                11.0%
                           Other                                12.1%               6.2%




Table 2. Firm Size by Age Quartiles

                                                    Employee Summary Statistics
       Age Quartile              Mean              Median         S.D.                 Coeff. of Variation
       First                       3.6               2.0                4.0                     1.1
       Second                      8.9               3.0                25.0                    2.8
       Third                      12.9               5.0                25.5                    2.0
       Fourth                     24.9               9.5                43.1                    1.7
Note: Firms unaffected by Hurricane Sandy. The coefficient of variation is the S.D. divided by the mean.
                                                                      Firms and Infrequent Shocks         16




Table 2 examines the relationship between firm age and size in our data using firms in the
sample that were unaffected by Sandy. Firm size is typically measured in number of employees
or, sometimes, revenues (e.g., SBA, 2014); we use number of employees. 13 The youngest firms
are almost always small, but small firms are not necessarily young. A firm’s age is positively
correlated with its size as measured by number of employees (Pearson’s r = 0.34) and revenues (r
= 0.49).

3.2   Identification

Firms report whether they were financially positively affected, negatively affected, or unaffected
by Hurricane Sandy. 14 We take being negatively affected by Hurricane Sandy to be an
exogenous shock to the firm financing outcomes that we study here. Consider the model of
outcome      (e.g., whether a firm applied for credit) for firm




where      indicates being negatively affected by Sandy,        is a vector controls and     an error term.
This model provides the effect of being negatively affected by Sandy                        , but only if
                                .

One could imagine that, in contrast to Sandy being an exogenous event, firms relying on
expensive financing products such as credit cards before the event might be more likely to report
being negatively affected. As a proxy for pre-event firm financing, we use the firm’s original
funding profile and test whether a firm’s original funding is related to whether it was negatively


13
   A firm’s number of employees are likely less volatile than its revenues for several reasons, including the
transaction costs of hiring and firing employees.
14
  The specific wording is “Was your business financially affected by Superstorm Sandy?” with response options
“Yes, overall positively affected,” “Yes, overall negatively affected,” and “No, not significantly affected.”
                                                                              Firms and Infrequent Shocks   17




affected by Sandy. Firms were asked to identify all sources of funding that they used to start their
business (e.g., business loans, personal savings, etc.). The financing outcome variables in
Columns 1 through 4 of Table 3 are the focus of our analyses of credit demand and credit access.
Each is binary and discussed in Section 4. Using data from firms outside the disaster area that
reported they were unaffected by Sandy, we find that a firm’s original funding is related to these
financing outcomes and so a firm’s original funding would seem to be a relevant proxy for pre-
event financing for firms in the disaster area.15

Column 5 shows that, in FEMA disaster counties, a firm’s original funding source is unrelated to
whether it was negatively affected by Hurricane Sandy. Based on these analyses, we conclude
that being negatively affected by Sandy is unrelated to a firm’s financing before the event, and so
treat the group of firms in the disaster counties that reported that they were unaffected by Sandy
as a control group for testing our hypotheses.

Column 5 also shows that older firms are more likely to report being negatively affected at
marginally significant levels. On average, each year a firm operates increases its likelihood of
being negatively affected by Sandy by 0.2 percentage points. This result could occur if younger
negatively affected firms were truncated from the data because they did not survive. Such
censoring would make our estimates of the effect of age in these data a lower bound.




15
     Ninety-two percent of firms outside the disaster area reported that they were unaffected by Sandy.
                                                                            Firms and Infrequent Shocks            18




Table 3. Negatively Affected By Sandy and Original Funding Type
                                                                                                        In Disaster
                                                          Outside Disaster Area
                                                                                                           Area
                                              (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)              (6)
                                                        I(Access to       I(Interest
                                           I(Applied                                                   I(Negatively
                                                         Financing           Rate      I(Collateral)
                                          for Credit)                                                    Affected)
                                                        Decreased)       Increased)
I(Original Funding: Business Loan)         0.0349         0.00142         -0.00575      0.307***         0.000523
                                           (0.048)        (0.046)          (0.031)       (0.076)          (0.054)

I(Original Funding: Credit Cards)          0.169**       0.138**          0.0702         0.0131          0.00332
                                           (0.078)       (0.068)          (0.51)         (0.059)         (0.053)

I(Original Funding: Personal Savings)     -0.00823      0.000870          -0.0481        -0.0873         -0.0100
                                           (0.062)       (0.049)          (0.060)        (0.072)         (0.058)

I(Original Funding: Friends and Family)    -0.0215       0.0691           0.121**        0.0609         -0.000979
                                           (0.067)       (0.047)          (0.053)        (0.068)         (0.034)

I(Original Funding: Other)                 0.0712        -0.00996        -0.00332        0.133*          0.0840
                                           (0.079)        (0.058)         (0.057)        (0.080)         (0.077)

Age                                       -0.000981     -0.000255        0.000104        0.00119         0.00241*
                                           (0.001)       (0.001)          (0.001)        (0.002)         (0.0012)

Employees                                 0.000976      0.0000527        -0.000673     0.00264***       -0.000293
                                           (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.0007)        (0.001)
Obs.                                         479            485              468            469            776
Rsq                                         0.240          0.261            0.298          0.386          0.089

Note: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses. Linear probability models with White’s
(1980) heteroskedastically-consistent standard errors culstered at county. Models include industry and county fixed
effects. Columns 1 through 4 use data from firms outside the disater area that reported being unaffected by Sandy;
Column 5 uses responses from firms in the disaster area. In Column 2, respondents reported on their firms’ access to
financing comparing 2013 to 2012.

3.3    Estimation

Our outcome variables are typically binary and unless otherwise noted we report linear
probability models with White’s (1980) heteroskedastically-consistent standard errors clustered
by county. 16 Linear probability models provide a straightforward way of interpreting model
intercepts, indicator variables, and interaction terms, which we frequently do in our analyses. We


16
  Model errors may be correlated by country and/or industry. Our data include 38 counties and only 12 industries so
we use county clusters to improve estimation of the coefficients’ variance matrix (Cameron and Miller, 2015). We
examined models without clustering and clustering by industry; each lead to qualitatively similar results.
                                                                  Firms and Infrequent Shocks    19




also estimated the regressions below as logit models, and those results support the narrative
below and conclusions with respect to our hypotheses.

The regressions related to insurance take two forms. Only firms that were affected by Sandy
were asked about their insurance protection; our models of insurance decisions only include
negatively affected firms. First, we examine the effects of age and size, binning firms by quartile
for firm and outcome       (e.g., whether a firm has property insurance)




where, for example,                       is the indicator function for whether firm is in the first
age quartile. Parameters     and     are county and industry fixed effects, respectively. In these
regressions, the oldest firms and largest firms serve as reference groups. In a second model of
insurance decisions, we include a full set of age by employee quartile interactions




where                  is the indicator function for whether firm has insurance of any kind. In
this regression, the oldest, largest firms serve as the reference group.

Our regressions related to credit demand and constraints rely primarily on the following
estimation model to examine the consequences of being negatively affected by Hurricane Sandy
for firm and outcome       (e.g., whether a firm’s interest rates increased)
                                                                 Firms and Infrequent Shocks     20




where           ,       , and       are indicators, respectively, for whether a firm was negatively
affected, unaffected, or positively affected by Sandy. Our regressions include an indicator for
positively affected firms for completeness, but these firms are not a focus of our analysis.

We are interested in two aspects of these interaction terms. First, we consider whether the
interaction term is different from zero. For example, a negative and significant interaction of age
and negatively affected indicates that, among negatively affected firms, young ones are more
likely to report an outcome (e.g., applied for credit) than older firms                . We would
understand from this result that the shock disproportionately challenged young firms. In some
cases, the event may operate through pre-existing differences: all negatively affected firms are
more likely to apply for credit (captured in    ) and young firms, which apply at greater rates than
olders ones under normal conditions, apply at similarly greater rates after the shock (i.e.,
          . Second, we consider whether age (or size) influences unaffected and negatively
affected firms differently (such that          ). In these cases, the shock would seem to exacerbate
pre-existing dynamics observed among unaffected firms.

We construct the model’s intercept      to facilitate comparisons between negatively affected and
unaffected firms. We constrain the county and industry fixed effects so that                    and

               . Also, we standardize age and size (i.e., they are demeaned and divided by their
standard deviation). Given this construction, the intercept represents the average unaffected firm
in our data.

Finally, in the Appendix, we consider whether a firm’s insurance payments affect its credit
demand following Sandy. These regressions extend the model described in Equation 5 and
compare the credit demand of mutually-exclusive subgroups of negatively affected firms. The
relationship between insurance payment and credit demand may depend on the magnitude of loss
sustained by the firm. Therefore, we include additional terms interacting the magnitude of the
loss with whether insured firms received an insurance payment
                                                                           Firms and Infrequent Shocks   21




where “ ” represents all the elements on the right-hand side of Equation 5. Negatively affected
firms reported a median loss amount of around $25,000. We divide the sample at $25,000,
calling firms that sustained losses of less than or equal to this amount “small loss” firms and
those with losses greater than this amount “large loss” firms. The term                         is a dummy
set indicating the percent of losses paid by insurance (None (0%), Some (<50%), etc.). “No
Insurance” is an indicator for firms reporting that they do not have any form of insurance.

While our sample includes 949 firms, our observations notably differ across regressions.
Differences in observations are largely because the questions asked of each firm depend on its
prior responses. For example, only firms that applied for credit were asked how much time they
spent applying. In some cases, observations also change because firms elected not to answer
certain questions; however, we cannot identify a pattern in these missing observations that is
relevant to our analysis.

3.4      Firms Negatively Affected by Sandy and Their Financing Needs

One-third of the firms in the disaster counties report being negatively affected by Hurricane
Sandy in our data. Firms in New Jersey and New York City were significantly more likely to be
negatively affected than those in Connecticut or New York State. Firms in the leisure and
hospitality industries were more likely to be negatively affected than those in other industries.17

Negatively affected firms report a combination of effects on their incomes and balance sheets: 82
percent report that revenue decreased, 55 percent that expenses increased, 42 percent that assets
decreased, and 39 percent that debt increased. Negatively affected firms estimated the financial
loss in dollars that they incurred from Sandy and were asked to select up to two causes of loss

17
     Firms in construction most commonly reported being positively affected by Sandy.
                                                                          Firms and Infrequent Shocks           22




from a list (categories shown in Table 4). We scale the loss amount by the number of employees
to increase the comparability of losses across firms. 18 Firms most frequently cited customer
disruptions (e.g., customers evacuating or changing spending habits due to the storm), but the
largest magnitude losses stemmed from damage to assets (see Table 4). Firms were also given
the opportunity to write in other sources of loss, but no additional categories emerged.

Table 4. Firm Loss Source and Magnitude of Loss from Sandy
                                              Reported Loss Amount per Employee (by Percentile)
      Loss Source      Frequency         P10         P25          P50           P75              P90
      Assets              29.7%          $3,289      $4,688      $12,500       $25,000          $75,000
      Utilities            43.6%          $921         $1,786        $5,000         $11,667         $25,000
      Supplier             12.5%         $1,000        $2,206        $5,417          $9,375         $18,750
      Customer             61.2%         $1,167        $2,500        $6,250         $17,500         $37,500
      Gasoline             11.4%         $1,346        $2,174        $5,000          $8,750         $17,500
      Other                8.4%           $438         $1,750        $7,000         $25,000         $75,000

Note: Firms negatively affected by Hurricane Sandy


Among negatively affected firms, 77 percent report an immediate financing need created by the
event. Firms were asked to report their most important financing need “experienced in the
aftermath of Superstorm Sandy.” The most frequent financing needs reported by negatively
affect firms were meeting operating expenses (34 percent of firms), making capital investments
(11 percent), and repositioning business to meet changing customer demand (10 percent).




18
   The specific wording of the loss amount question is “What was the total value of your business’s estimated
financial losses from Superstorm Sandy?” with response options (1) Less than $10,000, (2) $10,000 - $25,000, (3)
$25,001 - $50,000, (4) $50,001 - $100,000, (5) $100,001 - $250,000, and (6) Greater than $250,000. To scale the
loss amount by the number of employees, we take the midpoint of each bin: if a firm answers (1), we code this value
as $5,000. In any regression in which we include our transformed debt (which has a similar response set) or loss
amount variables, we include dummies to identify top-coded firms (if the firm answers (6) in the above), called “top
loss.”
                                                                          Firms and Infrequent Shocks        23




4     Results

This section describes our findings related to each of the hypotheses developed in Section 2.
Table 5 serves as a guide, summarizing our hypotheses and our conclusions.

Table 5. Summary of Hypotheses and Conclusions

        Hypothesis                                                                  Conclusion
        H1: Firms were insured against losses created by Hurricane Sandy.           Not supported
        H1a: Insuring against disasters is increasing in firm size.                 Supported
        H1b: Insuring against disasters is increasing in firm age.                  Supported
        H2: Sandy increased credit demand among negatively affected firms.          Supported
        H2a: Credit demand is decreasing in firm size.                              Not supported
        H2b: Credit demand is decreasing in firm age.                               Supported
        H3: Sandy increased credit constraints among negatively affected firms.     Supported
        H3a: Credit constraints are decreasing increasing in firm size.             Partially supported
        H3b: Credit constraints are decreasing in firm age.                         Partially supported

4.1    H1: Firms Were Insured Against Losses Created by Sandy

We find that insurance played a small role in addressing losses these firms incurred from Sandy.
Firms affected by Sandy in our sample were asked the types of insurance that they had in place
when the event occurred and the percent of losses recovered through insurance.19 Among insured
firms, property insurance was the most common response. Twenty-nine percent of negatively
affected firms reported not having insurance (Table 6).

Across all types of insurance, firms most frequently reported that none of their losses were
recovered through insurance claims (Table 6). This finding does not seem to be the result of slow
claims resolution: while some claims may have remained unsettled at the time of the survey
(November 2013), 93 percent of insurance claims in New Jersey and New York had been settled

19
  Firms affected by Sandy were asked “Which types of insurance did your business have at the time of Superstorm
Sandy? Select all that apply” and could choose from response options “property insurance,” “flood insurance,”
“business disruption insurance,” “no insurance,” and “other, please specify.”
                                                                         Firms and Infrequent Shocks         24




by April 2013 (Insurance Information Institute, 2013). Instead, this result seems broadly
consistent with repeated findings that a notable proportion of disasters losses remain uninsured
even in the most developed insurance markets. For example, Swiss Re (2013) estimates that
approximately half ($35 billion) of the total losses from Sandy were uninsured.

The low level of insurance payments seems to be explained by the types of losses created by a
severe storm or hurricane, which may differ from the protections provided by the most common
forms of insurance. Sandy was not a hurricane when it made landfall and so assets losses were
likely from flood. Commercial property insurance policies in the U.S. vary regarding whether
they cover flood as businesses can purchase flood insurance from the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP, Quintero, 2014). Flood insurance from the NFIP protects against flood-related
property losses; it does not cover flood-related business interruptions. All the businesses with
flood insurance that did not receive any insurance payments reported that they did not have
property damage from Sandy. Their losses came from customer and utility disruptions. While a
variety of business interruption policies exist, many types require that the firms’ property be
physically damaged and that the claimed financial loss from interruption is due to a shutdown
from this damage and not other factors such as economic conditions (Lesser, 2016). These
requirements also seem to poorly match the losses stemming from customer and utility
disruptions commonly reported by negatively affected firms (Section 3.4).

Table 6. Insurance and Loss Recovery After Sandy Among Negatively Affected Firms
                                                             Reported Fraction of Loss
                                                            Recovered Through Insurance
      Insurance               Frequency          None             Some             Most            All
      Property Insurance        54.1%            73.8%            18.3%            6.3%           1.6%
      Flood Insurance           11.9%            51.7%            31.0%           17.2%           0.0%
      Biz. Dis. Insurance       30.0%            72.2%            16.7%            8.3%           2.8%
      No Insurance              28.9%           100.0%               -               -              -

Note: 270 firms reported having insurance and 170 specified a recovery amount. For fraction of loss recovered,
some/most refers to a loss recovery of less/more than 50%. Data on firms negatively affected by Hurricane Sandy.


While we do not find support for Hypothesis 1 that firms tended to insure against losses created
by Sandy, we do find support for Hypotheses 1a and 1b, that the likelihood of insuring increases
                                                                            Firms and Infrequent Shocks            25




in firm age and firm size. Table 7 (Columns 1-4) reports results for negatively affected firms.
This table divides firms into quartiles by age and by size (the number of employees), using the
oldest firms and largest firms as reference groups. 20 Firms less than five years old are 30
percentage points more likely to be uninsured relative to the oldest firms. Young firms and small
firms are less likely to insure against property damage and business interruptions. The effects of
age seem to be incremental – even firms in the third age quartile (12 to 23 years old) insure
significantly less than the oldest firms. Size tends to divide firms relatively evenly at the median,
such that below-median firms are about 25 percentage points less likely to have any form of
insurance than above-median ones. Less than 12 percent of the firms in our sample insure against
floods; those that do tend to be larger.




20
  The four age categories are 1) firms less than 5 years old, 2) firms 5 to 11 years old, 3) firms 12 to 23 years old,
and 4) firms greater than 23 years old. Similarly, the four employee (firm size) categories are 1) firms with 1
employee, 2) firms with 2 or 3 employees, 3) firms with 4 to 11 employees, and 4) firms with more than 11
employees.
                                                                          Firms and Infrequent Shocks           26




Table 7. Effects of Age and Size on Insurance Uptake Among Negatively Affected Firms
                                        (1)             (2)        (3)                 (4)
                                                               I(Business
                                 I(Insurance    I(Property                            I(Flood
                                                              Interruption
                                    (Any))      Insurance)                          Insurance)
                                                               Insurance)
                                             th
                  Reference Group: Firms in 4 Age and Employees Quartiles

                  I(Age)
                  1st Quartile       -0.299**        -0.362**       -0.234***        -0.0341
                                      (0.121)         (0.164)         (0.083)        (0.071)

                  2nd Quartile        -0.104         -0.136**         -0.144         0.00619
                                     (0.066)          (0.066)        (0.089)         (0.067)

                  3rd Quartile       -0.157**        -0.238**         -0.103         -0.0126
                                      (0.072)         (0.115)        (0.079)         (0.061)
                  I(Employees)
                  1st Quartile       -0.252**        -0.240**        -0.184**         -0.117
                                      (0.087)         (0.099)         (0.072)        (0.081)

                  2nd Quartile       -0.245**        -0.211**        -0.161*         -0.135*
                                      (0.092)         (0.090)        (0.086)         (0.073)

                  3rd Quartile        0.0137         -0.00704        -0.0464         -0.0629
                                     (0.0897)         (0.079)        (0.076)         (0.061)
                  Obs.                  273             273            273             273
                  Rsq.                 0.31             0.28           0.27            0.27

Note: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses. I( ) is the indicator function. Linear
probability models with White’s (1980) heteroskedastically-consistent standard errors clustered at county. These
models only include firms negatively affected by Sandy and follow Equation 3. All models include industry and
county fixed effects.

Table 8 complements the results from Table 7 by examining the full set of age quartile and
employee quartile interactions for a model of whether a firm has any form of insurance. The
model follows Equation 4 and only includes firms negatively affected by Sandy. The reference
group is the oldest, largest firms (firms in the fourth quartile for both age and employees). For
each age quartile by employee quartile interaction, the table reports the model coefficient,
standard error, and number of observations of firms in that category. The table is shaded such
that darker cells reflect lower values.
                                                                          Firms and Infrequent Shocks            27




The pattern of darker cells in the top-left section of the table confirms the results from Table 7
that age and size each contribute to insurance decisions. For example, among the youngest group
of firms, those in the first, second, and third size quartiles are all significantly less likely to insure
than the reference group (shown in the first column); a similar pattern is found for the smallest
firms (shown in the first row). Combining size and age effects, the smallest, youngest firms are
50 percentage points less likely to have any form of insurance than the oldest, largest ones.21




21
   Old, small firms serve as a proxy for lifestyle firms. In the Online Appendix, we model these lifestyle firms as
risk averse and show that even these firms may choose not to insure against infrequent events because doing so
reduces resources available for more moderate shocks. Consistent with our predictions, we find that these old, small
firms are no more likely to insure than old firms that are larger.

The coefficient value for firms in the first size and second age quartiles (-0.270) appears large relative to its
neighbors. It is marginally significantly different (p = 0.09) from the coefficient for firms in the first size and
third age quartiles (-0.518). In the former, 13 out of 25 firms are insured while 10 out of 20 are insured in the
latter. The former is otherwise not significantly different from its neighbors.
                                                                                         Firms and Infrequent Shocks    28




Table 8. Age and Size Interactions from Model of Whether a Firm Has Any Insurance
             Dependent variable: I(Insurance (any))
                                                                            I(Age Quartile)
                                                              First      Second        Third    Fourth     Total Obs.
                                                Coeff.     -0.480***   -0.270*** -0.518***       -0.240
                                     First      St. Err.     (0.112)     (0.097)     (0.105)    (0.207)
                                                 Obs.           27          25          20          8         80
            I(Employee Quartile)




                                                Coeff.      -0.436**    -0.492**     -0.289*     -0.233
                                    Second      St. Err.     (0.204)     (0.191)     (0.155)    (0.207)
                                                 Obs.           13          11          14         12         50
                                                Coeff.     -0.416***      -0.041     -0.0244      0.098
                                     Third      St. Err.     (0.143)     (0.160)     (0.079)    (0.078)
                                                 Obs.           19          11          23         19         72
                                                Coeff.        0.127       -0.056      -0.145   Reference
                                    Fourth      St. Err.     (0.107)     (0.078)     (0.109)     Group
                                                 Obs.           2           11          27         31          71
                                   Total Obs.                   61          58          84         70         273

Note: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. I( ) is the indicator function. Output from linear probability model of
whether a firm has any form of insurance with White’s (1980) heteroskedastically-consistent standard errors
clustered at county. The model follows Equation 4, only includes firms negatively affected by Sandy, and includes
industry and county fixed effects. This regression model has a full set of interaction terms. The reference group is
the oldest, largest firms (fourth quartiles for both age and employees). For each age quartile by employee quartile
interaction, the table reports the model coefficient, standard error (in parentheses), and number of observations of
firms in that category. Table shading is such that darker cells reflect lower values. The model has an R squared of
0.34.

4.2    H2: Sandy Increased Credit Demand

Negatively affected firms were more likely to search and apply for credit and put forth more
effort doing so. We consider whether firms searched for credit, applied for credit, the types of
products for which they applied, and the time spent applying. Table 9 provides the results for all
outcome variables related to Hypotheses 2 and 3 and follow Equation 5. The first row shows the
model intercept, which describes the results for the average unaffected firm in our data (as
described in Section 3.3). The next row shows the consequences of the shock for negatively
affected firms. The following rows show the effects of firms’ age and size for unaffected and
                                                                               Firms and Infrequent Shocks        29




negatively affected firms. These regressions also include controls for positively affected firms
and county and industry fixed effects.22

Being negatively affected by Sandy increased the likelihood that a firm searched for credit by 70
percent        (Table     9,    Column       1,
                               ).23 About 29 percent of unaffected firms searched for credit compared to
half of negatively affected firms                                       . Younger, negatively affected firms were
marginally significantly more likely to search for credit than older ones.

Negatively affected firms were also almost twice as likely to apply for credit (Table 9, Column
2).24 The likelihood of applying for credit is 21 percent for unaffected firms compared to 39
percent of negatively affected firms (                                                                             ).
Among those negatively affected, it is the young firms and the large firms that are more likely to
apply for credit. For example, being one standard deviation larger than the average firm increases
a negatively affected firm’s likelihood of applying for credit by 8 percentage points. Firms that
did not apply for credit were asked why they did not, and negatively affected and unaffected
firms reported similar responses: about a third are debt averse, a third believe they are unlikely to
be approved, and a third do not need credit.

Regarding types of credit, negatively affected firms were significantly more likely to apply for
commercial loans, increasing the likelihood by about 15 percentage points (Column 3).25 Sandy
did not increase applications for credit cards; however, negatively affected and unaffected young

22
   We also tested three-way interaction terms of age, size, and whether firms were negatively affected by Sandy.
Those terms had almost no impact on the age and size coefficients reported in Table 9 and provided few additional
insights. Because of the difficulty of interpreting three-way interaction terms, we have omitted them from the
regressions reported here.
23
     “Did your business search for credit in the first half of 2013?”
24
     “Did your business apply for credit in the first half of 2013?”

25
  “Which types of credit products did your business apply for in the first half of calendar year 2013?” with response
options “Business loan,” “Line of credit,” “Credit card,” and “Other, please specify.”
                                                                           Firms and Infrequent Shocks            30




firms alike are significantly more likely to apply for credit cards to address their financing needs
(Column 4).26

Negatively affected firms also put forth more effort when applying for credit, characterized by
the hours they spent.27 Firms that receive all the credit for which they apply may stop searching
for credit and so we limit our regressions on effort applying to those firms that did not receive all
the credit for which they applied. During the first half of 2013, the average unaffected firm spent
about 15 hours completing applications. Among firms that did not receive all the financing they
requested, negatively affected ones spent more than twice as long (Column 5). Younger firms
and larger firms tended to spend more time applying for credit than older ones and smaller ones.

In the Appendix, we examine whether insurance payments affect credit demand. We find that
insurance payments significantly reduced the likelihood that firms incurring above-median losses
searched and applied for credit. Insurance payments did not significantly affect credit demand
among firms that experienced below-median losses.

In sum, we conclude that these results support H2 that Sandy increased the credit demand of
negatively affected firms. It significantly increased the likelihood that these firms searched and
applied for credit and they spent more time doing so. We also find support for H2b, that credit
demand is decreasing in the age of negatively firms. Compared to older negatively affected
firms, young negatively affected firms are more likely to apply for credit, to invest more hours
applying, and to adopt more expensive sources of financing such as credit cards.



26
   We also examined applications for lines of credit. About 75 percent of firms applying for credit applied for lines
of credit. Among firms applying for credit, a firm’s age, size, and being negatively affected by Sandy do not
significantly affect a firm’s likelihood of applying for a line of credit.
27
   “When applying for credit in the first half of 2013, approximately how many total hours did your business spend
researching and completing credit applications?”
                                                               Firms and Infrequent Shocks    31




We do not find support for hypotheses H2a, that credit demand is decreasing in the size of
negatively affected firms. Instead, compared to smaller negatively affected firms, larger
negatively affected firms are more likely to apply for credit and spend more time doing so, which
may be a function of their likelihood of being approved, as we show in the next section. That
small negatively affected firms do not apply for credit goes against our prediction based on the
insights of Rampini and Viswanathan (2010). One plausible explanation follows from the
demographic research of Hurst and Pugsley (2011): an important subset of small businesses is
guided by non-pecuniary rewards such as the owner’s amenity value of being self-employed. As
shown in the Online Appendix, avoiding or limiting the use of credit in this context can be
consistent with the behavior of a risk averse utility maximizing owner.
                                                                                                                            Firms and Infrequent Shocks               32




Table 9 Effects of Sandy on Credit Demand and Access

                                   (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)            (8)             (9)             (10)
                                                                                                                                                            I(Received
                                                                        I(Applied               I(Access to    I(Interest                   I(Collateral,
                               I(Searched     I(Applied    I(Applied                 Number                                                                  All Credit
                                                                        for Credit               Financing        Rate      I(Collateral)    Bus. Real
                               for Credit)   for Credit)   for Loans)                of Hours                                                                Financing
                                                                          Cards)                Decreased)    Increased)                       Estate)
                                                                                                                                                            Requested)
Intercept                      0.291***      0.214***      0.515***     0.322***     15.26*     0.165***      0.0769***      0.215***          0.0332        0.333***
                               (0.0234)      (0.0209)      (0.0300)     (0.0464)     (8.383)    (0.0195)       (0.0168)      (0.0344)         (0.0279)        (0.0396)

I(Neg. Affected)               0.201***      0.177***      0.150**       0.0525      20.36**    0.164***      0.113***       0.156***       0.0703***         0.0187
                               (0.0517)      (0.0391)      (0.0588)     (0.0664)     (9.858)    (0.0280)      (0.0229)       (0.0290)        (0.0187)        (0.0578)

Age x I(Unaffected)            -0.0654**      -0.0154      -0.0739*     -0.107***    -10.65      -0.00609     0.00113          0.0251          0.0116       0.0975**
                                (0.0284)      (0.0274)     (0.0388)      (0.0377)    (6.918)     (0.0264)     (0.0170)        (0.0255)        (0.0123)      (0.0391)

Age x I(Neg. Affected)          -0.0698*     -0.0736**     0.00791      -0.165***    -12.67**    -0.0122      -0.0521**        0.0245         0.0378*         0.0251
                                (0.0381)      (0.0333)     (0.0649)      (0.0573)     (5.662)    (0.0383)      (0.0230)       (0.0225)        (0.0199)       (0.0753)

Employees x I(Unaffected)        0.0188        0.0307       0.0504       0.0456       18.83      -0.0122      -0.0226*       0.0740**        0.0413**       0.0410**
                                (0.0240)      (0.0228)     (0.0451)     (0.0499)     (23.77)     (0.0155)     (0.0128)       (0.0303)        (0.0181)       (0.0184)

Employees x I(Neg. Affected)    0.00296      0.0824**      -0.0592       0.0270      16.71**     -0.0256      0.00790        0.123***        0.152***        0.154**
                                (0.0309)     (0.0373)      (0.0481)     (0.0747)     (8.188)     (0.0287)     (0.0493)       (0.0237)        (0.0233)        (0.0665)

Obs.                              829           830          275          275          188         834           808            793             790            273
Rsqr                              0.12          0.12         0.29         0.25         0.32        0.11          0.08          0.179            0.28           0.26

Note: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses. I( ) is the indicator function. All models have binary dependent variables except for
“Number of Hours” and are linear probability models. All models report White’s (1980) heteroskedastically-consistent standard errors clustered at county,
include industry and county fixed effects, and full interactions for positively affected firms, as described in Equation 5. Models are constructed so that the
intercept value represents the average unaffected firm in the data. Columns 3, 4, and 10 only include firms that applied for credit. Column 5 only includes firms
that applied for credit but did not get all the credit that they requested. Columns 8 and 9 include all firms with outstanding debt.
                                                                             Firms and Infrequent Shocks      33




4.3      H3: Sandy Increased Credit Constraints

We also find that credit markets tightened for negatively affected firms. We consider whether
firms perceive that their access to financing had changed relative to the previous year, their
interest rates had increased during this time, they were required to secured loans with collateral,
and they received all the financing that they had requested.

Table 9 shows the results for these regressions, which follow Equation 5. While 39 percent of
these firms report taking on more debt because of Sandy, negatively affected firms were also
more twice as likely as unaffected firms to report that their access to financing had decreased
relative to the previous year (Table 9, Column 6,
                                                         ). 28 About one-third of negatively affected firms
report that their access decreased (                                                                            .
This difference in credit access is not explained by negatively affected firms using significantly
more credit: negatively affected and unaffected firms had similar leverage ratios at the time of
the survey.29

These credit constraints seem to be caused by several factors, including higher interest rates and
collateral requirements for negatively affected firms. Negatively affected firms are more than
twice as likely as unaffected firms to report that their interest rate increased relative to the
previous year (Table 9, Column 7).30 Approximately 8 percent of unaffected firms report that
their rates increased, compared to 19 percent of negatively affected firms. Small business interest
rates were generally declining during this time: the interest rates on SBA 20-year major asset and
real estate loans (CDC/504 loans) decreased by 40 basis points from an average rate of 4.7

28
  “How has your business’s ability to access financing changed when comparing the first half of 2013 to the same
period in 2012?”
29
  We model leverage as both a firm’s debt (in $10,000) divided by its revenues and by its number of employees. In
both cases, being negatively affected leads to a positive, insignificant coefficient (
     for the debt-to-revenues model and                                    for the debt-to-employees model).
30
     “How did the interest rate on your business debt change in the first half of 2013 compared with 2012?”
                                                                             Firms and Infrequent Shocks            34




percent in the first half of 2012 to 4.3 percent in the first half of 2013 (Small Business Finances,
2016). Younger, negatively affected firms are significantly more likely to report that their
interest    rates    had    increased      relative    to    the    previous      year.



We also find that being negatively affected increases the likelihood that a firm is required to
secure its loan with collateral by 73 percent (Table 9, Column 9): approximately 37 percent of
negatively affected firms use collateral. 31 Large firms are especially likely to use collateral.
Negatively affected firms are more likely to collateralize business real estate, business non-real
estate assets, and personal real estate. Some of the largest differences are for business real estate
(Column 9). The effect of size on using business real estate for collateral is significantly greater
for           negatively             affected            firms            than             unaffected             ones
(                                                                                                      ). About 7
percent of unaffected firms that are one standard deviation larger than the average secures their
loans with business real estate (                                         ), compared to 26 percent of their
negatively affected counterparts (                                                    ).

This use of collateral seems important for explaining credit constraints, as larger firms are more
likely to receive all the financing they requested (Column 10). 32 A one standard deviation
increase in size increases the likelihood by 15 percentage points of a negatively affected firm
receiving all the credit for which it applies. The effect of size on whether a business receives all

31
   “Was collateral required to secure any of your business debt? Collateral can include inventory, equipment,
property, personal real estate or other assets.” And “Which types of collateral were required to secure your
business debt? Select all that apply” with response options “Inventory or accounts receivable,” “Business non-real
estate assets (equipment, vehicles, securities),” “Business real estate,” “Personal real estate,” “Other, please specify
(e.g., personal assets).”
32
  “How much of the credit your business applied for was approved?” with response options “All (100%),” “Most
( 50%),” “Some (<50%),” “None (0%).” The dependent variable takes the value 1 if firms answered “All (100%)”
and 0 otherwise.
                                                                      Firms and Infrequent Shocks          35




the credit for which it applies is greater for negatively affected firms than unaffected ones at
marginally significant levels (
                  ).

These credit constraints are substantial and persistent. Most negatively affected firms (69
percent) report a financing need specifically related to Sandy one year after the event. 33 The
median range of these financing needs is $50,000 to $100,000.

In sum, we conclude that these results support H3 that Sandy increased credit constraints among
negatively affected firms. Negatively affected firms were significantly more likely to report that
their access to financing had decreased, their interest rates had increased, and they were required
to secure loans with collateral. We find partial support for H3a and H3b, that credit constraints
are decreasing in firm size and age, respectively. Age and size did not influence the likelihood
that a negatively affected firm reported that its access to financing had decreased. Still, smaller,
negatively affected firms were less likely to report than larger ones that they had received all the
credit financing that they had requested, and younger, negatively affected firms were more likely
to report interest rate increases than older ones.

4.4   Few Firms Borrow from the U.S. Small Business Administration’s Disaster
      Lending Program.

Our results indicate that financial frictions may play an important role in small and young firms’
recovery after a disaster, suggesting the potential for public intervention to address market
failures. Toward policy recommendations, we consider the performance of the disaster lending
program of the SBA. Firms are eligible to apply for SBA disaster loans if they incur physical
damage or an economic loss from a federally declared disaster. This program seems well-suited
to address the types of credit market gaps identified above; however, we find that few firms


33
  “Now, roughly one year later, what type(s) of financing needs related to Superstorm Sandy does your business
have?”
                                                                          Firms and Infrequent Shocks           36




borrow from this program. In our data, 8 percent of negatively affected firms borrowed from the
SBA disaster lending program.

Table 10 shows the loan application completion and approval rates for all firms (not just those in
our survey) that applied for SBA disaster loans due to Hurricane Sandy.34 Ninety-nine percent of
the value of Sandy-related SBA approved loans to businesses were in the three states covered in
our survey: CT, NJ, and NY. FEMA referred many of the SBA applicants, suggesting that about
90,000 firms, overall, contact the SBA. One-third of firms that began the application process
withdrew their application before completing it. Almost 60 percent of firms that completed the
application process were rejected by the SBA.

In our communications with managers of the SBA program, they cite several demand and
supply-side factors explaining this relatively low take-up. For example, SBA (2015a) identifies
acceptable credit history, ability to repay, and collateral (when it is available) as requirements for
borrowing. Managers at the SBA report that as firms learn more about these requirements
through the application process, some choose not to continue. We also speculate that the
program’s prescribed interest rates affected participation. Interest rates in the program do not
exceed 4 percent for businesses that cannot obtain credit elsewhere; for businesses that already
have access to credit, interest rates do not exceed 8 percent (SBA, 2015a). These rates are
generally higher than the unprecedentedly low market rates in 2012 and 2013 and so the high
rejection rate of applicants by the SBA likely results from the types of firms selecting into the
program at that time.




34
  Federal disaster appropriations for Hurricane Sandy allowed the SBA to provide up to $5 billion in disaster loans
(Rivera, 2013); over $500 million was eventually approved by the SBA for lending to firms (about 80 percent of
approved SBA loans were to households, who are also eligible to apply, SBA, 2015b).
                                                                   Firms and Infrequent Shocks   37




Table 10. Applications for SBA Disaster Loans Among Firms Following Hurricane Sandy

                                                   Percent of               Percent of
                                Number of        Started Apps            Completed Apps
                                  Firms        Ending in Outcome        Ending in Outcome
FEMA Referrals to SBA                89,423           ---                     ---
SBA Applications Received            14,970           ---                     ---
    Withdrew                          4,926           33%                     ---
  Declined                            5,808           39%                     58%
  Approved                            4,236           28%                     42%
Approved Amount                $513,458,100
Note: Data provided by SBA.


5     Conclusion

We examine firms’ financial management decisions related to an infrequent, severe income and
asset shock, Hurricane Sandy. We use firm-level data, collected one year after Sandy and
stratified by age, size, and industry to represent the population of firms in the New York area.
We find that about a third of the firms negatively affected by the event did not have insurance of
any kind. Firms with insurance did not tend to insure against the losses created by Sandy. For
example, half of negatively affected firms with flood insurance and almost three quarters with
business interruption insurance did not receive any payment due to Sandy. Instead, firms turned
to credit to finance recovery: firms negatively affected by Sandy were twice as likely to apply for
credit as unaffected firms. Negatively affected firms also reported financing constraints such as
higher interest rates and increased requirements to secure loans with collateral.

Firms’ age and size systematically affect their financial management of Sandy, resulting in
increased vulnerability of smaller firms and younger firms. Recent research on firm size (e.g.,
Rampini and Viswanathan, 2010) indicates that the high productivity of smaller firms motivates
them to invest more heavily in production, reducing their capacity to manage shocks relative to
larger firms. Consistent with these predictions, larger firms in our data were more likely than
smaller firms to be insured and to have the capacity to meet collateral requirements to borrow
after the event. We build on that work through recognition that insuring against rare events
                                                               Firms and Infrequent Shocks      38




reduces resources to manage more frequent shocks. Many of the risks to which firms are exposed
decline with age (Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Miranda, 2013). Consequently, we posit that insuring
against specific, rare events such as natural disasters becomes more attractive as firms age.
Consistent with these predictions, we find that younger firms are significantly less likely to
insure than older ones. Also, younger, negatively affected firms were more likely than older ones
to apply for credit, especially credit cards, and to experience interest rate increases after the
shock.

Our findings provide initial insights that warrant additional research to clarify their
generalizability, as the potential influence of survivorship and survey response bias in our sample
is unclear. While particularly challenging, collecting detailed data on firms both before and after
a severe shock would strengthen causal interpretations of the observed differences across firms.
We gain some confidence in the generalizability of our results from the research of Basker and
Miranda (2014) who study Hurricane Katrina using census data, rather than post-event surveys.
They find that young and small firms were more likely to fail following that event; our results
complement this finding through additional information regarding firms’ financial management
of a similar shock. Our findings also warrant additional research regarding how the outcomes
that we observe following a major storm in the New York area generalize to other locations and
shocks.


6   Market and Policy Recommendations

We close by discussing market opportunities and public policy recommendations based on our
findings. Regarding market opportunities, our theoretical model helps explain why even fully-
informed, disaster-prone, risk-averse businesses might not insure, yet we expect that the many
insured businesses who received no payments from Sandy were surprised and disappointed to
learn that they were not better protected. The exposure of businesses in our study to shocks such
as Sandy suggest a need for innovative insurance products. For example, parametric insurance
bases claims payments on an objective measure of a catastrophe such as windspeed or rainfall.
Parametric insurance may be especially relevant for younger and smaller firms, as this type of
                                                                    Firms and Infrequent Shocks        39




insurance reduces the problems of asymmetric information that may be substantial for insuring
these firms through traditional products.

Regarding public policy, we first suggest a greater emphasis on programs that encourage
preparing for shocks. We propose a voluntary federal disaster preparedness program to assist
firms in the nontrivial tasks of assessing infrequent risks and developing strategies to address
them. A firm’s preparedness assessment might act as a signal to its counterparts (e.g., lenders,
supply chain partners), improving access to credit, insurance, supplier contracts, lease
agreements, and other private-sector contracts exposed to disaster risk.

Second, we suggest a broader set of financing mechanisms structured to overcome the financial
frictions constraining vulnerable and affected firms. Our results suggest a need for targeted
improvements to the SBA disaster lending program. Despite strong evidence that negatively
affected firms do not have access to sufficient credit, only 8 percent of negatively affected firms
borrowed from the SBA program. Firms with the greatest financing needs may require additional
equity investments rather than credit. Young firms are some of the least equipped to finance
recovery with credit. To this end, we suggest public disaster funding that would also include
means-tested grants (as a substitute for equity) depending on firm preparedness scores,
repayment capacity, presence in socially vulnerable communities, among other criteria.


Appendix: Large Insurance Payments Reduce Credit Demand

We also assess whether a firm’s insurance payments affect its demand for credit following
Sandy. 35 Credit would seem to act as an imperfect substitute for insurance following a
catastrophe and so we predict that firms without insurance and those receiving small insurance
payments relative to their losses would be more likely to search and apply for credit.



35
  “Roughly, what percent of your business’s losses was recovered through insurance?” with response options
“None (0%),” “Some (<50%),” “Most ( 50 %),” “All (100%),” and “Business did not suffer any losses.”
                                                                 Firms and Infrequent Shocks    40




These regressions follow Equation 6. The relationship between insurance payments and credit
demand may depend on the magnitude of losses sustained by the firm. Therefore, the regressions
include interaction terms, examining the effects separately of insurance payments for negatively
affected firms that sustained below-median losses from those that sustained above-median losses
– the median loss amount was $25,000. The regressions also include controls for firms’ age and
size, positively affected firms, and industry and county fixed effects.

Table 11 shows the results. The intercept provides the estimate for the average unaffected firm.
For these regressions, the term I(Neg. Affected) serves as a reference group for several
interaction terms. It describes negatively affected, insured firms that incurred below-median
losses and received no claims payments. These firms were around 25 percentage points more
likely to search and apply for credit than the average unaffected firm.

Insurance payments did not significantly affect whether firms searched and applied for credit
when their losses were small. The terms under I(Neg. Affected) x D(Insurance Payments) show
the effects of insurance payments for negatively affected firms that sustained below-median
losses, which do not significantly differ from the reference group of firms that received no
payments (I(Neg. Affected)). Uninsured firms sustaining small losses also did not differ from
this reference group.

Insurance payments significantly reduced the likelihood that firms searched and applied for
credit when their losses were large. The term I(Neg. Affected) x I(Large Loss) describes
negatively affected, insured firms that sustained above-median losses and received no claims
payments. The likelihood that these firms searched or applied for credit did not significantly
differ from their small-loss counterparts (I(Neg. Affected)), which serve as their reference group.
The terms under I(Neg. Affected) x I(Large Loss) x D(Insurance Payments) show the effects of
insurance payments for negatively affected firms sustaining above-median losses. Negatively
affected, above-median-loss, insured firms that were fully covered by claims payments were
significantly less likely to search and apply for credit than those that received no claims
payments (their reference group is I(Neg. Affected) x I(Large Loss)). They were about 60
                                                               Firms and Infrequent Shocks     41




percentage points less likely, making them even less likely to search and apply for credit than
unaffected firms. We speculate that these firms that received full payments had especially low
credit demand as insurance payments (e.g., cash for business interruptions) may have addressed
their financing needs. Finally in the final row, uninsured firms sustaining large losses did not
differ from their reference group of insured firms that sustained large losses but did not receive
insurance payments (I(Neg. Affected) x I(Large Loss)).
                                                                                Firms and Infrequent Shocks       42




Table 11 Effects of Insurance Payments on Credit Demand

                                                                           (1)                    (2)
                                                                 I(Searched for Credit)   I(Applied for Credit)
            Intercept                                                  0.311***                0.248***
                                                                        (0.0307)               (0.0205)
            Negatively Affected, Below-Median Losses
            I(Neg. Affected)                                           0.235***                0.258***
                                                                       (0.0619)                (0.0640)
            I(Neg. Affected) x D(Insurance Payments)
            Reference Group: I(None (0%))
               I(Some (< 50%))                                          -0.158                  -0.128
                                                                        (0.254)                 (0.262)
               I(Most ( 50%))                                           0.124                  -0.117
                                                                        (0.377)                 (0.309)

               I(All)                                                   -0.0343                 -0.00482
                                                                        (0.341)                  (0.334)

            I(Neg. Affected) x I(No Insurance)                          -0.0492                 0.0200
                                                                        (0.159)                 (0.142)
            Negatively Affected, Above-Median Losses
            I(Neg. Affected) x I(Large Loss)                            -0.0558                 -0.0684
                                                                       (0.0966)                 (0.115)
            I(Neg. Affected) x I(Large Loss) x D(Insurance Payments)
            Reference Group: I(None (0%))
               I(Some (< 50%))                                           0.0667                  0.0956
                                                                        (0.0870)                 (0.100)
               I(Most ( 50%))                                         -0.362***                 -0.241
                                                                         (0.124)                 (0.158)
               I(All)                                                  -0.580***               -0.614***
                                                                        (0.0819)                (0.0723)
            I(Neg. Affected) x I(Large Loss) x I(No Insurance)          -0.00246                 -0.150
                                                                        (0.0719)                (0.0989)
            Obs.                                                         835                      835
            Rsq.                                                         0.12                     0.12

Note: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors in parentheses. I( ) is the indicator function; D( )
indicates a dummy set. Linear probability models with White’s (1980) heteroskedastically-consistent standard errors
clustered at county. All models include industry and county fixed effects and control for firms’ age and size and
being positively affected, as described in Equation 6. Models are constructed so that the intercept value represents
the average unaffected firm in the data.




References
Adelino, M., S. Ma, and D. Robinson, 2017, Firm Age, Investment Opportunities, and Job Creation. Journal of
Finance, accepted manuscript online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12495.

Amaya, D., G. Gauthier, and T. O. Léautier, 2015, Dynamic Risk Management: Investment, Capital Structure, and
Hedging in the Presence of Financial Frictions, Journal of Risk and Insurance, 82(2): 359-399.
                                                                          Firms and Infrequent Shocks            43




Aon Benfield, 2015, 2014 Annual Global Climate and Catastrophe Report.
URL: thoughtleadership.aonbenfield.com/Documents/20150113_ab_if_annual_climate_catastrophe_report.pdf.

Basker, E., and J. Miranda, 2014, Taken by Storm: Business Survival in the Aftermath of Hurricane Katrina,
Working Paper, University of Missouri (Columbia, MO).

BBC (British Broadcasting Company), 2015, UK Floods: Cost of Storms Eva and Desmond Could Top £1.5 Billion,
December 28, 2015.

Berg, G., and J. Schrader, 2012, Access to Credit, Natural Disasters, and Relationship Lending, Journal of Financial
Intermediation, 21(4): 549-568.

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang, 2011, A Unified Theory of Tobin's q, Corporate Investment, Financing, and Risk
Management. The Journal of Finance, 66(5), 1545-1578.

Caillaud, B., G. Dionne, & B. Jullien, 2000), Corporate Insurance with Optimal Financial Contracting. Economic
Theory, 16(1), 77-105.

Cameron, A. C., and D. L. Miller, 2015, A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference, Journal of Human
Resources, 50(2): 317-372.

Caruso, A., 2015, Statistics of U.S. Business Employment and Payroll Summary: 2012, U.S. Census Bureau.

Caves, R. E., 1998, Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and Mobility of Firms, Journal of
Economic Literature, 36(4): 1947-1982.

Cerqueiro, G., S. Ongena, and K. Roszbach, 2016, Collateralization, Bank Loan Rates, and Monitoring, The Journal
of Finance, 71(3): 1295-1322.

Chavaz, M., 2015, Bank Lending After a Disaster: Who and How? Working Paper, Bank of England (London, UK).

Cortés, K. R., and P. E. Strahan, 2015, Tracing out Capital Flows: How Financially Integrated Banks Respond to
Natural Disasters, Working Paper 14-12R, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (Cleveland, OH).

Cummins, J. D., M. Suher, and G. Zanjani, 2010, Federal Financial Exposure to Natural Catastrophe Risk, in
Deborah Lucas, ed., Measuring and Managing Federal Financial Risk (Chicago: University of Chicago Press)
Chapter 4: 61-92.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., I. Love, and V. Maksimovic, 2006, Business Environment and the Incorporation Decision,
Journal of Banking & Finance, 30(11): 2967-2993.

Dunne, T., M. J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson, 1989, The Growth and Failure of U.S. Manufacturing Plants, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4): 671-698.

Evans, D. S., 1987a, Tests of Alternative Theories of Firm Growth, Journal of Political Economy, 95(4): 657-674.

Evans, D. S., 1987b, The Relationship Between Firm Growth, Size, and Age: Estimates for 100 Manufacturing
Industries, Journal of Industrial Economics, 35(4): 567-581.

Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2014, Fall 2013 Small Business Credit Survey.
URL: http://www.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/Fall2013/#tabs-2.
                                                                          Firms and Infrequent Shocks        44




Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson, 2008, Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on
Productivity or Profitability? American Economic Review, 98(1): 394-425.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson, 2016, The Slow Growth of New Plants: Learning About
Demand? Economica, 83(329): 91-129.

Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein, 1993, Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate Investment and
Financing Policies, The Journal of Finance, 48(5): 1629-1658.

Ghosh, S., and S. Kondapalli, 2016, Damage Done by the Chennai Floods, In Focus, AIR Worldwide, March 03,
2016.
URL: http://www.air-worldwide.com/Blog/Damage-Done-by-the-Chennai-Floods/.

Haltiwanger, J., R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda, 2013, Who Creates Jobs? Small Versus Large Versus Young, Review
of Economics and Statistics, 95(2): 347-361.

Herranz, N., S. Krasa, and A. P. Villamil, 2015, Entrepreneurs, Risk Aversion, and Dynamic Firms, Journal of
Political Economy, 123(5): 1133-1176.

Hurst, E., and B. W. Pugsley, 2011, What do Small Businesses Do? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 43(2
(Fall)): 73-142.

Insurance Information Institute, 2013, Over 90 Percent of the New Jersey and New York Sandy Insurance Claims
Have Been Settled; Likely to Be Third Largest Storm Ever for U.S. Insurers, April 19, 2013.
URL: http://www.iii.org/press-release/over-90-percent-of-the-new-jersey-and-new-york-sandy-insurance-claims-
have-been-settled-likely-to-be-third-largest-storm-ever-for-us-insurers-041913.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2013, Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment
Report, Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.

Jovanovic, B., 1982, Selection and the Evolution of Industry, Econometrica, 50(3): 649-670.

Khwaja, A. I., and A. Mian, 2008, Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from An Emerging
Market, The American Economic Review, 98(4): 1413-1442.

Kobe, K., 2012, Small Business GDP Update: 2002-2010, U.S. Small Business Association Office of Advocacy.
URL: sba.gov/sites/default/files/rs390tot_1.pdf.

Lesser, D., 2016, Getting (Back To) Business Interruption Insurance, United Policyholders.
URL: www.uphelp.org/pubs/getting-back-business-interruption-insurance.

Mayers, D., and C. W. Smith Jr. (1987). Corporate Insurance and the Underinvestment Problem. The Journal of Risk
and Insurance, 54(1), 45-54.

McWhirter, C., and R. Simon, 2016, In Flood-Ravaged Louisiana, Small Businesses Struggle to Recover, The Wall
Street Journal, September 21, 2016.

Nance, D. R., Smith, C. W., & Smithson, C. W. (1993). On the Determinants of Corporate Hedging. The Journal of
Finance, 48(1), 267-284.

NOAA HRD (United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Hurricane Research Division),
2014, The Thirty Costliest Mainland United States Tropical Cyclones 1900-2013.
                                                                         Firms and Infrequent Shocks          45




URL: http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/tcfaq/costliesttable.html.

Price, J., 2016, Flooding Hits a Handful of Crucial Businesses in One Small North Carolina Town, Marketplace,
October 21, 2016.
URL: http://www.marketplace.org/2016/10/20/business/flooding-hits-handful-crucial-businesses-one-small-north-
carolina-town.

Quintero, C., 2014, Storm Surge Caused Major Damage during Hurricane Sandy, US Geological Survey.
URL: http://www.usgs.gov/blogs/features/usgs_top_story/storm-surge-caused-major-damage-during-hurricane-
sandy/.

Rajan, R., and A. Winton, 1995, Covenants and Collateral as Incentives to Monitor, The Journal of Finance, 50(4):
1113-1146.

Rampini, A. A., A. Sufi, and S. Viswanathan, 2014, Dynamic Risk Management, Journal of Financial
Economics, 111(2): 271-296.

Rampini, A. A., and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Collateral, Risk Management, and the Distribution of Debt
Capacity, The Journal of Finance, 65(6): 2293-2322.

Rampini, A. A., and S. Viswanathan, 2013, Collateral and Capital Structure, Journal of Financial
Economics, 109(2): 466-492.

Rivera, J., 2013, Sandy Update 5: A Lending Milestone as Congress Adds Recovery Funds, U.S. Small Business
Administration, January 30, 2013.
URL: https://www.sba.gov/blogs/sandy-update-5-lending-milestone-congress-adds-recovery-funds.

Rochet, J. C., and S. Villeneuve (2011). Liquidity Management and Corporate Demand for Hedging and
Insurance. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 20(3), 303-323.

Roy, A. D., 1952, Safety First and the Holding of Assets, Econometrica, 20(3): 431–449.

SBA (Small Business Administration), 2014, Table of Small Business Size Standards.
URL: sba.gov/sites/default/files/files/Size_Standards_Table.pdf.

SBA (Small Business Administration), 2015a, Disaster Loan Program.
URL: https://www.sba.gov/content/disaster-loan-program.

SBA (Small Business Administration), 2015b, Disaster Loan Data.
URL: https://www.sba.gov/content/disaster-loan-data.

Small Business Finances, 2016, 504 Rate History.
URL: http://cdcloans.com/lender/504-rate-history/504-rate-archive/.

Stiglitz, J. E., and A. Weiss, 1981, Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information, American Economic
Review, 71(3): 393-410.

Thornhill, S., and R. Amit, 2003, Learning about Failure: Bankruptcy, Firm Age, and the Resource-Based View,
Organization Science, 14(5): 497-509.

White, H., 1980, A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and A Direct Test for
Heteroskedasticity, Econometrica, 48(4): 817-838.
Firms and Infrequent Shocks   46
                                                       Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks                47




                                     FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION


7       Online Appendices

7.1      Online Appendix 1. A Model of Firm Financing and Natural Disaster Risk

We develop a theoretical model to formulate hypotheses related to firm financing and natural
disaster risk in Section 2. In the interest of completeness, we repeat portions of the model setup
included there. Following Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2016), who identify a relationship
between demand and firms’ age and size, we introduce risk to returns via demand risk that
influences the price at which the firm can sell its goods. 36 Our model leverages the work of
Jovanovic (1982), Rampini and Viswanathan (2010), and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) but uses
some simplifications tailored to our research questions. Our model is static, which allows us to
examine cross-sectional exogenous differences in firms related to their age and size, but does not
facilitate analyses of how firms evolve as is done by Jovanovic and Rampini and Viswanathan.

7.1.1      Firm’s financing problem

A representative firm is endowed with an initial stock of equity                          and a unique production
technology            that is increasing and concave (                             . The firm is a price taker, facing
demand risk as it sells its output at price                 , which is unknown to the firm when it makes its
production decisions. The price is drawn randomly and follows the stationary probability density
function        . The firm does not observe its firm-specific price distribution, but observes market
prices for a broad class of similar goods.37 The stationary distribution of market prices is                    , and
the variance of these market prices is greater than the variance of the firm’s price distribution.
Beginning with this market distribution as a prior, the firm updates its estimate of its price

36
     Jovanovic (1982) reaches similar results using stochastic production costs.
37
 The observed market prices include businesses that have exited the market because the demand for their goods
was too low.
                                                  Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks        48




distribution      as it observes draws from its actual price distribution        . The firm’s price and
market prices are normally distributed and truncated at zero. The firm also incurs a fixed
operating cost .

The firm selects a level of assets        to be used in production. If        , the firm can borrow the
residual (             ) at prices governed by the cost function         , which is increasing and quasi-
convex (                    .

Firm rewards are positive if firm equity and revenues are greater than liabilities,
     . If not, the firm is insolvent and declares bankruptcy, receiving a reward of zero. The firm
maximizes the expectation of its value function




The critical price       is the price below which the firm would be insolvent. This price is a
function of the firm’s financial structure




The critical price is decreasing in equity (firms with more equity can withstand a less
advantageous price draw) and is increasing in firm debt.38


 We identify the effects of equity and debt on the critical price using the implicit function theorem.
38

Let                              . By the implicit function theorem



The critical price is decreasing in equity. Similarly, for debt
                                                        Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks                49




Borrowing both increases the firm’s expected returns (should it survive) and increases its chance
of failure. The firm’s first order condition is




The first term shows that when the firm is operating above the critical price level, borrowing
increases the expected marginal returns of production, motivating the firm to borrow until
expected marginal revenues equal marginal costs. The second term shows that borrowing also
reduces expected returns by reducing the size of shock that the firm can survive because debt
increases the critical price.39

7.1.2      Lender’s problem

The lender’s problem follows from that of the firm. The firm’s borrowing costs are revenues to
the lender. The lender is a price-taker, following an interest rate menu                     .40 The firm borrows
from a single lender so that the lender loses some portion of its initial principal, the amount
                      , if the firm declares bankruptcy. That is, the lender takes control of the firm’s

Since                  and         for operating firms, liabilities are larger than revenues   . Because the
production function is concave and cost function quasi-convex, marginal revenues are less than marginal costs
          and so the numerator is negative. The critical price is increasing in debt,
39
     To see this derivation, rewrite the firm’s expected return (A1) as




Following Leibniz’s rule, the derivative of expected returns with respect to debt is


The term in the integrand is the derivative of the function when the price is above the critical price. The term in the
second bracket comes from the fundamental theorem of calculus and evaluates how a change in debt affects returns
through a change in the boundary of the integral. The lender’s problem and the firm’s problem that includes natural
disaster risk below follow a similar structure to that above and also rely on Leibniz’s rule.
40
  The assumption that lenders take interest rates as given facilitates our exposition. Our lender model focuses
exclusively on supply adjustments. Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) allow lenders to set interest rates and show that
asymmetric information can still lead to credit rationing.
                                               Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks         50




resources,          , which are less than the firms’ liability               because of bankruptcy. The
lender’s problem is to maximize




where    is the lender’s returns,        is the lender’s estimate of the firm’s price risk. The lender
observes a subset          of the firm’s price draws. For example, the lender observes the firm’s
tax filings but not firm revenues since the most recent filing.

From the lender’s first order condition, lending more increases 1) the revenue of the lender, 2)
the loss of the lender if the firm fails, and 3) the risk of firm failure.




7.1.3   Firms’ age and size, financing and shocks

Firms’ financing needs and access to financing are distinctly influenced by their age and size.
For the exercise, the compared firms are identical (e.g., have comparable production
technologies) except for their age and size characteristics. Let a large firm be one with a large
equity endowment               where      is the endowment of the average sized firm. This large
firm will demand less credit than the average firm as its marginal product of borrowing is lower,
                                       . Consequently, the large firm will tend to produce more,
borrow less, and be less leveraged (have a lower ratio of debt to equity) than the average firm.
Additionally, the larger firm can withstand larger price shocks than the average firm as the
critical price is decreasing in equity, leading lenders to supply more credit to the large firm
(Equation A4).

Let a young firm be one whose estimated price distribution closely resembles its uninformed
prior of the market distribution,              . Let an older firm be one that operates with more
observed price draws      and so its estimated price distribution       is converging toward its actual
                                           Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks         51




price distribution                     . Thus, the variance for the estimated price variance for
the younger firm is greater than that of the older firm,                           . Assume for
comparison a mean-preserving spread, that the old firm is the average firm in the market such
that the young and old firms have the same expected price,                            . The larger
estimated variance of the younger firm’s price distribution has two effects: it increases the
likelihood of failure and of windfall gains. The younger firm would reap the benefit of a windfall
and is protected by bankruptcy in the case of failure and so has a larger demand for credit than
the older firm.

The increased likelihood of failure reduces the amount of credit provided by the lender to young
firms relative to older ones (Equation A4). Asymmetric information, the difference between the
firm’s price distribution estimate   and that of the lender      , intensifies this problem for the
young firm as emerging information about its quality is unavailable to the lender, motivating
credit rationing. As the number of price draws grows, the discrepancy between information
available to the borrower    and that available to the bank      decreases.

Consider a scenario in which this firm experiences a financial loss created by an unanticipated
disaster   . This variable is general, representing all disaster losses – property damage and
business interruptions, including effects on demand. Consequently, this disaster risk should be
understood as completely independent of the non-disaster price risk already discussed. This loss
occurs just before the firm makes financing and investment decisions. For comparisons across
firms, we assume that the losses destroy some portion         of the firm’s endowment
    .

This loss increases demand for credit for all firms as borrowing universally increases firms’
expected returns. The loss also reduces the lender’s optimal credit supply for all firms as all
firms have less equity, less capacity to manage a shock following the disaster. The event
heightens the demand and supply conditions already in play such that young and small firms are
most at risk of being unable to access the financing that they demand.
                                            Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks       52




7.1.4    Lifestyle firms

We also consider a specific type of firm that differs from the entrepreneurial one we describe
above and instead is a firm intended to meet the lifestyle objectives of its owners. Hurst and
Pugsley (2011) describe a set of firms that do not intend to grow, and we speculate that owning
and managing a business is a non-financial amenity for the owners of these firms. For
comparison, assume that the lifestyle firm is more risk averse (in the sense of Pratt, 1964) than
the entrepreneurial ones previously described. Comparison to the entrepreneurial firm’s first
order condition (Equation A3) shows that the lifestyle firm is less influenced by the potential of
larger returns of borrowing (due to the concavity of the utility function) and more influenced by
the risk of failure. Both conditions motivate the lifestyle firm to demand less credit than the
entrepreneurial one, including after a shock.

7.2     Online Appendix 2. Hurricane Sandy: Consequences and Public Assistance

On October 29, 2012, Sandy made landfall along the New Jersey coast as a post-tropical storm.
The storm caused more than $70 billion in damages, becoming the second costliest such event in
U.S. history after Hurricane Katrina (NOAA HRD, 2014). Sandy’s high winds and powerful
storm surge each contributed to the magnitude of the disaster (NOAA NWS, 2012). In addition
to the infrastructure and property damage, Sandy created several sources of business interruption,
including electricity and transportation disruptions. Across New York and New Jersey, roughly
four million customers remained without power two days after the event (Department of Energy,
2012). By November 9, over 250,000 customers in New Jersey were still without electricity
(Spoto and Livio, 2012).

Regarding transportation disruptions, on November 2 as many as 60 percent of New Jersey’s gas
stations were closed due to lack of fuel or damage (Muskal and Carcano, 2012), and state
mandated rationing in some counties persisted until November 13 (Spoto, 2012). Sandy was also
the worst disaster in the history of the New York City subway system, complicating the
commutes of many employees (Keane, Tomesco, and Levin, 2012). Five days after Sandy hit, 80
percent of the subway system was back on line. However, it took one month to restore even
                                                  Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks                53




partial service to the PATH trains from NY to NJ, and full service did not return until March
2013. Some subway lines took more than a year to fully return to service (Davies, 2013).

The Department of Commerce (DOC) reported business disruptions for most industries, but
noted that the New Jersey tourism industry may suffer longer-term impacts (Henry et al., 2013).
In contrast, the construction industry experienced a marked increase in employment and
revenues as communities rebuilt and repaired damaged infrastructure (Henry et al., 2013).

The DOC also reported that claims for unemployment insurance in New York and New Jersey
spiked dramatically in the weeks after Sandy but returned to pre-event levels within a month.
Regional payroll employment and industrial production also rebounded rapidly after the storm
(Henry et al., 2013).

Over $60 billion in federal aid was appropriated for Sandy disaster relief efforts (Hernandez,
2013). These funds included appropriations for several federal agencies. The U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) received the most funding: over $10 billion for its
Community Development Block Grant program. About $1.3 billion of federal assistance was
provided directly to firms: the SBA approved $500 million in lending to firms, and the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) paid approximately $780 million in non-residential claims.41

A major component of U.S. federal assistance is provided to state and local governments and
disbursed via congressional appropriations following a disaster. One example of this relief is
Community Development Block Grants provided by HUD. Risk mitigation grants are also
available through a competitive process from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
While firms may benefit from these programs, it is local governments that apply for, receive, and
determine the uses of these funds (FEMA, 2015; HUD, 2015).




41
 We calculate claims using data provided to us by the NFIP. Sandy led to 5,804 claims, the vast majority of which
were in NJ (3,093) and NY (1,934).
                                                  Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks               54




Two programs available directly to firms are flood-specific insurance through the NFIP and
disaster loans through the Small Business Administration (SBA). Firms can insure against flood
events and are eligible for up to $500,000 in building coverage and $500,000 in contents
coverage through the NFIP. Small firms that can demonstrate physical damage and/or economic
injury (e.g., from business interruptions) from a federally declared disaster can borrow up to $2
million, contingent on credit approval from the SBA.

Sandy appropriations allowed for the SBA to provide up to $5 billion in disaster loans (Rivera,
2013); over $500 million was eventually approved by the SBA for lending to firms (about 80
percent of approved SBA loans were to households; SBA, 2015). One year after Sandy, the SBA
had approved almost $2.5 billion in loans to roughly 36,000 borrowers (Hulit, 2013).

The timing of loans may have created additional challenges for firms borrowing from the SBA.
The bulk of congressional appropriations ($50 billion) were approved three months after
Hurricane Sandy made landfall (Hernandez, 2013). The SBA can begin lending before full
congressional appropriations have been approved. As of April 2013, almost 3,000 loans totaling
$279 million had been approved, yet only $39 million had been disbursed, leaving many
individuals and firms short on needed liquidity six months after the disaster (Clark, 2013).


References
Clark, P., 2013, What Happened to Small Businesses Walloped by Hurricane Sandy? Bloomberg.com, April 12,
2013.
URL: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-04-12/what-happened-to-small-businesses-walloped-by-
hurricane-sandy.

Davies, A., 2013, One Year Later: Here’s How New York City’s Subways Have Improved Since Hurricane Sandy,
BusinessInsider.com, October 29, 2013.
URL: http://www.businessinsider.com/heres-how-nycs-subway-system-has-come-back-from-hurricane-sandy-2013-
10.

Department of Energy (United States Department of Energy – Office of Electricity Delivery & Energy Reliability),
2012, Hurricane Sandy Situation Report #6.

FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency), 2015, Hazard Mitigation Assistance.
URL: fema.gov/hazard-mitigation-assistance.
                                                   Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks              55




Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson, 2016, The Slow Growth of New Plants: Learning About
Demand? Economica, 83(329): 91-129.

Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein, 1993, Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate Investment and
Financing Policies, The Journal of Finance, 48(5): 1629-1658.

Henry, D. K., S. Cooke-Hull, J. Savukinas, F. Yu, N. Elo, and B. Van Arnum, 2013, Economic Impact of Hurricane
Sandy – Potential Economic Activity Lost and Gained in New Jersey and New York, United States Department of
Commerce.
URL: http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/sandyfinal101713.pdf.

Hernandez, R., 2013, Congress Approves $51 Billion in Aid for Hurricane Victims, The New York Times, January
28, 2013.
URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/29/nyregion/congress-gives-final-approval-to-hurricane-sandy-aid.html.

HUD (Department of Housing and Urban Development), 2015, Community Development Block Grant Disaster
Recovery Program.
URL: hudexchange.info/programs/cdbg-dr/.

Hulit, J., 2013, Hurricane Sandy and Small Business: One Year Later, U.S. Small Business Administration, October
29, 2013.
URL: https://www.sba.gov/blogs/hurricane-sandy-and-small-business-one-year-later.

Hurst, E., and B. W. Pugsley, 2011, What do Small Businesses Do? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 43(2
(Fall)): 73-142.

Insurance Information Institute, 2013, Over 90 Percent of the New Jersey and New York Sandy Insurance Claims
Have Been Settled; Likely to Be Third Largest Storm Ever for U.S. Insurers, April 19, 2013.
URL: http://www.iii.org/press-release/over-90-percent-of-the-new-jersey-and-new-york-sandy-insurance-claims-
have-been-settled-likely-to-be-third-largest-storm-ever-for-us-insurers-041913.

Jovanovic, B., 1982, Selection and the Evolution of Industry, Econometrica, 50(3): 649-670.

Keane, A. G., F. Tomesco, and A. Levin, 2012, New York Subway System Faces Weeks to Recover From Storm,
Bloomberg.com. October 31, 2012.

Muskal, M., and C. Carcano, 2012, Post-Sandy Misery: Power Out, Toilets Clogged, Temperatures Falling, Los
Angeles Times, November 2, 2012.
URL: http://articles.latimes.com/2012/nov/02/nation/la-na-nn-hurricane-sandy-east-coast-20121102.

NOAA HRD (United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Hurricane Research Division),
2014, The Thirty Costliest Mainland United States Tropical Cyclones 1900-2013.
URL: http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/tcfaq/costliesttable.html.

NOAA NWS (United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Weather Service), 2012,
Hurricane/Post-Tropical Cyclone Sandy, October 22–29, 2012 (Service Assessment).

Pratt, J. W. (1964). Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large. Econometrica, 32(1), 122-136.

Rampini, A. A., and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Collateral, Risk Management, and the Distribution of Debt
Capacity, The Journal of Finance, 65(6): 2293-2322.
                                                 Online Appendix: Firms and Infrequent Shocks               56




Rivera, J., 2013, Sandy Update 5: A Lending Milestone as Congress Adds Recovery Funds, U.S. Small Business
Administration, January 30, 2013.
URL: https://www.sba.gov/blogs/sandy-update-5-lending-milestone-congress-adds-recovery-funds.

SBA (Small Business Administration ), 2015, Disaster Loan Data.
URL: https://www.sba.gov/content/disaster-loan-data.

Spoto, M., 2012, N.J. Odd-Even Gas Rationing to End in Morning, Christie Says, NJ.com, November 12, 2012.
URL: http://www.nj.com/politics/index.ssf/2012/11/christie_tours_center_coordian.html.

Spoto, M., and S. K. Livio, 2012, Power Outages Continue to Plague N.J. In Wake of Sandy, Nor’easter, NJ.com,
November 9, 2012.
URL: http://www.nj.com/news/index.ssf/2012/11/power_outages_continue_to_plag.html.

Stiglitz, J. E., and A. Weiss, 1981, Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information, American Economic
Review, 71(3): 393-410.
