                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




REAL INTEREST RATES, IMBALANCES AND THE CURSE OF REGIONAL SAFE ASSET
                 PROVIDERS AT THE ZERO LOWER BOUND

                                   Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
                                          Hélène Rey

                                      Working Paper 22618
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22618


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




Nick Sander and Maxime Sauzet provided outstanding research assistance. We thank our
discussant David Vines, Ricardo Caballero, Barry Eichengreen, Philipp Hartmann, Òscar Jordà,
Ralph Koijen, Martin Lettau, Richard Portes, Ken Rogoff, Andrew Sheng, Alan Taylor, David
Thesmar and Gabriel Zucman for comments. All errors remain our own. Special thanks to Òscar
Jordà, Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor for sharing their data with us. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Real Interest Rates, Imbalances and the Curse of Regional Safe Asset Providers at the Zero
Lower Bound
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 22618
September 2016
JEL No. E2,E4,F4

                                            ABSTRACT

The current environment is characterized by low real rates and by policy rates close to or at their
lower bound in all major financial areas. We analyze these unusual economic conditions from a
historical perspective and draw some implications for external imbalances, safe asset demand and
the process of external adjustment. First, we decompose the fluctuations in the world
consumption wealth ratio over long period of times and show that they anticipate movements of
the real rate of interest. Second, our estimates suggest that the world real rate of interest is likely
to remain low or negative for an extended period of time. In this context, we argue that there is a
renewed Triffin dilemma where safe asset providers face a trade-off in terms of external exposure
and real appreciation of their currency. This tradeoff is particularly acute for smaller economies.
This is the ‘curse of the regional safe asset provider.’ We discuss how this ‘curse’ is playing out
for two prominent regional safe asset providers: core EMU and Switzerland.


Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and CEPR
and also NBER
pog@econ.berkeley.edu

Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
hrey@london.edu
1        Introduction

The current macroeconomic environment remains a serious source of worry for policymakers. Global

real and nominal interest rates are at historical lows across advanced economies, both at the short

and long end of the term structure. Policy rates are close to or at their effective lower bound in all

major financial areas.1 Figures 1 and 2 report the nominal policy rates and long yields for the U.S.,

the Eurozone, the U.K. and Japan since 1980. Increasingly large amounts of wealth are invested

at zero or negative yields.2

        Yet economic activity in many parts of the advanced world remains quite anemic, or insuffi-

ciently vigorous to sustain a normalization of monetary policy, as evidenced by the repeated delays

in the U.S. Federal Reserve’s ‘lift-off’. Figures 3 and 4 report the output gap of advanced economies,

as calculated in the April 2016 IMF’s World Economic Outlook database. While output gap cal-

culations are always imprecise, the figures indicate that, with the exception of Germany and the

U.K., most advanced economies remain significantly below their potential level of output.3

        That, despite the aggressive global monetary policy treatment administered, levels of economic

activity remain so weak across the advanced world strongly suggests that the natural interest rate,

i.e. the real interest rate at which the global economy would be able to reach its potential output,

remains substantially below observed real interest rates. Far from being overly accommodating,

current levels of monetary stimulus may well be insufficiently aggressive because of the Zero Lower

Bound constraint on policy rates.4

        Understanding whether natural rates are indeed low, for how much longer, and the source of

their decline has become a first-order macroeconomic question. In a celebrated speech given at the

IMF in 2013, five years after the onset of the Global Financial Crisis, Summers (2015) ventured that

we may have entered an age of ‘secular stagnation’, i.e. and era where output remains chronically

below its potential, or equivalently real rates remain above their natural rate. Not coincidentally,

the secular stagnation hypothesis was first voiced by Hansen (1939), ten years after the onset of
    1
     This effective lower bound may well be negative. In this paper, and with a slight abuse of language, we refer to
the ‘effective’ lower bound as the ‘Zero Lower Bound’ (ZLB). It should be clear that there is no conceptual difference
between a small positive and a small negative lower bound on policy rates.
   2
     According to FitchRatings (2016), the total amount of fixed-rate sovereign debt trading at negative yields reached
$11.7 trillion at the end of June 2016.
   3
     Potential output data from other sources, such as AMECO or the OECD are broadly consistent.
   4
     Most central banks also deployed nonconventional monetary policy mostly in the form of asset purchases, or
forward guidance. While the evidence suggests these policies have contributed to stabilize the economy, they may
not have been sufficient to raise the natural rate above actual rates.


                                                          1
                     percent
                                                                                  Financial Crisis     Eurozone Crisis
                      25



                      20



                      15



                      10



                       5



                       0



                       -5
                         1980   1983   1986   1989   1992   1995   1998   2001   2004     2007       2010    2013    2016



                                                     U.S.    Eurozone     U.K.     Japan




Figure 1: Policy Rates, Eurozone, Japan, U.S. and U.K., 1980-2016. Sources: U.S.: Federal
Funds Official Target Rate; Eurozone: until Dec. 1998, Germany’s Lombard Rate. After 1998, ECB Marginal
Rate of Refinancing Operations; U.K.: Bank of England Base Lending Rate; Japan: Bank of Japan Target
Call Rate. Data from Global Financial Database.




                     percent
                                                                                  Financial Crisis     Eurozone Crisis
                      18

                      16

                      14

                      12

                      10

                       8

                       6

                       4

                       2

                       0

                       -2
                         1980   1983   1986   1989   1992   1995   1998   2001   2004    2007        2010   2013     2016



                                                     U.S.    Germany      U.K.     Japan




Figure 2: Long yields, Germany, Japan, U.K. and U.S., 1980-2016. Sources: U.S.: 10-year
bond constant maturity rate; Germany: 10-year benchmark bond; U.K.: 10-year government bond yield;
Japan: 10-year government bond yield. Data from Global Financial Database



                                                                    2
                4
                                                                        Financial Crisis          Eurozone Crisis



                2



                0



                -2



                -4



                -6



                -8
                     1990   1993          1996      1999      2002        2005             2008      2011           2014

                                   United States   Eurozone   Japan      United Kingdom



Figure 3: Output Gap (percent of potential output), Eurozone, Japan, U.K. and U.S.,
1990-2015. Note: The graph shows the persistent decline in the output gap following the global financial
crisis and European sovereign debt crises. Source: World Economic Outlook, April 2016.




                8
                                                                        Financial Crisis          Eurozone Crisis


                6


                4


                2


                0


                -2


                -4


                -6


                -8
                     1990   1993          1996      1999      2002        2005             2008      2011           2014

                                      France       Eurozone     Italy         Spain           Germany



Figure 4: Output Gap (percent of potential output), Eurozone, France, Germany, Italy
and Spain, 1990-2015. Note: The graph shows the persistent decline in the output gap following the
global financial crisis and European sovereign debt crises. Source: World Economic Outlook, April 2016.




                                                               3
the Great Depression.

       This paper contributes to this debate along three dimensions. We start by asking whether

global real interest rates are likely to remain low and why. Using a novel empirical approach to

this question, we conclude that they will, for an extended period of time, and that global economic

activity is likely to remain muted. We argue that, as in other historical periods, most notably in the

1930s, this is the likely outcome of an extended and on-going process of deleveraging that creates

a ‘scarcity of safe assets.’

       Next, we consider the question of global imbalances. Previous studies have emphasized that the

global imbalances of the 1990s and 2000s originated from a combination of low levels of financial

development and rapid economic growth in emerging market economies.5 If we enter an era of

secular low growth, does it follow that global imbalances should recede? We answer this question

in the negative: as argued in Caballero et al. (2015) and also in Eggertsson et al. (2015), global

imbalances ‘mutate’ at the Zero Lower Bound from a benign phenomenon to a malign one.6 At

the ZLB, external surpluses propagate stagnation as countries attempt to grab a higher share of

a depressed global aggregate demand via a more depreciated currency, increasing the potential for

negative spillovers and the prospect of currency wars.

       The last part of our analysis focuses on safe assets providers. We argue that safe asset providers

must, in equilibrium, either be more exposed to global shocks with the incipient risk of large ex-post

losses, or choose to let their currency appreciate with potentially adverse immediate real effects.

Furthermore, we show that the terms of this trade-off worsen the smaller the safe asset provider

is, a phenomenon we dub the ‘curse of the regional safe asset provider.’ We document how this

‘curse’ has played out for two regional safe asset providers in recent years: Switzerland, and the core

members of the European Monetary Union (EMU), including Germany, but also the Netherlands,

Belgium and France. Looping back to our initial global focus, we argue that the curse of these

EMU safe asset providers contributes significantly to the headwinds faced by the global economy

and to the current pattern of global imbalances. We conclude by outlining some potential solutions.

       Our empirical exercise begins by analyzing the consumption-to-wealth ratio in four advanced

economies: the United States, the United Kingdom, France and Germany, for which we have
   5
    See Caballero et al. (2008), Mendoza et al. (2009) and Bernanke (2005).
   6
    Of course, there may be reasons linked to financial stability for which large imbalances might constitute a risk
even outside the ZLB.



                                                         4
data going back at least to 1920.7 We show that, at any point in time over the last century, the

aggregate consumption-to-wealth ratio contained a great deal of information about future short

term real rates. According to our empirical analysis, actual and natural real interest rates are

likely to remain low for an extended period of time: our point estimates suggest that short term

real interest rates could remain between -2% and 0% until 2021, with natural rates likely to be even

lower. Our findings provide a bleak assessment of the medium-run growth prospects in advanced

economies, and how difficult the return to prosperity may be for most advanced economies: we

may well be stuck at the ZLB for the foreseeable future.

       Our approach requires minimal assumptions, likely to hold under very general circumstances.

In effect, we extract the historical information encoded in households’ decisions to consume out of

wealth. The consumption-to-wealth ratio tends to be abnormally low following periods of rapid

increases in wealth, as is often the case during episodes of financial exuberance. In the aftermath of

these booms, the return on wealth tends to be low or negative, and the consumption-to-wealth ratio

reverts to equilibrium. Our empirical results indicate that this low return on wealth is traceable in

large part to future low real risk-free rates.

       We document two stark historical episodes where the consumption-wealth ratio was inordinately

low. The first episode starts in 1929 at the onset of the Great Depression and lasts until the second

World War. This is when Alvin Hansen first wrote about secular stagnation. The second episode

starts in 1997 and is still on-going. It is during this period that Larry Summers revived the concept

of secular stagnation.

       What might cause a persistent decline in real interest rates? The literature emphasizes four can-

didate explanations (see Eichengreen (2015)): a slowdown in technological progress, demographic

forces, a savings glut, and a decline in investment, possibly due to a decline in its relative price. The

first force is well understood: a slower rate of technological progress reduces the marginal product

of capital. Demographic forces, especially a slowdown in fertility, or an increase in life expectancy,

also have the potential to increase savings, depressing equilibrium rates of return. The ‘savings

glut’ explanation has multiple components. On the trend side, it originates from the combination

of low levels of financial development in Emerging Market Economies and rapid economic growth
   7
    Our measure of consumption consists of household’s aggregate consumption expenditures. Our measure of wealth
consists of households financial assets minus financial liabilities, plus housing and agricultural land. It does not include
human wealth (the present discounted value of present and future non-financial income).



                                                             5
relative to Advanced Economies (see Bernanke (2005) and Caballero et al. (2008)). Low short

term real interest rates can also result from an increased demand for ‘safe assets’ (Caballero and

Farhi (2015)), especially in the aftermath of financial crises. An abundant body of empirical evi-

dence documents how households, firms, governments simultaneously attempt to de-lever in order

to repair their balance sheet after a major financial shock (see e.g. Mian et al. (2013) and Jordà

et al. (2013)). Post-crisis weakness in the banking sector which often shuts out small businesses

from credit markets, and the re-regulation of the financial sector which limits risk-taking and may

involve some degree of financial repression also contribute to low real interest rates (Reinhart and

Rogoff (2009)). A faster decline in the price of investment goods can also reduce natural rates of

interest, if the elasticity of the volume of investment to the real interest rate is not too high.

       Our empirical method does not allow us to separately test these four hypotheses. However it

strongly suggests that the ‘savings glut’ explanation and de-leveraging dynamics played a large

role in the decline in real rates both in the 1930s and now, as in Eggertsson and Krugman (2012)

or Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011). Our findings are thus consistent with the view that the main

low-frequency drivers of global real interest rates are cyclical movements in the demand for safe

assets, in a context of limited supply, i.e. an environment of ‘safe asset scarcity’.8

       The second part of our paper considers more closely the implications of our findings for global

imbalances. Since the Global Financial Crisis, global imbalances have diminished but have not

disappeared altogether. Figure 5 reports current account surpluses and deficits for countries or

regions, scaled by world output since 1980. While U.S. current account deficits have decreased,

they remain sizable, at -0.66 percent of world GDP in 2015, representing around a third of all current

account deficits. On the funding side, two developments are noticeable. First, the surpluses of oil

producers have disappeared. Second, the Eurozone has become a major source of surpluses, with

a current account surplus of 0.61% of world output in 2015. Figure 6 reports current account

balances and surpluses for members of the Eurozone since 1993, as a fraction of Eurozone output.9

It is quite startling to observe that, since 2014, all Eurozone countries are running current account
   8
     This terminology sometimes leads to some confusion. It should be clear that, in equilibrium, the supply of assets
(safe or otherwise) always equals their demand. Instead ‘scarcity of safe assets’ refers to a situation where there is
either an autonomous increase in the demand for safe assets, or an autonomous decline in their supply, leading to
an endogenous adjustment in their price (outside the ZLB) or in output (at the ZLB) so as to restore equilibrium in
these markets. See Caballero et al. (2016).
   9
     In both graphs, the Eurozone consists of the 12 major members of the EMU for which we have consistent data
over that period.



                                                          6
surpluses or have a balanced position, and are projected to do so in years to come.

      In Caballero et al. (2015) and Caballero et al. (2016), one of us argued that current account

imbalances mutate from ‘benign’ to ‘malign’ when the global economy hits the Zero Lower Bound.

Excess savings of surplus countries cannot be accommodated any longer by a decline in global real

interest rates. Instead, they push the global economy into a liquidity trap that depresses economic

activity. Surplus countries export their recession, at the expense of deficit countries. Moreover,

Caballero et al. (2016) argues that exchange rates become indeterminate at the Zero Lower Bound,

yet play a key role in the adjustment process, by shifting relative demand for domestic and foreign

goods. The analysis in that paper indicates a tight link between net foreign asset positions and

exchange rates: countries or regions running current account surpluses have a more depreciated

currency than under financial autarky, and correspondingly higher levels of activity, at the expense

of foreign countries. A direct and immediate implication is that the exchange rate becomes a key

variable to reallocate depressed global demand across countries, raising the prospect of ‘currency

wars’.10 This analysis suggests that a period of secular stagnation does not necessarily imply

that global imbalances should recede. Instead, imbalances at the ZLB have a greater potential to

destabilize the global economy.

      Indeed, Figure 7 illustrates that significant exchange rates movements have accompanied most

major central bank attempts to stimulate their economy since 2008. The figure reports the cumu-

lated rate of appreciation (+) or depreciation (-) of the euro against the US dollar, the Japanese

yen and the Swiss franc since January 2007. The figure illustrates the large recent gyrations in

exchange rates, especially in the dollar-euro rate after the implementation of the Federal Reserve’s

QE2 in October 2010 or the announcement of the ECB’s public sector purchase program (PSPP)

in January 2015; in the yen-euro rate following Abenomics in December 2013; or in the Swiss franc-

euro rate after the Swiss National Bank decided to put a floor on the bilateral rate (September

2011) and to abandon it (January 2015). The figure also illustrates the significant depreciation of

the Euro against the three other currencies since 2014, consistent with the surge in the Eurozone’s

current account surpluses.

      In this context we ask how the growing demand for safe assets shapes external portfolios.

Gourinchas et al. (2010) explored the implications of being a world insurer for the United States’
 10
      See Eggertsson et al. (2015) for a similar argument.



                                                             7
               % OF WORLD GDP
                                                                                 Asian Crisis               Financial Crisis Eurozone Crisis
                                 2.50

                                 2.00

                                 1.50

                                 1.00

                                 0.50

                                 0.00

                            -0.50

                            -1.00

                            -1.50

                            -2.00

                            -2.50
                                         1980       1983     1986     1989    1992     1995       1998     2001      2004      2007     2010    2013


                                         U.S.       Eurozone 12     Japan    Oil Producers     Emerging Asia ex-China        China    Rest of the world




Figure 5: Global Imbalances, 1980-2015. Note: The graph shows Current Account balances as a
fraction of world GDP. Source: World Economic Outlook Database (April 2016), and Authors’ calculations.
WEO forecasts for 2015. Oil Producers: Bahrain, Canada, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Mexico, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; Emerging Asia ex-China: India,
Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam. Eurozone 12: Austria,
Belgium, Cyprus, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain.


                                       5%

                                       4%

                                       3%
                % of Eurozone Output




                                       2%

                                       1%

                                       0%

                                       -1%

                                       -2%

                                       -3%
                                             1993          1996      1999        2002         2005         2008         2011          2014        2017
                                                    Germany            Ireland               Greece               Portugal            Italy
                                                    Spain              France                Netherlands          Others              Euro 12



Figure 6: Eurozone Imbalances, 1993-2017. Note: The graph shows the current account balances of
Eurozone countries, relative to Eurozone output. Source: World Economic Outlook Database (April 2016)
and Authors’ calculations. WEO forecasts for 2015-2017. Euro 12: Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain.


                                                                                              8
                      percent
                                                                     QE2     CHF Floor     Abenomics           ECB QE
                       30

                       20

                       10

                          0

                      -10

                      -20

                      -30

                      -40

                      -50

                      -60
                              2007     2008     2009       2010       2011        2012      2013       2014      2015      2016


                                                       Dollar-Euro         Yen-Euro         Swiss Franc-Euro




Figure 7: Global Exchange Rates, 2007-2016. Note: The graph shows the cumulated depreciation
(+) or appreciation (-) of the dollar, the yen, and the Swiss Franc against the euro since January 2007.
Source: Global Financial Database. The figure reports ln(E2007m1 /E) where E denotes the foreign currency
value in euro.




                    20%


                    10%


                     0%


                   -10%


                   -20%


                   -30%


                   -40%


                   -50%


                   -60%
                       1952          1957     1963      1969      1975       1980        1986   1992      1998      2003     2009   2015


                                               Net Foreign Assets                        Cum. Current Account


Figure 8: United States Net Foreign Asset Position and Cumulated Current Account,
1952-2015. Note: The graph shows the U.S. net foreign asset position as a fraction of U.S. output and
the counterfactual obtained by cumulating current account balances since 1952Q1. Source: BEA, Flow of
Funds and Author’s calculations.


                                                                                9
external portfolio. That paper argued that the structure of the U.S.’s external portfolio (gross assets

and gross liabilities) reflects its capacity to provide safe assets. With integrated financial markets,

asset prices and returns adjust so that, in equilibrium, the U.S. provides insurance to the rest of the

world. This is reflected in the fact that (a) the U.S. holds a leveraged position long in risky assets

and short in safe assets, relative to the rest of the world; (b) in normal times, the U.S. earns high

returns on its gross assets relative to its gross liabilities (the ‘exorbitant privilege’ of the United

States); (c) the U.S. experiences large capital losses in times of financial stresses (a phenomenon

we called the ‘exorbitant duty’). This last point is especially relevant in recent years. Figure 8

reports updated estimates of the U.S. net foreign asset position since 1952. Between 2007Q4 and

2015Q3, the U.S. external valuation losses represent $4.13 trillion, or a staggering 22.9% of 2015

U.S. GDP.11 Three episodes account for the bulk of these adjustments: in 2008Q4, following the

collapse of Lehman Brothers; in 2011Q3 during the Eurozone crisis, and in 2014Q4 when the dollar

appreciated substantially against the yen and the euro. As a result, the bulk of the U.S. cumulated

valuation gains since 1952, which reached 35% of US GDP at their peak in 2007, have dissipated.

    An important message of Gourinchas et al. (2010) is that the status of safe asset issuer inevitably

comes with increased exposure to global shocks. In the current paper, we move away from the U.S.

and consider instead what the implications of our analysis are for regional safe asset providers. As

we argued in Gourinchas and Rey (2007a), net safe asset providers face a variant of the old ‘Triffin

dilemma’ (Triffin (1960)): faced with a surge in the demand for their (safe) assets, regional safe

asset providers must choose between increasing their external exposure, or letting their currency

appreciate. In the former case, the increased exposure can generate potentially large valuation

losses in the event of a global crisis, as documented in the case of the U.S.. In the limit, as the

exposure grows, it could even threaten the fiscal capacity of the regional safe asset provider, or the

loss absorbing capacity of its central bank, leading to a run equilibrium.12

    Alternatively, a regional safe asset provider may choose to limit its exposure, i.e. the supply of

its safe assets. The surge in demand then translates into an appreciation of the domestic currency

which may adversely impact the real economy, especially the tradable sector. The smaller the
   11
      In 2007Q4, the U.S. net foreign asset position was -$1.28 trillion. By 2015Q3, it reached -$9.03 trillion, a $7.74
trillion decline, $3.61 trillion of which represents cumulated current account deficits, and $4.13 trillion (22.9% of U.S.
GDP) valuation losses.
   12
      See Maggiori et al. (2016) and Amador et al. (2015) for recent related analyses of the Triffin dilemma or the
potential for ‘reverse speculative attacks’. See also He et al. (2015) for a discussion of the issue of the determination
of the status of reserve assets in a world with competing stores of value.


                                                           10
regional safe asset provider is, the less palatable either of these alternatives is likely to be, a

phenomenon we dub the ‘curse of the regional safe asset provider.’

       In light of these considerations, we revisit the recent experience of two European safe asset

providers: Switzerland, and core EMU, consisting of Germany, France, the Netherlands and Bel-

gium. The case of Switzerland illustrates nicely the terms of the basic trade-off: After fixing its

exchange rate against the euro in September 2011, the Swiss National Bank grew increasingly wor-

ried about its external exposure and the potential for future losses in the wake of the ECB’s PSPP.

In January 2015, in a surprise announcement, the Swiss National Bank chose to let the currency

float, a move that was followed by a sharp appreciation of the Swiss currency (see Figure 7).

       The case of the core EMU is equally fascinating. In the run-up to the financial crisis, it acted

as a safe asset provider, with an extra twist. As documented by Hale and Obstfeld (2016), core

EMU countries invested in risky projects in peripheral Eurozone members, but also intermediated

foreign capital from outside the Eurozone into these countries, thereby increasing further their

exposure. Most of that increased exposure occurred via an expansion in core EMU banks’ balance

sheet and leverage (Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015)) and cross-border loans instead of portfolio

holdings. In the run-up to the Eurozone crisis, core EMU banks borrowed globally and lent to

peripheral Eurozone countries, earning small but positive excess returns in the process. With a

common currency, core EMU countries could not let their real exchange rate appreciate in response

to a surge in the demand for safe assets, except via gradual domestic inflation. Instead, they have

tended to absorb the increased exposure onto their national balance sheet.13

       When the Eurozone crisis materialized, as in the case of the U.S. and other safe asset providers,

core EMU stood to realize substantial capital losses on its net external position, a combination of

losses on its gross external assets and capital gains on its external liabilities. With an exposure

structure similar to the U.S., rough calculations indicate that the valuation losses could have reached

a staggering 40% of output for Germany alone. Unlike the U.S., however, where the valuation losses

were immediately realized via changes in asset prices and currency price movements, resulting in

the sharp decline in the U.S. net foreign asset position documented in Figure 8, the protracted

resolution process of the European Sovereign Debt crisis mitigated the losses of the core EMU
  13
    Some of that increase in financial sector exposure may also reflect risk shifting and expectations of bailouts using
tax payers money. This emphasizes the need for a very careful monitoring of financial fragilities and imbalances,
especially for EMU safe asset providers.



                                                          11
countries but profoundly hampered the economic recovery of the region. Without a Eurozone

debt resolution mechanism for banks or sovereigns, and with the fear that markets might turn

on them, most peripheral eurozone members embarked on multiple rounds of private and public

deleveraging. The result has been a massive shift from current account balance in 2007 for the

Eurozone, to a current account surplus of 0.5% of world GDP in 2014, predicted to rise to 0.6% in

2015, as illustrated on Figures 5 and 6.14 If the Eurozone had been a closed economy, the resulting

deflationary forces may well have proven self-defeating, just like attempts to deflate one’s economy

at the expense of one’s trading partners were ultimately self-defeating during the Great Depression

under the Gold Exchange Standard. At the global Zero Lower Bound, the shift towards external

surpluses has lessened the burden of adjustment on the Eurozone, at the expense of the rest of the

world.

         In summary, our analysis suggests that core EMU countries have not performed their role as

regional safe asset providers. Unlike the U.S. which saw its net foreign asset position deteriorate

substantially during the crisis, as U.S. Treasuries appreciated while external assets plummeted in

value, core EMU economies have not absorbed the banking losses that were on their balance sheet.

Instead they pushed back the losses onto the peripheral countries public sector balance sheet ex-

post which forced them to de-lever aggressively. This aggregate delevering, and the corresponding

surge in saving continues to have deleterious effects on the global economy. Given our finding that

real interest rates will remain low for an extended period of time, we consider that it would be

wise to steer away from policies that make us teeter on the edge of a global liquidity trap. Being a

regional safe asset provider may prove to be a curse not only to the core EMU, but to the Eurozone

at large, and to the global economy.



2         The Dynamics of Global Real Interest rates

As illustrated in Figures 1 and 2, both long and short rates have declined dramatically over the

last thirty years. A growing literature has attempted to understand the source of this decline and
    14
    Figure 6 demonstrates that the bulk of the increase in the Eurozone current account surpluses does not come
from core EMU. Core EMU current account surpluses increased modestly from 2.3% to 2.6% of the region’s output
between 2007 and 2015. Over that period, the rest of the Eurozone’s current account improved from -1.9% to 0.5%,
representing 87% of the improvement in the Eurozone’s current account.




                                                      12
concludes that the decline in global real rates is likely to be quite persistent.15 In this paper, we

borrow from Gourinchas and Rey (2016) and propose a novel approach based on the low frequency

movements in the global consumption-to-wealth ratio.


2.1    The Global Budget Constraint: Some Elements of Theory

To fix ideas, denote beginning-of-period world private wealth Wt . Wt consists of private finan-

cial wealth (assets minus liabilities) as well as private non financial assets such as housing, non

incorporated businesses, land etc...16 The accumulation equation for the global economy is:



                                            Wt+1 = Rt+1 (Wt − Ct ),                                               (1)


where Ct denotes world private consumption expenditures and Rt+1 is the gross return on wealth

between t and t + 1. In this equation, all variables are in real terms so Rt+1 denotes the real

return on total wealth. Equation (1) is simply an accounting identity: it has to hold exactly period

by period. We add some structure on this equation by observing that, in most models, private

agents aim to stabilize the ratio of their consumption to their wealth.17 If the average propensity

to consume out of wealth is stationary, equation (1) can be log-linearized around the steady state

consumption-total wealth ratio C/W ≡ 1−ρw , where ρw < 1.18 Denoting ∆ the difference operator,

Et the expectation operator, rt+1 = ln Rt+1 the continuously compounded real return on wealth and

following some simple manipulations as in Campbell and Mankiw (1989), Lettau and Ludvigson
  15
     Barro and Sala-i Martin (1990) explores the converse question of why real interest rates were so high in the
1980s. More recently, Laubach and Williams (2003, 2015) and Pescatori and Turunen (2015) attempt to measure the
(unobserved) natural rate. Following Wicksell, they define the natural rate as “the real short-term rate consistent
with the economy operating at its full potential once transitory shocks to aggregate supply or demand have abated”
(Laubach and Williams (2015), p 2). Hamilton et al. (2015) adopts a similar definition but a different estimation
method, relying on a bivariate error correction model for U.S. and world interest rates.
  16
     In the following discussion, we ignore human wealth, i.e. the present value of current and future labor income.
We focus on private consumption and wealth, as opposed to national consumption and wealth, which includes public
consumption and net wealth. Our results are largely unchanged if we use either concept, except during wars where
public consumption surges, while private consumption declines.
  17
     For instance, if consumption decisions are taken by an infinitely lived representative household with logarithmic
period utility u(C) = ln C, then the consumption wealth ratio is constant and equal to the discount rate of the
representative agent.
  18                                                         Γ            C
     In steady state, C/W satisfies the following relation: R̄  = (1 − W    ) ≡ ρw , where Γ denotes the steady state
growth rate of total wealth and R the steady state gross return.




                                                         13
(2001) and Gourinchas and Rey (2016) we can derive the following fundamental relationship:

                                     ∞                       ∞                        ∞
                                                f
                                     X                       X                        X
                      ct − wt w Et         ρsw rt+s   + Et         ρsw rpt+s   − Et         ρsw ∆ ln Ct+s        (2)
                                     s=1                     s=1                      s=1

                               ≡ cwtrf + cwtrp + cwtc ,


       where ct and wt denote respectively (log) real consumption (resp. real wealth) per capita, rtf

is the real short term risk-free return, rpt is the excess return.19 Equation (2) states that today’s

aggregate consumption to wealth ratio (the left hand side) is high if either (a) expected future

rates of return on wealth are high so that the denominator of C/W is expected to increase or (b)

expected future aggregate consumption growth is low, so the numerator of C/W is expected to

decline.

       It is important to emphasize that the assumptions needed to derive this relation are minimal:

we started from the law of motion of private wealth, which is simply an accounting identity. In

particular, it holds with or without investment or production – these are simply factors that affect

the return on wealth. We then performed a log-linearization under mild stationarity condition.20

This simple equation conveys the message that today’s average propensity to consume out of wealth

encodes information about expected future consumption growth Et ∆ ln Ct+s , expected future safe
          f
rates Et rt+s , or future risk-premia Et rpt+s . It also indicates how to construct the contributions

of each component, cwtrf , cwtrp and cwtc as the expected present discounted value of each variable.

Since it is well-known that aggregate consumption is close to a random walk, so that its growth

rate ∆ ln Ct+s is largely unpredictable, and excess returns are also volatile and difficult to predict,

we expect from equation (2) that the aggregate consumption to financial wealth ratio will provide
                                                                                          f
us with significant information about the expected path of future real risk free returns rt+s .
  19
     The return on wealth can always be decomposed as r = rf + r − rf , the sum of the real risk-free rate rf and
                                                                         

an excess return r − rf . We don’t observe the excess return on wealth r − rf , so we proxy it with the excess equity
return rp, adjusted with a noise parameter which we estimate to maximize the empirical fit of equation (2). See
Gourinchas and Rey (2016) for details.
  20
     We also impose a transversality condition that simply rules out paths where wealth grows without bounds in
relation to consumption.




                                                             14
2.2   Interpretation

Equation (2) does not provide a causal decomposition: in general, the risk free and risky returns

as well as consumption growth are endogenous and interdependent. In Gourinchas and Rey (2016)

we discuss how different shocks are likely to impact the various terms on the right hand side of

equation (2) and summarize this discussion here:

   • Productivity Shocks: persistent negative productivity shocks decrease future aggregate

      consumption growth ∆ ln Ct+s , which pushes up ct − wt (direct effect). There is an indirect

      effect that goes in the opposite direction since lower productivity growth tends to reduce

      equilibrium real interest rates, which pushes ct − wt down. The relative strength of the two

      effects depends on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). With a low IES, real

      rates respond more than consumption growth, hence the indirect effect is likely to dominate

      and ct − wt will decline. If instead the IES is high, consumption growth responds more than

      real rates, the direct effect dominates and ct − wt increases. More generally, we expect the

      return component cwtrf and the consumption growth components cwtc to have opposite signs if

      productivity shocks are a main source of fluctuations: low future interest rates would coincide

      with low per-capita and total consumption growth.

   • Demographics: a slowdown in population growth has a direct effect on the consumption-

      wealth ratio via the decline in total consumption growth ∆ ln Ct+s . This direct effect is

      the same as that of productivity and pushes up ct − wt . Population growth may also have an

      indirect effect on the consumption-wealth ratio via its effect on savings and global real returns.

      If the lower population growth induces higher saving rates among currently alive generations,

      the real interest rate will decline and this will tend to push down ct −wt . Similarly, increases in

      life expectancy that reduce the ratio of workers to retiree may stimulate savings, as households

      need to provide for a longer retirement life, pushing down real rates and reducing ct − wt .

      Again, we expect opposite movements in the return and the consumption growth components:

      low future interest rates would coincide with low total consumption growth (but not per-capita

      consumption growth).

   • Deleveraging shock: A deleveraging shock can be interpreted as an increase in the saving

      propensity (see Eggertsson and Krugman (2012); Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011)). There

                                                   15
      is ample evidence that saving propensities increase in the aftermath of financial crises, as

      households attempt to repair their balance sheets (see e.g. Mian et al. (2013)). In equilibrium

      this needs to be offset by a decline in the equilibrium real rate. The response of future total

      consumption depends on whether the economy operates outside the Zero Lower Bound or not.

      Outside the ZLB, investment is likely to increase. While current consumption growth would

      be low initially, it would increase later as output increases. If the economy is at the ZLB,

      aggregate demand may remain depressed, which would keep investment low and consumption

      growth muted. Most of the impact of financial shocks is therefore likely to be reflected in the

      return component cwtrf .

   • Demand for safe asset: A surge in the demand for safe assets should lead to a decline

      in the real risk-free rate, and an increase in the risk premium, i.e. expected excess returns.

      The first effect tends to reduce ct − wt while the second increases it. The overall effect on

      consumption growth is unclear. We therefore expect to see the impact of an increase in the

      demand for safe assets in a decline of the return component cwtrf and an opposite movement

      in the risk premium component.

We conclude that different primitive shocks have different effects on the various components on the

right hand side of equation (2) which we will exploit later to help us identify the relevant source of

the variation in the data.


2.3   Empirical implementation

We implement our empirical strategy in two steps. In the first step, we construct estimates of the

consumption-wealth ratio over long periods of time. We then evaluate the empirical validity of

equation (2) by constructing the empirical counterparts of cwtrf , cwtrp , cwtc in that equation and

testing whether they accurately capture movements in the consumption wealth ratio (i.e. whether

ct −wt = cwtrf +cwtrp +cwtc ). In a second step, we directly evaluate the forecasting performance of the

consumption-wealth variable ct − wt for future risk-free interest rates, risk premia and consumption

growth.

   For the first step, we use historical data on private wealth, population and private consumption

for the period 1920-2011 for the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and France from


                                                  16
Piketty and Zucman (2014a) and Jordà et al. (2016).21 We identify the risk-free return with

the ex-post real return on three-month Treasuries minus CPI inflation (both series obtained from

Jordà et al. (2016)), and the real return on risky assets as the total equity return for each country

minus CPI inflation (obtained from the Global Financial Database- see Appendix A for a detailed

description of the data). Over the period considered, these four countries represent a substantial

share of the world’s wealth. Moreover London, New-York and to a lesser extent Frankfurt are major

financial centers.

       The dotted blue line in Figure 9 reports c−w, demeaned, for our 4-country aggregate since 1920

(G4).22 As expected, historical time-series on the consumption wealth ratio show little long run

trend but significant serial correlation. These long swings in the consumption-wealth ratio justify

the use of long time series.23

       We identify two periods during which the consumption-wealth ratio was significantly depressed:

the first one spans the 1930s starting around the time of the Great Depression and ending at the

beginning of the 1940s. Interestingly, it is in 1939 that Professor Alvin Hansen wrote his celebrated

article about ‘secular stagnation’ (Hansen (1939)). The second episode of low consumption-wealth

ratio starts in the late 1990s with a pronounced downward peak in 2007 that is reversed during

the financial crisis. As this paper is being written, the consumption-wealth ratio remains depressed

for the G-4 aggregate. Not coincidentally, in the Fall 2013 at a conference at the International

Monetary Fund, Larry Summers, revived the idea of secular stagnation (Summers (2015)). From

an accounting point of view, a low consumption wealth-ratio can follow periods of low consump-

tion growth or periods of rapid wealth growth. In both cases (in 1928-29, then in 2007-08), the

consumption-wealth ratio decreases dramatically right before a financial crisis, then rebounded

during the crisis (1930 and 2009). This suggests that the movements in the consumption-wealth

ratio are driven mostly by the dynamics of wealth during boom-busts episodes.

       We estimate each of the components on the right hand side of equation (2) using a reduced

form Vector Auto Regression (VAR).24
  21
     The wealth data prior to 1920 for these three countries is somewhat imprecise. There appears to be a strong
break in data before the 1920s, most likely due to the first World War.
  22
     The appendix presents the raw data.
  23
     Over shorter time periods, ct − wt may exhibit a marked trend. For instance, over the 1970-2011 period, we
observe a large decline in ct − wt .
  24
     Note that our approach does not need to identify the various structural shocks driving the variables. Equation
(2) only requires that we construct present discounted forecasts of real rates, excess returns and consumption growth.



                                                         17
2.4    VAR Results

Figure 9 shows the consumption wealth ratio as well the components of the right hand side of

equation (2) for the G4.25 We further decompose total consumption growth ∆ ln Ct into per capita

consumption growth ∆ct and population growth ∆nt and report separate components for the

expected present value of future population growth (cwn ) and per-capita consumption growth

(cwcp ).

    The results are striking. First, we note that the fit of the VAR is very good.26 The grey line

reports the predicted consumption-wealth ratio, i.e. the sum of the four components cwtrf + cwtrp +

cwtn + cwtc . We find that our empirical model is able to reproduce quite accurately the annual

fluctuations in wealth over almost a century of data. This is quite striking since the right hand side

of equation (2) is constructed only from the reduced form forecasts implied by the VAR estimation.

Second, most of the movements in the consumption-wealth ratio reflect expected movements in the

future risk-free rate, i.e. the cwtrf component. By contrast, the risk premia cwtrp , population growth

cwtn and per capita consumption growth cwtcp components are often economically insignificant. it

follows that the consumption-wealth ratio today contains significant information on future real

risk-free rates, as encoded in equation (2). As discussed above, periods of low consumption-wealth

ratios are following periods of rapid asset price increases. Our empirical results indicate that these

are followed by extended periods of low (or negative) real risk-free interest rates. Moreover, we find

only weak evidence for the view that productivity growth or demographic forces are key secular

drivers of the real risk free rates since neither per capita consumption growth nor population growth

seem to matter much. Recall that if productivity or population growth were the main drivers of

the consumption wealth ratio, we would expect to find significantly negatively correlated direct

contribution of each of these (cwc and cwn ) with the real interest rate contribution (cwrf ). While

we find a negatively correlated contribution, it is economically small -and also not very robust.27
We assume a discount rate ρw = 0.96. Recall that ρw = 1 − C/W̄ . This implies an average propensity to consume
out of wealth of 4%. Our calculations also estimate a ‘noise’ parameter for potential mismeasurement of the excess
returnPon private wealth. We estimate this noise parameter by regressing ct − wt − cw      ˆ rf
                                                                                             t − cwˆ ct on our estimate
        ∞    s
of Et s=1 ρw rpt+s . While this maximizes the overall fit of the decomposition, it does not affect the risk-free and
consumption growth contributions. See Gourinchas and Rey (2016) for details.
  25
     We use a wealth-weighted average of the riskfree rate of the U.S. and the U.K. for the risk-free rate, and of the
equity excess returns for the global excess return. Substantial price instability in the 1920s in Germany and France
prevent us from using these countries’ real returns.
  26
     The lags of the VAR are selected by standard criteria.
  27
     As discussed above, for the interest rate component to dominate the productivity or population growth terms
would require a very low intertemporal elasticity.


                                                          18
                 .3


                 .2


                 .1


                 .0


                 -.1


                 -.2


                 -.3


                 -.4
                   1920   1930     1940    1950    1960        1970    1980    1990    2000   2010

                                      ln(c/w)                         Risk free comp.
                                      Risk premium comp.              Cons. per cap. comp.
                                      Pop. growth comp.               Predicted




Figure 9: Consumption Wealth: Real Risk-free rate, Equity Premium, Consumption
per capita and Population Growth Components. United States, United Kingdom,
Germany and France, 1920-2011. Note: The graph reports the (log, demeaned) private consumption-
wealth ratio together with the riskfree, risk premium, consumption per capita and population growth com-
ponents. Estimates a VAR(2). Source: Private wealth from Piketty and Zucman (2014a). Consumption,
population and short rates from Jordà et al. (2016). Equity returns from Global Financial Database.


Similarly, our estimates indicate that the consumption-wealth ratio contains little information about

future equity risk premia. This is perhaps a more surprising result in light of Lettau and Ludvigson

(2001)’s findings that a cointegration relation between aggregate consumption, wealth and labor

income predicts reasonably well U.S. equity risk premia.28

       Table 1 decomposes the variance of ct − wt into components reflecting news about future real

risk-free rates, future risk premia, and future consumption growth. It is immediate that the bulk

of the variation in c − w is accounted for by future movements in the real short term risk-free rate.

The fact that total consumption growth contributes negatively is consistent with the view that

the productivity slowdown may play a role: the contribution of consumption growth per capita is
  28
    A number of factors may account for our result. First and foremost, ct − wt is stationary in our sample, hence we
do not need to estimate a cointegrating vector with labor income. Second, we consider a longer sample period, going
back to 1920. Thirdly, as argued above, our sample is dominated by two large financial crises and their aftermath,
unlike theirs. Lastly, we view our analysis as picking up low frequency determinants of real risk-free rates while
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) seem to capture business cycle frequencies.



                                                          19
                                       #     percent             G4
                                       1     βr f               1.406
                                       2     βrp                0.025
                                       3     βc                -0.336
                                             of which:
                                       4       βcp             -0.168
                                       5       βn              -0.168
                                       6     Total              1.094
                                             (lines 1+2+3)

                  Table 1: Unconditional Variance Decomposition of ct − wt
Note: βrf (resp.βrp , and βc ) represents the share of the unconditional variance of c − w explained by future
risk free returns (resp. future risk premia and future total consumption growth); βcp (βn ) represents the
share of the unconditional variance of c − w explained by per capita consumption growth (population
growth). The sum of coefficients βcp + βn is not exactly equal to βc due to numerical rounding in the VAR
estimation. Sample: 1920-2011


negative. However productivity growth or population growth are unlikely to be the main drivers

of c − w unless they have a disproportionate effect on real risk free returns.


2.5    Predictive regressions

Our decomposition exercise indicates that the consumption-wealth ratio contains information on

future risk-free rates. We can evaluate directly the predictive power of cwt by running regressions

of the form:

                                           yt+k = α + βcwt + t+k                                         (3)


where yt+k denotes the variable we are trying to forecast at horizon k and cwt is the consumption-

wealth ratio at the beginning of period t. We consider the following candidates for y: the average

real risk free rate between t and t + k; the average one-year excess return between t and t + k; the

average annual real consumption growth growth per capita between t and t + k; the average annual

population growth between t and t + k.

   Tables 2 presents the results. We find that the consumption-wealth ratio always contains

substantial information about future short term risk free rates (panel A). The coefficients are

increasing with the horizon and become strongly significant. They also have the correct sign,

according to our decomposition: a low c − w strongly predicts a period of below average real risk-

free rates. By contrast, the consumption-wealth ratio has almost no predictive power for the equity

risk premium and very limited predictive power for per capita consumption growth. The regressions


                                                     20
                                   U.S., U.K., France and Germany
                                       Forecast Horizon (Years)
                                             1     2      5        10
                                      A. Short term interest rate
                                 ct − wt .07      .10    .19      .22
                                           (.06) (.06) (.06) (.04)
                                    R2     [.03] [.07] [.27]     [.43]
                                 B. Consumption growth (per-capita)
                                 ct − wt .06      .05    .02      .01
                                           (.04) (.04) (.02) (.02)
                                    R2     [.06] [.06] [.02]     [.00]
                                          C. Equity Premium
                                 ct − wt .27      .20    .01     -.06
                                           (.25) (.18) (.11) (.11)
                                    R2     [.02] [.02] [.00]     [.01]
                                        D. Population Growth
                                 ct − wt .02      .02    .02      .02
                                           (.01) (.01) (.01) (.01)
                                    R2     [.07] [.13] [.18]     [.24]

Table 2: Long Horizon Regressions. Note: The table reports point estimates, Newey-West corrected
standard errors and the R2 of the forecasting regression.


indicate some predictive power for population growth: a low c − w predicts a low future population

growth which suggests that the indirect effect (via changes in real risk-free rates) dominates the

direct effect, since the direct effect of a lower future population growth (and total consumption

growth) would be to increase c − w according to Equation (2).

    Figure 10 reports our forecast of the risk free rate using the G-4 consumption-wealth ratio at 1,
                                                                 f             f
                                                                    = k1 k−1
                                                                        P
2, 5 and 10 year horizon. For each year t, the graph reports rt,k         s=0 rt+s , the average of the

one-year real risk-free rate between t and t + k where k is the forecasting horizon. The graph also
                              f
reports the predicted value r̂t,k based on predictive regression (3). While the fit of the regression is

quite poor at 1-year, it becomes quite striking at 10-year. Our point estimates indicate that short

term real risk free rates are expected to remain around -2% for an extended period of time. The

last forecasting point is 2011, indicating a forecast of -2% until 2021 (bottom right graph).


2.6    Interpretation.

Taken together, our results suggest that boom-bust financial cycles are a strong determinant of

real short term interest rates. Wealth increases rapidly during the boom, faster then consumption.

Increased leverage, financial exuberance, and risk appetite fuel asset prices, bringing down c − w.


                                                    21
               .20                                                                               .20

               .16
                                                                                                 .15
               .12
                                                                                                 .10
               .08

               .04                                                                               .05

               .00
                                                                                                 .00
              -.04
                                                                                                 -.05
              -.08

              -.12                                                                               -.10
                 1920   1930   1940   1950   1960    1970       1980   1990   2000   2010           1920   1930   1940   1950   1960     1970       1980   1990   2000   2010


                                              1 -year ahe ad                                                                    2 -ye ars ahe ad



               .10                                                                               .08
                                                                                                                                       actua l
               .08                                                                               .06                                   fitte d

               .06
                                                                                                 .04

               .04
                                                                                                 .02
               .02
                                                                                                 .00
               .00
                                                                                                 -.02
              -.02

              -.04                                                                               -.04


              -.06                                                                               -.06
                 1920   1930   1940   1950   1960    1970       1980   1990   2000   2010           1920   1930   1940   1950   1960     1970       1980   1990   2000   2010


                                             5-yea rs a hea d                                                                   10-yea rs a hea d




Figure 10: Predictive Regressions: Risk Free Rate, 1920-2010. Note: The graph reports
forecasts at 1, 2, 5 and 10 years of the annualized global real risk free rate from a regression on past ln(c/w).
Each graph reports, for each time t, the average short real interest rate between t and t + k where k is the
forecasting horizon, together with the forecast at time t, based on cwt .


Two such historical episodes for the global economy are the roaring 1920s and the 2000s. In

the subsequent bust, asset prices collapse, collateral constraints bind, and households, firms and

governments attempt to simultaneously de-leverage, as risk appetite wanes. The combined effect is

an increase in saving that keeps future safe real interest rates low. An additional force may come

from a weakened banking sector and financial re-regulation or repression that combine to further

constrain lending activity to the real sector. Our estimates indicate that short term real risk free

rates are expected to remain low or even negative for an extended period of time. Since current

rates are constrained by the Zero Lower Bound, natural real interest rates might be even lower!

    Our empirical results do not support directly the view that low real interest rates are the result

of low expected future productivity –since we don’t find much predictive or explanatory power for

future per capita consumption growth- or demographic forces. Instead, it points us towards the

global financial cycle boom/bust cycle, both in the 1930s and now. Under this interpretation, it is

the increased in desired savings, and the move away from risky asset that drive real interest rate

determination. Therefore, we view these empirical results very much in line with interpretations



                                                                                            22
of recent events that emphasize the global financial cycle (Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015),

Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), as well as the scarcity of safe assets (Caballero and Farhi (2015)).



3     Imbalances and The Curse of the Regional Safe Asset Providers.

If the scarcity of safe assets can drive equilibrium real interest rates down -potentially into a global

liquidity trap, with most advanced economies at the ZLB, their geographical distribution will

determine the pattern of global imbalances. As described in Gourinchas et al. (2010), the country

at the centre of the international monetary system acts as the world insurer and global liquidity

provider. As such, its external balance sheet is particularly remarkable, featuring large amounts of

liquid gross external liabilities and large gross mostly illiquid external assets. It follows that the

center country typically has a large long net position in risky assets and a large short net position

in safe liabilities. As shown in Figure 11, U.S. net exposure to risky assets amounts to about 10%

GDP in 2015Q4 after having reached 37% of GDP in 2007 Q4, while U.S. short net position in

safe liabilities amounts to around 58% of GDP in 2015Q4, having undergone a trend increase (in

absolute value) since 1984.29

    This asymmetric composition of assets and liabilities explains largely the excess returns that the

US earns on its external position. But this exorbitant privilege (see Gourinchas and Rey (2007a))

comes with an exorbitant duty (Gourinchas et al. (2010)). In times of global stress the value of

the external assets of the U.S., dominated by risky investment, plummets while the value of its

liabilities remains stable or even appreciates. As the centre country provides insurance to the rest

of the world, its gross liabilities can be large relative to its own economic size. The properties of

the external balance sheet of the centre country therefore imply massive wealth transfers to the

rest of the world in troubled times. Since at least the summer of 2007, financial markets have

been in turmoil. The subprime crisis, followed by the default or near default of several investment

banks, insurance companies and nation states has driven volatility to levels not seen in the last

two decades. Inspection of the data on the net foreign asset position of the United States during

the period of the recent crisis is very revealing. As discussed earlier, Figure 8 reports updated
  29
     Net exposure to risky assets is defined as FDI assets+ equity assets+ loans and portfolio debt to emerging markets
and euro area periphery - (FDI liabilities+ Equity liabilities). Net safe liability position is defined as Net Foreign
Asset position - net risky asset position. The net safe liability position consists therefore of loans and portfolio debt
assets to advanced economies (except euro area periphery) + gold and reserves - portfolio and bank liabilities.



                                                           23
                                      United	  States	  -­‐ Net	  exposure	  (%	  of	  GDP)
                  60,00%




                  40,00%




                  20,00%




                    0,00%




                  -­‐20,00%




                  -­‐40,00%




                  -­‐60,00%




                  -­‐80,00%

                                               Net	  R isky	  Assets/GDP   Net	  S afe	  Assets/GDP




Figure 11: US net exposure to risky assets and net position in safe liabilities as a %
of US GDP, 1952Q1-2015Q4. Net exposure to risky assets is defined as (FDI assets+ equity
assets+ loans and portfolio debt to emerging markets and euro area periphery) - (FDI liabilities+
Equity liabilities). Net safe liability position is defined as Net Foreign Asset position - net risky
asset position (the net safe liability position consists therefore of loans and portfolio debt assets
to advanced economies (except euro area periphery) + gold and reserves - portfolio and bank
liabilities)). For portfolio debt we use the geographical breakdown of the Coordinated Portfolio
Investment Survey (IMF). For bank loans and liabilities we use the US TIC data geographical distri-
bution (https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/ticlaim.aspx). We
compute geographical shares from those two data sources and apply them to the IIP data.


estimates of the U.S. net foreign asset position since 1952. We observe three dramatic collapses of

the U.S. international asset positions as a fraction of GDP during the crisis: between 2007Q4 and

2009Q1 as the US investment banking world sank and the U.S. net foreign asset position declined

by about 24% of GDP; it initially bounced back but between 2011Q1 and 2012Q2, it declined

again by 20.5% of GDP as the Eurozone crisis was unfolding; finally between 2013Q3 and 2015Q3

it decreased by another 19% of GDP as the dollar appreciated substantially against the yen and

the euro, decreasing the dollar value of external assets. All in all, between 2007Q4 and 2015Q3,

we estimate that U.S. valuation losses represent $4.13 trillion, or a staggering 22.9% of 2015 U.S.

GDP.


3.1    Scarcity of Safe Assets and the Exorbitant Duty

Periods of turmoil come with massive movements in net foreign asset positions, especially that of

the center country providing insurance to the rest of the world. In the current configuration of the

International Monetary System, the U.S. is the main world insurer. There are however a number


                                                                       24
of smaller or more regional safe asset providers such as Switzerland, or Germany and other core

eurozone economies. An important message of Gourinchas et al. (2010) is that the status of safe

asset issuer inevitably comes with increased exposure to global shocks.

    As pointed out in Section 2 of this paper, one plausible interpretation of the current very low

real rates is that the world economy is characterized by a large demand for safe assets, driven in

part by post-crisis deleveraging dynamics. Indeed we found that low consumption-wealth ratios,

symptomatic of periods of financial exuberance and rapid wealth growth predict low future real

interest rates for an extended period of time. This sequence of events occurred at the time of the

Great Depression, as well as in the more recent period.30

    Faced with a large demand for safe assets, safe asset issuers are confronted with an important

tradeoff. They can either choose to provide insurance to the rest of the region or world and thus

let their external balance sheet grow, together with their external exposure to global risk. Or they

can choose to limit the issuance of safe assets, letting the value of domestic asset rises and their

currency appreciate, thereby increasing the value of their limited supply of safe assets.

    Gourinchas et al. (2010) argue that this trade-off is a variant of the old ‘Triffin dilemma’

(Triffin (1960)): on the one hand, limiting the supply of safe assets can have contractionary effects

on the economy as the currency appreciates; on the other hand, the increased external exposure to

macroeconomic risk can generate potentially large valuation losses in the event of a global crisis, as

described above in the case of the United States. In the limit, as external exposure grows, it could

even threaten the fiscal capacity of the regional safe asset provider, or the loss absorbing capacity

of its central bank, leading to a run equilibrium.31

    For small regional safe asset providers, the tradeoff between real appreciation of their currency

and net external exposure to global risk is likely to be even less appealing: the smaller the country

is, the larger is the quantity of safe assets it has to provide to the rest of the world, in relation

to the country’s economic size– or the larger the appreciation of its currency has to be in order

to boost the value of these safe assets. The smaller the regional safe asset provider is, the less

palatable either of these alternatives is likely to be, a result we dub the ‘curse of the regional safe
   30
      Shifts in the composition of institutional investors, increased size of the asset management industry (pension
funds for example) and/or changes in financial regulation can also play a role in fostering higher demand for assets
and in particular safe assets.
   31
      Gourinchas and Rey (2007a) already suggested the possibility of a run of international investors on the gross
liabilities of the centre country in the case where its fiscal capacity would be put into question by international
investors, stressing the parallel with the old ’Triffin dilemma’. See also Obstfeld (2011).


                                                        25
asset provider.’

       Figure 12 illustrates the argument.32 The solid lines (blue) represent the trade-off curves be-

tween net exposure to global risks (in units of domestic output) and the appreciation of the domestic

currency, for a large and a small safe asset provider. The curse of the regional safe asset provider

is simply illustrated by the fact that the trade-off curve for the smaller country lies above that

for the larger one: the former faces a larger exposure (relative to its own size) and/or a larger

appreciation.33 The dashed (red) lines represent illustrative indifference curves: they capture the

notion that countries prefer both less net exposure and less appreciated currencies: utility increases

as we move towards the lower left part of the figure. Each country chooses a different optimal point

at the tangency between the indifference curve and its size-specific trade-off curve: point A for

the larger country and point B for the smaller one. As is clear from the figure, depending on the

shape of these indifference curves, countries may pick different ‘habitats’ on the trade-off curve.

For instance, as we have drawn the figure, the smaller country prefers less exposure and more ap-

preciation, relative to the larger country.34 There are good reasons to believe that larger economies

will be content with supplying the safe asset elastically and absorb the (comparatively smaller)

exposure, while smaller countries may prefer to let their real exchange rate appreciate more, in

order to avoid excessively high levels of external exposure. Smaller countries may be particularly

unwilling to let their external exposure grow too much, if this would threaten their solvency in case

of a bad enough shock. This could in turn potentially endanger their status as safe haven. In the

realistic case where small countries are competing with other safe asset providers (including poten-

tially large ones), they could easily lose their share of the exorbitant privilege to their competitors

by excessively expanding their exposure. Strategic complementarities between investors could even

open the door to run equilibria, to which smaller safe asset providers might be more vulnerable.35

What this suggests is that there are some potentially non-linear responses once exposure levels be-

come too elevated. Smaller safe asset providers are more likely to reach these levels if they attempt
  32
     This discussion builds on Gourinchas et al. (2010).
  33
     A simple example illustrates the point starkly. Suppose the global net demand for safe asset is inelastic and
equal to S̄. For the country supplying the safe asset, it follows that S̄ = E.d.Y where d is the net exposure, i.e. the
ratio of the domestic value of safe assets held abroad to domestic output, Y , and E is the value of the safe asset
currency, with an increase reflecting an appreciation. This defines a trade-off curve d.E = YS̄ that is higher for smaller
economies (lower Y ).
  34
     This is only a relative statement. Since the smaller country faces a worse trade-off, point B features a more
appreciated currency and more exposure compared to point A. But the relative share of the adjustment changes
towards more exchange rate flexibility.
  35
     See Calvo (2013) for related arguments.


                                                           26
Figure 12: The Curse of the Regional Safe Asset Provider. Note: The solid (blue) line reports
the trade-off between net exposure (relative to own output) on the vertical axis and the appreciation of the
domestic currency on the horizontal axis. The dashed (red) line reports illustrative indifference curves when
countries prefer less external exposure and less appreciated currency. Point A corresponds to the optimal
choice of exposure and currency appreciation for a large safe asset provider. Point B is the corresponding
point for a small safe asset provider. A small safe asset provider under fixed exchange rates would end up
at point C instead.


to prevent an appreciation of their currency. A small safe asset provider may therefore subject

itself to a ‘value-at-risk constraint’, to avoid excessively risky exposure levels, and prefer to let its

currency appreciate.36

    According to this analysis a small economy such as Switzerland (point B) will tolerate a more

appreciated currency than the U.S. (point A). If instead the small economy attempted to fix the

value of its currency, it would face very elevated exposure levels (point C). Such high levels of

exposure may eventually threaten the solvency of the country. For a small asset provider, this

discussion suggests that it seems optimal to retain some flexibility in the real exchange rate.


3.2     European safe asset providers

3.2.1    Switzerland

In light of these considerations, we revisit the recent experience of two European safe asset providers:

Switzerland and core EMU, which we will interpret here to mean Germany. The case of Switzerland
  36
     Large safe asset providers may limit their issuance for a different reason, namely to manipulate their terms of
trade. See Kindleberger (2013) for a discussion of the role of the ‘benevolent hegemon’ in that context.



                                                        27
illustrates nicely the terms of the basic trade-off: after fixing its exchange rate against the euro in

September 2011, the Swiss National Bank grew increasingly worried about its external exposure.

The decline in the Swiss net external position between 2011Q2 and 2015Q1 was very large: it went

from 123% of GDP to 84% of GDP, with a peak of 143% in 2012Q3. In January 2015, in a surprise

announcement, the central bank chose to let its currency float, a move that was followed by a sharp

appreciation of the Swiss currency (see Figure 7). In Figure 13, we show the rapid growth of official

reserves and of the external risky assets of Switzerland (in particular FDI) after the beginning of

the global financial crisis. At end 2015, FDI and equity external assets amount to about three

times the Swiss GDP. On the liability side, banking deposits account for the lion’s share of the

Swiss external position as evidenced in Figure 14. External debt liabilities are very small due to

the lack of depth in the Swiss debt market, so that Swiss safe assets are effectively bank deposits.

Gross bank deposits and trade credit (the “other liability” category of the balance of payment)

reached almost 200% of Swiss GDP by end 2015. This is despite the fact that the Swiss Franc

was allowed to appreciate substantially, suggesting that the increased exposure would have been

even higher had the peg not been abandoned. Figure 15 shows the net exposure of Switzerland to

risky assets and the net position in safe liabilities. Both are decreasing in absolute value in recent

years though next exposure is still high (about 100% of GDP in net risky assets even if the net safe

position is zero) in 2015Q4. This decline in net exposure is to some extent misleading however.

The reason is that unlike for the U.S., the foreign exchange reserves of Switzerland are very sizable.

We included them in the safe assets (hence they decrease the net risky position and increase the

net safe position of Switzerland). But because of their currency composition, they carry significant

exchange rate risk (in Q2 2016 for example the SNB portfolio investments in foreign currency bonds

were dominated by euro investments (41%) and dollar ones (32%)).37 Since total reserves grew from

39% of GDP to 88% of GDP during the period 2011Q2-2015Q1, taking the associated risk into

account would increase very sizably the net risky exposure of Switzerland and decrease its net safe

liability position in the recent years.


 37
      Source: http://www.snb.ch/en/iabout/assets/id/assets reserves




                                                        28
                                        Switzerland	  -­‐	  External	  assets	  composi5on	  (%	  of	  GDP)	  
                   800.00%	  




                   700.00%	  




                   600.00%	  




                   500.00%	  




                   400.00%	  




                   300.00%	  




                   200.00%	  




                   100.00%	  




                     0.00%	  
                          2000	     2003	                         2006	                             2009	                      2012	     2015	  

                                                     RESA/GDP	         FDIA/GDP	     EQA/GDP	       DA/GDP	       OA/GDP	  




Figure 13: Swiss Gross External Assets, 2000Q1-2015Q4. Note: The graph reports the gross
external asset position of Switzerland as a % of GDP . RES: Reserves; FDI: Foreign Direct Investment; O :
bank loan and trade credit; D: Portfolio Debt; EQ : Portfolio Equity.




                                     Switzerland	  -­‐	  External	  liabili1es	  composi1on	  (%	  of	  GDP)	  
                   700.00%	  




                   600.00%	  




                   500.00%	  




                   400.00%	  




                   300.00%	  




                   200.00%	  




                   100.00%	  




                     0.00%	  
                          2000	     2003	                         2006	                             2009	                      2012	     2015	  

                                                              FDIL/GDP	        EQL/GDP	     DL/GDP	       OL/GDP	  




Figure 14: Swiss Gross External Liabilities, 2000Q1-2015Q4. Note: The graph reports the
gross external liability position of Switzerland as a % of GDP . FDI: Foreign Direct Investment; O : bank
loan and trade credit; D: Portfolio Debt; EQ : Portfolio Equity.




                                                                                       29
                                                              Switzerland - Net exposure (% of GDP)
                    300.00%



                    250.00%



                    200.00%



                    150.00%



                    100.00%



                     50.00%



                      0.00%
                           2001   2002   2003   2004   2005      2006      2007        2008     2009        2010    2011   2012   2013   2014   2015

                     -50.00%



                    -100.00%



                    -150.00%



                    -200.00%

                                                                    Net Risky Assets/GDP      Net Safe Assets/GDP




Figure 15: Swiss net exposure to risky assets and net position in safe liabilities as a %
of Swiss GDP, 2000Q1-2015Q4. Note: Net exposure to risky assets is defined as (FDI assets+
equity assets+ loans and portfolio debt to emerging markets and euro area periphery) - (FDI
liabilities+ Equity liabilities). Net safe liability position is defined as Net Foreign Asset position -
net risky asset position (the net safe liability position consists therefore of loans and portfolio debt
assets to advanced economies (except euro area periphery) + gold and reserves - portfolio and bank
liabilities)). For portfolio debt we use the geographical breakdown of the Coordinated Portfolio
Investment Survey (IMF). For bank loans and liabilities we use the Locational Banking Statistics
(BIS) geographical distribution. We compute geographical shares from those two data sources and
apply them to the IIP data.


3.2.2   Core EMU

The case of core EMU is equally fascinating. In the run-up to the financial crisis, it acted as a

safe asset provider, with an extra twist. As documented by Hale and Obstfeld (2016), Germany

alongside other core Eurozone countries such as France, Belgium and the Netherlands, invested in

risky projects in peripheral Eurozone members, but also intermediated foreign capital into these

countries, thereby increasing further their exposure. Most of that increased exposure occurred via

an expansion in core EMU bank’s balance sheet and leverage (Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015))

and cross-border loans instead of portfolio holdings. In short, core EMU banks borrowed globally

and lent to peripheral Eurozone countries, earning small but positive excess returns in the process.

Importantly, because core EMU shares a common currency with the rest of the Eurozone, it cannot

let its currency appreciate in response to a surge in the demand for safe assets. Instead, it has to

absorb the increased exposure onto its national balance sheet. We illustrate how this trade-off has



                                                                                           30
                                                                        Germany	  -­‐	  External	  liabili0es	  composi0on	  (%	  of	  GDP)	  
                     300.00%	  




                     250.00%	  




                     200.00%	  




                     150.00%	  




                     100.00%	  




                      50.00%	  




                       0.00%	  
                            1960	     1963	     1966	     1969	       1972	     1975	     1978	     1981	     1984	     1987	         1990	     1993	       1996	     1999	     2002	     2005	     2008	     2011	     2014	  

                                                                                                       FDIL/GDP	      EQL/GDP	            DL/GDP	       OL/GDP	  




Figure 16: German Gross External Liability Position, 1960Q1-2015Q4. Note: The graph
reports the gross external liability position of Germany disaggregated by asset classes, as a % of GDP. FDI:
Foreign Direct Investment; O : bank loan and trade credit; D: Portfolio Debt; EQ : Portfolio Equity.


played out by considering in detail the external balance sheet of Germany.38

       As can be seen from Figure 16, on the liability side the German external balance sheet has the

definite characteristics of a safe asset provider with a very large share of its gross liabilities being

either debt or bank liabilities (153% of GDP at end 2015). Over the period 1960-2015Q4, the share

of safe liabilities in total liabilities is always above 60% and is sometimes above 80%. Portfolio

equity and FDI account for a small share of liabilities. Interestingly the amount of safe assets held

by foreigners has increased sizably with the euro area crisis in 2010. What is remarkable however

is that on the asset side the portfolio is very symmetric in terms of asset classes, with the share of

FDI and equity hovering around 20 and 30% of total assets in recent years (Figure 17). A very large

proportion of German external assets are fixed income securities or bank loans. This is different

from the US which is invested heavily in FDI and portfolio equity and exhibits a very asymmetric

balance sheet structure in terms of asset classes. The riskiness of the bank loans and deposits may

be very different on the two sides of the German balance sheet however. Indeed, German banks

have extended large amount of credits to the euro periphery. At end 2003, the consolidated claims

of German banks on the euro area as a whole was about 92% of German GDP. At their peak in

July 2007 they amounted to an impressive 125% of GDP while the first warning shots of the global
  38
    Similar trade-offs are present for the other core EMU members. However, Germany plays a prominent role in
that group.



                                                                                                                                 31
                                                                       Germany	  -­‐	  External	  assets	  composi3on	  (%	  of	  GDP)	  
                    300.00%	  




                    250.00%	  




                    200.00%	  




                    150.00%	  




                    100.00%	  




                     50.00%	  




                      0.00%	  
                           1960	     1963	     1966	     1969	     1972	     1975	        1978	      1981	     1984	      1987	     1990	     1993	      1996	      1999	     2002	     2005	     2008	     2011	     2014	  

                                                                                             RESA/GDP	        FDIA/GDP	         EQA/GDP	         DA/GDP	        OA/GDP	  




Figure 17: German Gross External Asset Position, 1960Q1-2015Q4. Note: The graph reports
the gross external asset position of Germany disaggregated by asset classes, as a % of GDP. FDI: Foreign
Direct Investment; O : bank loan and trade credit; D: Portfolio Debt; EQ : Portfolio Equity.


financial crisis were becoming more obvious.

       In Figure 18 we look at the geographical composition of consolidated German Monetary and

Financial Institutions (MFIs) external claims.39 The share of German banks’ claims on the euro

area in total claims climbed by about 10 points (from 33% to 42% ) between July 2007 and

September 2009. The share of claims on the euro area periphery had been in constant rise from

2002 and up to 2009 while the share of claims on the core euro area countries, after dipping in 2005

and decreasing till 2007, resumed its growth from 2007 onwards. The years 2009-2010 constitute

turning points with German banks decreasing massively their exposures to the periphery. In Figure

19 we calculate the net risky exposure of Germany, including not only FDI and equity assets but

also portfolio debt as well as loans to emerging markets and to the periphery of the euro area

(using the locational statistics -not the consolidated ones- for consistency with the IIP data). The

German net risky position increased to reach about 100% of German GDP in 2015. At the same

time, German’s net safe liability position stabilized around -50% of GDP after having reached a

peak of about -70% of GDP during the euro area crisis. Hence the net risky and net safe position
  39
    We looked both at consolidated data and non-consolidated data. Non-consolidated data are consistent with the
external investment position data which uses balance of payment (residency) definitions but do not cover the full
exposure of Germany (based on a concept of ownership). A graph using non-consolidated data (data available since
1994) looks very similar however as far as the movements in shares are concerned. Expected levels of exposures of
German banks to the euro area as a percentage of GDP are higher in the consolidated data however.




                                                                                                                                  32
                                                                     Claims	  of	  German	  Banks	  on	  Euro	  Area	  -­‐	  Decomposi7on	  
                                                                                                 (share	  of	  Total	  claims,	  consolidated	  data)	  
                       45.00%	  


                       40.00%	  


                       35.00%	  


                       30.00%	  


                       25.00%	  


                       20.00%	  


                       15.00%	  


                       10.00%	  


                        5.00%	  


                        0.00%	  
                               2002	     2003	          2004	           2005	           2006	       2007	          2008	          2009	           2010	     2011	         2012	          2013	          2014	         2015	  

                                             Claims	  on	  euro	  area/Total	  claims	               Claims	  on	  core	  countries/Total	  claims	             Claims	  on	  periphery	  countries/Total	  claims	  




Figure 18: Geographical composition of consolidated German MFIs external claims,
2002Q1-2015Q4. Note: The graph reports the geographical composition of consolidated German MFI
external claims on euro area countries. The core is defined as Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Luxem-
bourg, Netherlands. The periphery is defined as Cyprus, Estonia, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain.


of Germany have common features with the U.S. ones. One important difference however comes

from the nature of the assets involved: in the case of the U.S., risky assets consist mainly of FDI

and equity. In the case of Germany, a sizable share of external assets are bank loans and portfolio

debt into risky markets, in particular into the periphery of the euro area.

       German banks and investors were therefore loading up exposures on the countries of the periph-

ery of the euro area so that the riskiness of their banking (and portfolio) assets and liabilities was

very asymmetric. As a result, Germany was enjoying positive excess returns on its net foreign asset

position for most of the period between 1995 and July 2007, since the net international investment

position of Germany at market value exceeds the cumulation of current account surpluses or deficits

albeit only modestly. These small excess returns appear to turn negative from the spring of 2007

onwards as risk started to be repriced in the global economy as shown on Figure 20.

       The official statistics report a large cumulated valuation loss of about 19% of GDP or about

B
C492 bn between the international investment position and the cumulated current account deficit

of Germany between 2000 and 2015Q4. As pointed out by Busse and Gros (2016) however, there

are reasons to doubt the accuracy of these numbers.40 Using net investment income data, these

authors estimate that returns on German external assets exceeded returns on German external
  40
       See also Schipper (2015) and Deutsche Bundesbank (2014).




                                                                                                                                    33
                                                                     Germany	  -­‐	  Net	  exposure	  (%	  of	  GDP)	  
                    120.00%	  


                    100.00%	  


                     80.00%	  


                     60.00%	  


                     40.00%	  


                     20.00%	  


                       0.00%	  
                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  

                                 	  
                               50

                              52

                              54

                               56

                               58

                               60

                              62

                              64

                               66

                               68

                               70

                              72

                              74

                               76

                               78

                               80

                              82

                              84

                               86

                               88

                               90

                              92

                              94

                               96

                               98

                               00

                              02

                              04

                               06

                               08

                               10

                              12

                              14

                               16
                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            19

                            20

                            20

                            20

                            20

                            20

                            20

                            20

                            20

                            20
                    -­‐20.00%	  


                    -­‐40.00%	  


                    -­‐60.00%	  


                    -­‐80.00%	  


                   -­‐100.00%	  

                                                                          Net	  Risky	  Assets/GDP	     Net	  Safe	  Assets/GDP	  




Figure 19: German net exposure to risky assets and net position in safe liabilities as a %
of German GDP, 1950Q1-2015Q4 Note: Net exposure to risky assets is defined as NFA-Net safe
position i.e. (FDI assets+ equity assets+ loans and portfolio debt to emerging markets and euro area
periphery) - (FDI liabilities+ Equity liabilities). Net safe liability position is defined as reserve assets
+loans and debt to advanced economies (except euro area periphery)+ trade credit -(portfolio and
other liabilities). For portfolio debt we use the geographical breakdown of the Coordinated Portfo-
lio Investment Survey (IMF). For bank loans and liabilities we use the locational banking statistics
(http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Time series databases/External sector/).
We compute geographical shares from those two data sources and apply them to the IIP data.




                                                      GERMANY: NIIP and Cumulated Current Account (relative to GDP)
                                    80.00%


                                    70.00%


                                    60.00%


                                    50.00%


                                    40.00%


                                    30.00%


                                    20.00%


                                    10.00%


                                     0.00%
                                              2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                    -10.00%

                                                                                             NFA/GDP                     Cumulated CA/GDP




Figure 20: Gap between the Net International Investment Position of Germany and the
cumulated current account surpluses, 2000Q1-2015Q4.



                                                                                                    34
liabilities even after the onset of the euro area crisis. When the crisis materialized and hit the

periphery of the euro area, Germany (and core EMU) stood to suffer substantial capital losses on

its net external position, a combination of losses on its gross external assets and capital gains on

its external liabilities.

       Unlike the U.S. however, where the valuation losses were immediately realized via changes in

asset prices and currency price movements, resulting in the sharp decline in the net foreign asset

position (Figure 8), these losses do not seem to have materialized. With the crisis, risk was repriced

throughout the periphery but there were no large realized losses.41 Without a debt resolution

mechanism for banks or sovereigns within the Eurozone, and with the fear that markets might

turn on them, most peripheral eurozone members launched multiple rounds of private and public

de-leveraging. The protracted resolution process of the European Sovereign Debt crisis profoundly

hampered the recovery of the Eurozone.

       Just for illustration purposes, we perform the following simple thought experiment. Imagine

that Germany had had the same external balance sheet structure as the US with a large share of

risky claims (FDI and equity instead of bank loans and portfolio debt) on the rest of world. We

ask: what would have been the order of magnitude of valuation losses that Germany would have

incurred between 2007Q4 and 2015Q3? German external assets stood at about 200% of GDP in

2007 while US gross external assets amounted to about 115% of GDP, out of which about 80% were

risky. Between 2007Q4 and 2015Q3, our estimates indicate that U.S. valuation losses represented

approximately $4.13 trillion, or 22.9% of 2015 U.S. GDP. Assuming a similar change in the value

of liabilities in the US and in Germany - both countries benefitted from safe haven effects and

have very similar net safe positions in 2007 Q4 (-50% of GDP for Germany and -47% of GDP for

the US)-, German losses would have been of the order of 40% of German GDP. We can perform a

perhaps less crude calculations by comparing the net exposures in risky assets for the US and for

Germany. In the US, net exposure to risky assets stood at about 38% in 2007Q4 (risky exposure,

just like that for Germany includes loans and portfolio debt assets to emerging markets and to the

euro periphery). For Germany it was about 68% for the same quarter. If Germany had undergone

a loss proportional to the US one, Germany would have had a valuation loss of about 41% of GDP,

which is very similar to the previous estimates. Whatever disagreement one might have about the
  41
       Except in Greece, but Greece was only a small share of German external exposure.



                                                         35
actual losses on the German net foreign asset position during that period, they are very far from

40% of GDP. According to the official statistics – which as mentioned above are probably biased

upwards- German losses would be at most 19% of GDP.

   Three points are important here. First, some of these valuation losses can ultimately be reverted

as the global economy recovers and safe asset providers –via their exposure– stand to gain dispro-

portionately from the subsequent recovery. Second, our point here is not to argue that Germany (or

other core EMU countries) should have shouldered such a staggering amount of losses. Rather, it

is that the external portfolio structure of regional safe asset providers can entail very large levels of

exposure which should be properly understood and monitored. Third, this portfolio structure is an

equilibrium phenomenon, emerging from market forces and expected returns. If German post-crisis

external returns are not very low, German pre-crisis external returns do not appear inordinately

large either: the yield difference between core and periphery investment appeared surprisingly low

in the run-up to the Eurozone crisis. This may have been the result of massive risk shifting on the

part of core-EMU financial institutions. It also suggests that safe asset providers are dispropor-

tionately vulnerable to periods of excessive risk appetite. Ultimately, this contributes to extremely

elevated exposure levels that make it very difficult to achieve a speedy resolution.

   The result of the protracted deleveraging in the euro area has been a massive shift from current

account balance, to a current account surplus of 0.7% of world GDP, as illustrated on Figures 5

and 6. In terms of our earlier analysis, these deleveraging forces pushed the natural interest rate in

the Eurozone far below the rest of the world. If the Eurozone were a closed economy, the resulting

deflationary forces would have been self-defeating, just as attempts to deflate one’s economy at the

expense of one’s trading partners were ultimately self-defeating during the Great Depression. At

the Zero Lower Bound, instead, this shift towards surpluses has lessened the burden of adjustment

on the Eurozone, at the expense of the rest of the world.

   In summary, core EMU has not performed its role as a regional insurer. Unlike the U.S. which

saw its net foreign asset position deteriorate a great deal during the crisis, as U.S. Treasuries

appreciated while external assets plummeted in value, core EMU has not absorbed the banking

losses on its balance sheet. Unrealized losses have been pushed onto the peripheral countries’

public sector balance sheet, forcing them to delever aggressively. This aggregate delevering, and




                                                   36
the corresponding surge in saving continues to have deleterious effects on the global economy.42

Given our finding that real interest rates will remain low for an extended period of time, we

consider that it would be wise to steer away from policies that make us teeter on the verge of a

global liquidity trap. Being a regional safe asset provider may prove to be a curse not only to core

EMU, but to the EMU as a whole, and to the global economy.



4     Conclusion

Several implications can be derived from our analysis. First, we analyze the long run historical

time series of consumption and wealth of four large economies accounting for much of international

financial and economic activity between the end of the 19th century and today (the United States,

the United Kingdom, France and Germany). We show that consumption wealth ratios tend to

predict future movements in real risk-free rates. The strength of our analysis comes in particular

from the fact that we do not superimpose any structural model on our data; all our results are

obtained using merely the intertemporal budget constraint of the world economy proxied by these

four countries. Economic common sense and our budget constraint say that low consumption-wealth

ratios today have to be an indication of future low returns on wealth or high future consumption

growth. After decomposing the return on wealth in a real rate component and an excess return

component and constructing the relevant VARs, we obtain a first-order result: consumption-wealth

ratios predict future real riskless rates. Furthermore, we identify two historical periods during which

the consumption wealth ratios have been unusually low: those are the two “secular stagnation”

periods (the 1930s and the current period). Both periods have been preceded by a period of

“financial exuberance” (the 1920s and the 2000s) were wealth has grown quickly. Both periods

have seen a major financial crisis followed by a period of deleveraging and low consumption. These

deleveraging periods during which we observe low consumption to wealth ratios announce low

future real rates. The bottom line is that our estimates indicate that the real rates should stay

low for several more years. Such a long period of low real rates has consequences ranging from the

sustainability of the business models of banks and insurance to the solvency of pension plans.
  42
     Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) emphasize that besides deleveraging post-crisis weakness of the banking sector and
in some cases post-crisis re-regulation of the financial sector (which may involve some degree of financial repression)
are also important factors contributing to the weakness of the economy.




                                                          37
   It also makes it more likely that several countries fall or stay in a liquidity trap. In a world

where many countries flirt with the ZLB, it is the reallocation of demand across geographical areas

that determines global imbalances as shown by Caballero et al. (2015) and Eggertsson et al. (2015).

There is therefore a large risk that countries pursue non-cooperative policies. Another important

message of our paper is that a world of low real rates also comes with unequal burdens. Safe

asset providers and in particular regional or small safe asset providers face a large demand for

their assets in times of turmoil. Building on Gourinchas et al. (2010), we show in section 3 of the

paper that such countries face a tradeoff between letting their exposure to world risk increase or

allowing their currency to appreciate in real terms. The tradeoff is starker for smaller economies

(such as Switzerland or core EMU countries) than for the United States as their exposure can

rapidly rise to several multiple of GDP. We dub this the ’curse of the regional safe asset providers.’

The recent experience of Switzerland comes to mind. Unlike the United States whose net foreign

asset positions has massively declined since 2007 (as insurance has been provided to the rest of

the world), core EMU countries have postponed or avoided losses on their external assets, forcing

euro area economies of the periphery to delever to make good on their external debt. Euro area

periphery countries’ deleveraging has translated into a large aggregate current account surplus of

the euro area, effectively exporting recession abroad.

   What are the implications of our analysis? The issue of post-crisis deleveraging leading to

low levels of the real interest rate is central to the difficulties of the world economy. Hence our

econometric analysis supports the part of the “secular stagnation” literature which assigns the

current economic weakness to the post financial crisis debt hangover and overhang. Increased

public spending in particular seems likely to decrease the risk of falling into a liquidity trap. But

our analysis also suggests a particular role for countries issuing safe assets. Overcoming the “curse

of the regional asset provider” seems to be one of the most challenging issue.

   First, if the Eurozone were to issue safe assets on a larger scale instead of relying only on Bunds,

French OAT, or on Swiss deposits, this would increase the supply of safe assets and presumably

increase the real rate. This should give impetus to a number of initiatives aiming at developing

euro-area safe assets, whether red/blue bonds (see Von Weizsäcker and Delpla (2010)); ESBies (see

Brunnermeier et al. (2011)); or CDOs (see Corsetti et al. (2016)). Relying on a broader supply of

safe assets, whose safety is not aligned with geographical boundaries but rather spans the entire


                                                 38
euro area would avoid the destabilizing portfolio shifts occurring during periods of high risk. In

periods of volatility, endogenous market segmentation increases, hindering the proper transmission

of monetary policy and capital flows towards safe haven countries pushing them to either supply

insurance and increase their risk exposure or to real appreciation with recessionary risk. Overcoming

the curse of the regional asset provider can therefore be done by delinking the supply of safe asset

from a particular economy.

   Second, having a mechanism which allows orderly loss-taking within the euro area would help

overcome the curse of the regional safe asset provider. When losses are not realized and deleveraging

drags on, recession takes hold and becomes self-defeating in a closed economy. In an open economy,

the recession is exported abroad via current account surpluses. A sovereign debt restructuring

mechanism within the euro area could help prevent a repeat of the current situation in the future.

By enabling an orderly write-down of debts, a sovereign debt restructuring mechanism avoids long

periods of deleveraging and resolves the problem of debt overhang (see Corsetti et al. (2016) for

a possible implementation). Paying particular attention to the treatment of non-performing loans

(NPLs) in the portfolios of banks is likely to help avoid the well-known phenomenon of zombie

lending. Sovereign debt restructuring and NPLs write-down could in some cases lead to financial

instability and contagion across the area. Safeguards in terms of banking union (including deposit

guarantees) if in place may help decrease the likelihood of contagion.

   Third, developing the Capital Markets Union is likely to allow a quicker write-down of losses.

Risk sharing through contingent assets -such as FDI and equity- would in all likelihood accelerate

loss-realization and reduce the deleveraging needs of the periphery. In that respect much remain

to be done and in particular some major rethinking of the legal infrastructure, especially around

bankruptcies.

   Lastly, increased monitoring of core EMU banks and financial intermediaries could in principle

enable regulators and supervisors to avoid boom-bust cycles in financial markets. In this crisis,

international banks have borrowed globally and lent to peripheral Eurozone countries, earning small

but positive excess returns in the process. Core EMU countries have not let their real exchange

rate appreciate in response to a surge in the demand for safe assets. Instead, they have tended to

absorb the increased external exposure onto their national balance sheet. Some of that increase in

financial sector exposure may well reflect risk shifting and expectations of bailouts using tax payers


                                                 39
money. A very careful monitoring of financial fragilities and imbalances, especially for EMU safe

asset providers may well decrease the probability of future financial instability.




                                                 40
References

Amador, M., J. Bianchi, L. Bocola, and F. Perri (2015). Reverse speculative attacks. mimeo

  University of Minnesota.

Barro, R. J. and X. Sala-i Martin (1990). World real interest rates. In NBER Macroeconomics

  Annual 1990, Volume 5, pp. 15–74. MIT Press.

Barro, R. J. and J. Ursúa (2010). Barro-ursua macroeconomic data. http://scholar.harvard.

  edu/barro/publications/barro-ursua-macroeconomic-data.

Bernanke, B. (2005, March). The global saving glut and the u.s. current account deficit. Sandridge

  lecture, virginia association of economics, richmond, virginia, Federal Reserve Board.

Brunnermeier, M. K., L. Garicano, P. R. Lane, M. Pagano, R. Reis, T. Santos, D. Thesmar,

  S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and D. Vayanos (2011). Esbies: A realistic reform of europe’s financial

  architecture. The Future of Banking, 15.

Busse, M. and D. Gros (2016, April). Returns to german savings invested abroad. http://voxeu.

  org/article/returns-german-savings-invested-abroad.

Caballero, R. J. and E. Farhi (2015, February). The Safety Trap. NBER Working Papers 19927.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2008, March). An equilibrium model of “global

  imbalances” and low interest rates. American Economic Review 98 (1), 358–93.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2015, October). Global Imbalances and Currency

  Wars at the ZLB. NBER Working Papers 21670, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2016, February). Safe Asset Scarcity and Aggre-

  gate Demand. NBER Working Papers 22044, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Calvo, G. (2013). The liquidity approach and the price theory of money: Disentangling the mysteries

  of financial crises.

Campbell, J. Y. and N. G. Mankiw (1989). Consumption, income and interest rates: Reinterpreting

  the time series evidence. In O. J. Blanchard and S. Fischer (Eds.), N.B.E.R. Macroeconomics

  Annual, pp. 185–215. Cambridge: MIT Press.

                                                41
Corsetti, G., L. FELD, R. Koijen, L. Reichlin, R. Reis, H. Rey, and B. W. di Mauro (2016).

  Reinforcing the eurozone and protecting an open society. Monitoring the Eurozone 2.

Deutsche Bundesbank (2014, May). Discrepancy between changes in foreign assets and the cumu-

  lative financial account balance: unsuitable indicator of wealth losses. In Monthly Report.

Eggertsson, G. B. and P. Krugman (2012). Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: A fisher-

  minsky-koo approach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1469–1513.

Eggertsson, G. B., N. R. Mehrotra, S. Singh, and L. H. Summers (2015). Contagious malady?

  global dimensions of secular stagnation. Working paper, Brown University.

Eichengreen, B. (2015, May). Secular Stagnation: The Long View. American Economic Re-

  view 105 (5), 66–70.

FitchRatings (2016, June 29). Brexit vote pushes negative-yielding debt to $11.7 trn. https:

  //www.fitchratings.com/site/pr/1008156.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and H. Rey (2007a). From world banker to world venture capitalist: Us external

  adjustment and the exorbitant privilege. In R. Clarida (Ed.), G-7 Current Account Imbalances:

  Sustainability and Adjustment, Chicago, pp. 11–55. University of Chicago Press.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and H. Rey (2007b, August). International financial adjustment. Journal of

  Political Economy, 665–703.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and H. Rey (2016, June). Global real rates: A long run approach. mimeo, UC

  Berkeley.

Gourinchas, P.-O., H. Rey, and N. Govillot (2010). Exorbitant privilege and exorbitant duty.

  mimeo, UC Berkeley.

Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (2011, November). Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the

  liquidity trap. Working Paper 17583, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hale, G. and M. Obstfeld (2016). The euro and the geography of international debt flows. Journal

  of the European Economic Association 14 (1), 115–144.



                                                42
Hamilton, J. D., E. S. Harris, J. Hatzius, and K. D. West (2015, August). The Equilibrium Real

  Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future. NBER Working Papers 21476, National Bureau of

  Economic Research, Inc.

Hansen, A. H. (1939). Economic progress and declining population growth. The American Economic

  Review 29 (1), pp. 1–15.

He, Z., A. Krishnamurthy, and K. Milbradt (2015, June). A model of the reserve asset. Technical

  report, Stanford University, Graduate School of Business.

Jordà, O., M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2013). When credit bites back. Journal of Money,

  Credit and Banking 45 (s2), 3–28.

Jordà, O., M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2016, April). Macrofinancial history and the new

  business cycle facts. forthcoming NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016.

Kindleberger, C. P. (2013). The world in depression, 1929-1939. 40th Anniversary edition. Uni-

  versity of California Press.

Laubach, T. and J. C. Williams (2003). Measuring the natural rate of interest. Review of Economics

  and Statistics 85 (4), 1063–1070.

Laubach, T. and J. C. Williams (2015). Measuring the natural rate of interest redux. Federal

  Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson (2001). Consumption, aggregate wealth and expected stock returns.

  Journal of Finance 56 (3), 815–49.

Maggiori, M., E. Farhi, et al. (2016). A model of the international monetary system. mimeo

  Harvard University.

Mendoza, E. G., V. Quadrini, and J.-V. Rı́os-Rull (2009, 06). Financial integration, financial

  development, and global imbalances. Journal of Political Economy 117 (3), 371–416.

Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013). Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic

  Slump. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (4), 1687–1726.



                                               43
Miranda-Agrippino, S. and H. Rey (2015). World asset markets and the global financial cycle.

  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Obstfeld, M. (2011, November). International liquidity: The fiscal dimension. Bank of Japan

  Lecture, Monetary and Economic Studies.

Pescatori, A. and J. Turunen (2015). Lower for longer: Neutral rates in the united states.

Piketty, T. and G. Zucman (2014a). Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Countries

  1700–2010. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3), 1255–1310.

Piketty, T. and G. Zucman (2014b, July). Wealth and Inheritance in the Long Run. CEPR

  Discussion Papers 10072, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff (2009). This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly.

  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Schipper, U. (2015). Transaction and valuation effects on germany’s international investment po-

  sition (iip)–new statistical approaches and iip trends. In IFC Satellite meeting at the ISI 60th

  WSC, Rio de Janeiro, July, Volume 24.

Summers, L. H. (2015). Have we entered an age of secular stagnation? IMF Economic Review 63 (1),

  277–280.

Triffin, R. (1960). Gold and the dollar crisis; the future of convertibility. New Haven: Yale University

  Press.

Von Weizsäcker, J. and J. Delpla (2010, May). The blue bond proposal. Policy brief, Brueghel.




                                                  44
                                                Appendix

A     Data Description
The data used in Section 2 were obtained from the following sources:

    1. Consumption:
      Real per-capita consumption going back to 1870 and covering the two world wars was taken from
      Jordà et al. (2016) who in turn took the data from Barro and Ursúa (2010). As this consumption
      series is an index rather than a level, we convert it to a level using the consumption data from Piketty
      and Zucman (2014a). To convert to a level we could use any year we have level data for but chose
      to use the year 2006 (the year that the index of consumption was 100). In addition, the consumption
      data was adjusted so that instead of being based on a 2006 consumption basket, it was based on a
      2010 consumption basket to match the wealth data.

    2. Wealth:
      Real per capita wealth data was taken from Piketty and Zucman (2014b). The wealth concept used
      here is private wealth. As such it does not include government assets but includes private holdings
      of government issued liabilities as an asset. Where possible, wealth data is measured at market
      value. Human wealth is not included. Private wealth is computed from the following components:
      “Non-financial assets” (includes housing and other tangible assets such as software, equipment and
      agricultural land), and net financial assets (includes equity, pensions, value of life insurance and bonds).
      Prior to 1954 for France, 1950 for Germany, 1920 for the UK and 1916 for the USA, wealth data is
      not available every year (see Piketty-Zucman’s appendix for details on when data is available for each
      country or refer to Table 6f in the data spreadsheets for each country). When it is available is is based
      on the market value of land, housing, other domestic capital assets and net foreign assets less net
      government assets. For the remaining years the wealth data is imputed based on savings rate data
      and assumptions of the rate of capital gains of wealth (see the Piketty-Zucman appendix for details
      of the precise assumptions on capital gains for each country. The computations can be found in Table
      5a in each of the data spreadsheets for each country).

    3. Short term interest rates:
      These were taken from Jordà et al. (2016) and are the interest rate on 3-month treasuries.

    4. Long term interest rates:
      These were taken from Jordà et al. (2016) and are the interest rate on 10 year treasuries.

    5. Return on Equity:
      This data is the total return on equity series taken from the Global Financial Database.

    6. CPI:
      CPI data is used to convert all returns into real rates and is taken from Jordà et al. (2016).

    7. Population:
      These were taken from Jordà et al. (2016).

      Figure 21 reports consumption per capita, wealth per capita, the consumption/wealth ratio as
      well as the short term real risk free rate for our G4 aggregate between 1920 and 2011.

                                                       45
                                                                                                            200,000
                                         real consu mptio n per capita          real wealth per capita

                                                                                                            160,000
              30,000

              25,000                                                                                        120,000


              20,000
                                                                                                            80,000

              15,000
                                                                                                            40,000
              10,000
                                                                                                            0
               5,000

                  0
                  1920     1930   1940    1950      1960      1970       1980        1990   2000     2010




                 .26
                                         consumption/wealth ratio

                 .24


                 .22


                 .20


                 .18


                 .16


                 .14
                   1920    1930   1940    1950      1960      1970       1980        1990   2000     2010




                 .20
                                         short term re al intere st rate (percent)
                 .16

                 .12

                 .08

                 .04

                 .00

                -.04

                -.08

                -.12
                    1920   1930   1940    1950      1960      1970       1980        1990   2000     2010




Figure 21: Real Consumption and Wealth per capita (2010 USD), Consumption Wealth
Ratio and Short term real risk free interest rate, U.S., U.K., Germany and France,
1920-2011.

                                                            46
The data used in Section 3 were obtained from the following sources:

1. United States: For the United States, the framework of Gourinchas and Rey (2007a,b),is used to
  construct net and gross foreign asset positions at market value. Data is available from two sources: the
  U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and the Federal Reserve Flow
  of Funds Accounts (FFA). The BEA is the main source for recent data. It reports its International
  Investment Position of the United States (IIP) annually since 1976, and quarterly since 2006. In
  addition, the BEA reports quarterly flow data in the U.S. International Transactions (USIT) tables
  since 1960 for some flow series, and 1982 for others. Following official classifications, we split the
  foreign portfolio into four categories: debt (corporate and government bonds), equity, foreign direct
  investment (FDI), and other. For assets, reserves are also presented as a separate category. The
  “other” category includes mostly bank loans and trade credits. It also contains gold reserves. U.S.
  GDP data are obtained at the quarterly frequency on an annualized basis from the BEA’s National
  Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), Table 1.1.5. - Gross Domestic Product, Line 1. Current
  account data are from NIPA Table 4.1, Line 33. Appendix B of Gourinchas and Rey (2007a), and
  Appendix A of Gourinchas and Rey (2007b), provide a complete description of the data construction.

2. Germany: For Germany, net and gross foreign asset positions, as well as Current Account data, are
  obtained from the Deutsche Bundesbank’s International Investment Position and Balance of Payments
  series. Complete series are based on Euros, including for historical data, and are available at the annual
  frequency from 1949, and the quarterly frequency from 2003Q4. We follow the same decomposition as
  for the United States into debt, equity, FDI, and other (as well as reserves assets). “Other” is taken
  as the difference between total external assets (liabilities) and the other 4 (3) categories. It contains
  mostly bank loans, trade credits, as well as currency and deposits (which include Target 2 balances).
  Quarterly GDP data on an unadjusted current-prices basis is from the Bundesbank as well as the Fed-
  eral Statistical Office of Germany (Statistische Bundesamt), and is annualized on a rolling 4-quarter
  window. Data are linearly interpolated over very short periods of time when needed. Risky assets
  include FDI and equity assets, while safe liabilities contain debt and “other investment liabilities”
  (from the official nomenclature, which is slightly more restrained than our “Other” category).German
  banks data are obtained from the Deutsche Bundesbank as well, specifically the External position of
  banks series. Those series provide details on the currency and geographical composition of banks’ bal-
  ance sheets. The Bundesbank follows the BIS in providing two main types of classification: locational
  banking statistics, which are based on the location of banks’ offices Banks in Germany (MFIs) series,
  and consolidated banking statistics, which are based on the nationality of banking groups Claims of
  German banks, including their foreign branches and subsidiaries vis-a-vis non-residents series. Con-
  solidated data provide a perhaps more accurate picture of the foreign and currency risk exposure
  of German Banks (concept of ownership), while locational data are more consistent with Balance of
  Payments data (concept of residency). Finally, Target 2 balances data, which are part of the “Other
  investment asset” category, are also obtained from the Deutsche Bundesbank, External position of the
  Bundesbank series.

3. Switzerland: Data for the International Investment Position and Current Account of Switzerland are
  available at the quarterly frequency from 2000Q1 from the Swiss National Bank (SNB), International
  Economic Affairs division (Cube ID: auvekomq). We follow the same decomposition as for the United
  States and Germany into debt, equity, FDI, and other (as well as reserves assets). “Other” is taken as

                                                  47
the difference between total external assets or liabilities and the other categories. It contains mostly
bank loans, trade credits, as well as currency and deposits. Quarterly GDP data is obtained from the
State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) of the Swiss Confederation. Non-adjusted data are
used, to be consistent with current account and net investment position data. We use data based on
the production approach, but figures are similar to expenditure and income-based approaches. GDP
is annualized using a rolling 4-quarter window.




                                               48
