NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HETEROGENEOUS WEALTH DYNAMICS:
ON THE ROLES OF RISK AND ABILITY
Paulo Santos
Christopher B. Barrett
Working Paper 22626
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22626

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016
Fieldwork for this paper was conducted under the Pastoral Risk Management (PARIMA) project
of the Global Livestock Collaborative Research Support Program (GL CRSP), funded by the
Office of Agriculture and Food Security, Global Bureau, USAID, under grant number
DAN-1328-G-00-0046-00, and analysis was underwritten by the USAID SAGA cooperative
agreement, grant number HFM-A-00-01-00132-00. Financial support was also provided by the
Social Science Research Council's Program in Applied Economics on Risk and Development
(through a grant from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation), The Pew Charitable
Trusts (through the Christian Scholars Program of the University of Notre Dame), the Fundação
para a Ciência e Tecnologia (Portugal), and the Graduate School of Cornell University. Thanks
are due to ILRI - Ethiopia for their hospitality and support and to Action for Development
(Yabello) for logistical support. A previous version of some of the results presented here
circulated under the title "Safety nets or social insurance in the presence of poverty traps?
Evidence from southern Ethiopia". We thank Ed Barbier, Michael Carter, Stefan Dercon, Andrew
Foster, Vivian Hoffman, Bob Myers, Dhushyanth Raju, Wally Thurman, Stephen Younger and
participants at multiple conferences and seminars for comments that greatly improved that paper.
We thank Getachew Gebru and our field assistants, Ahmed Ibrahim and Mohammed Ibrahim, for
their invaluable assistance in data collection. The views expressed here are those of the authors
and do not represent any agency. Any remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Paulo Santos and Christopher B. Barrett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneous Wealth Dynamics: On the Roles of Risk and Ability
Paulo Santos and Christopher B. Barrett
NBER Working Paper No. 22626
September 2016
JEL No. O1,O12,Q12
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the causal mechanisms behind persistent poverty. Using original data on Boran
pastoralists of southern Ethiopia, we find that heterogeneous and nonlinear wealth dynamics arise
purely in adverse states of nature. In favorable states, expected herd grow is quasi-linear and
universal. We further show that those with lower herding ability, as reflected in past herd growth
data, converge to a unique equilibrium at a small herd size while those with higher ability exhibit
multiple stable dynamic wealth equilibria.

Paulo Santos
Department of Economics
Monash University
Building 11 E Clayton
Paulo.Santos@monash.edu
Christopher B. Barrett
Cornell University
cbb2@cornell.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the causal mechanisms behind persistent poverty.
Using original data on Boran pastoralists of southern Ethiopia, we
find that heterogeneous and nonlinear wealth dynamics arise purely
in adverse states of nature. In favorable states, expected herd grow
is quasi-linear and universal. We further show that those with lower
herding ability, as reflected in past herd growth data, converge to a
unique equilibrium at a small herd size while those with higher ability
exhibit multiple stable dynamic wealth equilibria.

1

Introduction

Contemporary policy debates are rife with discussion of “poverty traps”.1
Several theoretical models combine some non-convex technology with some
market failure to explain why `‘the poor stay poor and the rich stay rich”. But
do poverty traps exist in the data? One prominent strand of the empirical
literature that addresses this question has mainly focused on searching for
a threshold effect associated with multiple dynamic equilibria in the growth
process, with one such equilibrium below a poverty line. The results of
such studies remain quite mixed, with some studies finding support for the
hypothesis while others, find no evidence of such a threshold (for reviews see
Barrett and Carter (2013), Kraay and McKenzie (2014), Barrett, Garg, and
McBride (forthcoming)). 2
Nonlinear dynamics may arise for any of several reasons, including shocks
that perturb key state variables (Carter and Barrett, 2006). It has been long
understood that if there exist wealth thresholds at which growth dynamics
bifurcate, then positive draws from the distribution of states of nature can
move some fortunate individuals above the threshold, while negative shocks
may generate persistent poverty if they exogenously drive others below the
1

See, for example, Sachs (2005) or United Nations Millenium Project (2005).
See also Azariadis and Stachurski (2005) or Bowles, Durlauf, and Hoff (2006) for good
reviews of the theoretical and early empirical literature on poverty traps.
2

2

threshold. In this paper, using original data from a poor population of livestock herders (i.e., pastoralists) in southern Ethiopia for whom livestock,
especially cattle, are the main (often, the only) non-human asset they own,
we find that nonlinear wealth dynamics arise only under adverse weather
conditions. The powerful implication is that risk exposure is itself central to
the very existence of multiple wealth equilibria in this system.
Why might that be? One possibility is heterogeneity among herders in
their ability to manage risk. There may exist “convergence clubs” based on
intrinsic, unobservable characteristics such as skills or ability. 3 Perhaps the
talented can more easily escape poverty or perhaps the disabled are especially
unlikely to do so, regardless of initial wealth. The role unobservable ability or
skill plays in determining earnings has long been recognized in studies of the
private returns to education (Card, 1995) or in the analysis of who becomes
an entrepreneur (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989). Of particular relevance to this
paper, Schultz (1975) emphasizes the central importance of individual ability
to reallocate scarce resources optimally and quickly in response to shocks,
what he terms ‘the ability to deal with disequilibria’. We know of no previous
study that explicitly considers the role of individual heterogeneity in shaping
wealth dynamics at micro-level, especially one rooted in the Schultzian ability
to manage economic disequilibria such as arise from weather shocks.
These two explanations for heterogeneous and nonlinear wealth dynamics,
risk and ability, may be closely related. It may be that risk can be a source of
persistent poverty due to the differential ability to cope ex post with shocks
(Dercon, 1998), or to manage shocks ex ante due to risk preferences and access to alternative risk management tools (Rosenzweig and Binswanger, 1993,
Carter, 1997). Thus, variation in returns to assets and their relation with
ability, across states of nature, may be central to understanding how both
individual-level characteristics and initial conditions affect wealth dynamics.
3

Baumol (1986), DeLong (1988) and Canova (2004) define and discuss the estimation
of convergence clubs in macroeconomic growth data.

3

We can represent wealth dynamics rather generally as follows:

yist


g c (y |θ ) + ε
ist
sB it−1 i
=
g c (y |θ ) + ε
sA

it−1

i

ist

ifyit−1 < γ c
ifyit−1 ≥ γ c

where yist is a measure of wealth of individual i, who belongs to cohort
c, in state s in period t, and growth dynamics may differ above and below
any cohort-specific threshold, γ c > 0. If there exists no threshold, then
unique, smooth path dynamics exist for each cohort. If a threshold exists,
path dynamics may bifurcate, as reflected in different parameters describing
the growth function above (A) and below (B) the threshold. The dynamics
themselves are conditioned by both the individual’s unobserved ability, θi ,
and its initial conditions, yit−1 , assuming a first-order Markov process. This
general formulation nests within it the familiar neoclassical growth function
with no variation across individuals or cohorts and no threshold. It also
c
c
(·), or a straight
(·) = gsA
nests within it conditional convergence, wherein gsB
multiple equilibrium system without differentiation by ability or cohort. We
use this general formulation both to recognize that one rarely knows ex ante
which specific form wealth dynamics take and that multiple mechanisms
could be at play simultaneously.
This matters because the policy implications of the convergence club and
threshold-based multiple equilibria mechanisms differ markedly. If poverty
is a unique dynamic equilibrium because of immutable individual characteristics, ongoing social transfers may be the only available remedy for an
unacceptably low standard of living. But if poverty results from initial asset
holdings insufficient to clear a critical minimum endowment threshold and
thereby follow a positive accumulation path, then asset transfers, changes
to the productivity of existing assets, or financial intermediation to enable
investment can yield increases in wealth that move beneficiaries towards a
higher-level equilibrium, thereby reducing, or even eliminating, the need for

4

ongoing transfers (Carter, 1998). If both processes are at play within a
population, then effective targeting of appropriate interventions depends on
identifying the relevant subpopulation to which a given poor household belongs.
Sorting out the mechanisms that underpin persistent poverty is therefore
enormously important in practical terms, but also quite difficult methodologically. Barrett and Carter (2013) and Barrett, Garg, and McBride (forthcoming) identify a range of confounding factors that challenge identification of
poverty trap mechanisms, several of which our unusual data let us overcome.
We study a relatively simple system in which a single, scalar-valued variable
(livestock holdings) serves as an excellent proxy for overall wealth, we have
household-level panel data that permit us to establish initial conditions and
to estimate herd management ability, and we have data on household’s expected herd growth conditional on particular states of nature. To the best
of our knowledge, these attributes are unique to these data and permit a
deeper exploration of the genesis of multiple dynamic wealth equilibria than
has been feasible previously.
We make no claim to external validity of our empirical findings beyond
the particular setting we study. Rather, the value of this exercise lies in unpacking the structure behind a poverty trap mechanism already established
among this population in other data. Among Boran pastoralists, a poor
population in southern Ethiopia, livestock herd evolution is characterized by
boom-and-bust cycles determined by drought and biological reproduction.
Using 17-year herd history data collected by Desta (1999), Lybbert et al.
(2004) find herd dynamics that follow an S-shaped curve with two stable
dynamic equilibria (at roughly 1 and 35-40 cattle), separated by an unstable dynamic equilibrium, a threshold at 15-20 cattle. Barrett et al. (2006)
find similar herd patterns in herd dynamics data from similar communities
in northern Kenya. The authors conjecture that this threshold results from
a minimum critical herd size necessary to undertake migratory herding to

5

deal with spatiotemporal variability in forage and water availability. Those
with smaller herds are forced to stay near their base camps, where pasture
conditions soon get degraded, leading to a collapse of herd size towards the
low-level stable equilibrium, while those with bigger herds can migrate in
search of adequate water and pasture, enabling them to sustain far larger
herds. Toth (2015) corroborates that herd mobility is sharply increasing
in herd size in the neighborhood of the herd size thresholds Lybbert et al.
(2004) identify. Santos and Barrett (2011) likewise find informal credit arrangements behave as one would predict in the presence of such thresholds.
These findings from east African pastoralist are among the strongest empirical evidence Kraay and McKenzie (2014) find in support of the multiple
equilibrium poverty traps hypothesis.
For this paper, we collected new data among the same population (but
not the same households) as those studied by Desta (1999) so as to explore
the role of shocks and ability in shaping wealth dynamics. The next section
briefly explains the data. In section 3, we use data on pastoralists’ expectations of herd size one year ahead, given different values of initial herd size.
We disaggregate these dynamics as a function of respondents’ expected rainfall states and find a non-linear relation between initial and future wealth
that arises exclusively in adverse states of nature. Under favorable rainfall
regimes, respondents’ subjective perceptions suggest a smooth asset growth
process. We use these data to simulate long-run equilibria that we show
correspond closely with those identified by Lybbert et al. (2004) in the historical data. We also note considerably larger variation among households
in expected herd dynamics under adverse states of nature, which raises the
possibility of household or individual characteristics that might generate such
cross-sectional variation.
Section 4 then explores that possibility using stochastic growth frontier
methods to obtain household-specific estimates of technical efficiency, which
we use as proxy for herding ability. We use these estimates to explore the

6

hypothesis that herder’s ability conditions wealth dynamics. This appears
true in the data. Low ability herders (which we define as those in the bottom quartile of the ability distribution) are expected to slide into poverty
regardless of initial wealth; we observe multiple dynamic herd size equilibria
only for herders of higher ability. In Section 5 we apply this approach to the
analysis of the expected evolution of the wealth of a sample of herders in this
region. We find evidence that ability makes a significant difference in terms
of expected wealth and inequality in this system. Section 6 concludes, stressing the policy implications of these findings with respect to complex wealth
dynamics and the centrality of shocks and individual ability to understanding
the existence of multiple equilibria in this system.

2

Data

We use data from a household survey fielded among a random sample of
120 Boran pastoralist households, in the same four communities of southern
Ethiopia as those studied by Lybbert et al. (2004), although among different
households. These data were collected by the Pastoral Risk Management
(PARIMA) project every three months, March 2000-June 2002, and then
annually each September-October starting in 2003. The focus of the project,
and consequently, of the data collected, was on understanding the importance
of shocks as a source of poverty persistence in this context, and the data
include rich detail on household composition, migration histories, changes in
herds, shocks, informal transfers of assets, etc. Barrett et al. (2004) describe
the location, survey methods and available variables. In section 4 we use
these data, briefly summarized in Table 1, to estimate herd growth frontiers,
from which we can estimate household-specific ability.
The respondents are, as a rule, male, experienced in herd management
and, to a large extent, have not migrated from where they were born. Conditional on owning livestock, cattle represents approximately 85% of their

7

Table 1: PARIMA data: definition and descriptive statistics
Variable
cattle
herd size at t
herd size at t-1
no cattle at t-1
herd below threshold at t-1
herd above threshold at t-1
labor
land
sex
experience
migrant
Dida Hara
Dillo
Qorate
Wachille

Definition
as % of TLU
herd size at t
herd size at t-1
=1 if owns no cattle at t-1, 0 otherwise
=1 if 0 < herd size at t-1 <15, 0 otherwise
=1 if herd size at t-1 > 15
family size at t
land cropped in June 2000
=1 if male
years since start of herd management
=1 if migrated to where currently lives
=1 if lives in Dida Hara
=1 if lives in Dillo
=1 if lives in Qorate
=1 if lives in Wachille

Mean
0.85
9.18
8.12
0.19
0.68
0.14
5.50
1.12
0.64
20.26
0.21
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25

Std. Err.
0.22
12.87
11.35
0.39
0.47
0.35
3.36
2.25
0.48
14.07
0.41
0.43
0.43
0.43
0.43

total TLU, and only 7 households own more livestock in species other than
cattle. An important fraction (close to 1 in 5 households) own no cattle.
These households are sedentarized and depend heavily on relief food distribution in towns. They own few, if any, other non-human assets so even for
these stockless households livestock holdings serve as a reasonable proxy for
wealth.McPeak, Little, and Doss (2011) An even more important fraction
(slightly above 2 in 3 households) own herds that are smaller than 15 cattle,
the accumulation threshold identified in Lybbert et al. (2004). During the
period for which we have data, the average herd did grow, from an average
herd size of 8.1 cattle in 2000 to 9.2 cattle in 2003 (the equivalent of a growth
rate of 4.3% per year). However, this average masks important heterogeneity
in terms of growth experiences, as shown in Table 2: focusing only on households who owned cattle, growth episodes are almost as likely as decreases or
stagnation in herd size.
In 2004 we also collected new data on households’ subjective expectations
of herd dynamics. The use of elicited expectations to study decision-making
has now been applied extensively for testing economic hypotheses in both
8

Table 2: PARIMA data: heterogeneity in growth, 2000-2003
Growth

no cattle

negative
0
positive
N

–
57
9
66

herd below
threshold
47
66
128
241

herd above
threshold
11
14
25
50

developed and developing countries (for reviews, see Manski, 2004, Hurd,
2009, Delavande, 2014, Delavande, Gine, and McKenzie, 2011). That said,
it is worth explaining in some detail how we elicited these data.
We started by randomly selecting four hypothetical initial herd sizes for
each respondent, one from each of the intervals defined by the equilibria identified by Lybbert et al. (2004). 4 Respondents were then asked to characterize
their expectations of rainfall during the coming year, choosing between good,
normal or bad. 5 6 Because the data were collected well into the rainy season, these answers should not be interpreted as uninformed priors, that could
4

The intervals are [1,5), [5, 15), [15, 40) and [40, 60] tropical livestock units (TLU)
where 1 TLU = 1 cattle = 0.7 camels = 10 goats or sheep. The TLU measure allows
aggregation across species on the basis of animals’ average adult metabolic weight. Among
the Boran we study, the overwhelming majority of TLU are held in the form of cattle.
5
This sort of trinomial rainfall characterization is familiar to respondents, as it corresponds to published rainfall forecasts such as those disseminated by the regional Drought
Monitoring Centre and government and nongovernmental organization extension officers.
See the analysis in (Luseno et al., 2003, Lybbert et al., 2007), who previously studied
pastoralists’ rainfall expectations
6
In this and several other African rangelands ecosystems, pasture biomass covaries
strongly with rainfall. In recent years, the density of grazing livestock and wildlife has
been insufficient to affect biomass sufficiently to alter herd dynamics, with stocking rates
well below carrying capacity outside of a relatively small cluster of overgrazed areas around
settlements (McPeak, Little, and Doss, 2011). While climate change or a significant increase in human population and stocking rates could change the relationship between herd
sizes and range vegetation dynamics, at the current time both appear driven largely by
variation in weather. So the rainfall states we study should suffice to capture the stochastic
dynamics of interest.

9

merely reflect differences in optimism. 7 Respondents were also asked to assume a herd of standard composition for the region (in terms of age and sex
of the animals). In one site, and in a second separate interview, we additionally asked respondents to consider what would happen to their herd (with an
identical randomly allocated initial herd size), in the case of more extreme
weather conditions, namely severe drought and a very good year. 8
After thus framing the problem, we asked each respondent to define the
maximum and the minimum herd size they would expect to have one year
later if they themselves started the year with the randomly assigned initial
herd size. These bounds provide a natural anchor for the next step, in which
we asked respondents to distribute, on a board, 20 stones among herd sizes
between the minimum and the maximum previously elicited, thereby describing their subjective herd size distribution one year ahead conditional on the
randomly assigned initial herd size and the statement about rainfall. Finally,
each respondent was asked if s/he had ever managed a herd approximately
equal in size to the initial value provided as the random seed. The elicitation
of the probability distribution function is an appropriate technique under
these circumstances (Morgan and Henrion, 1990) and allows us to compute
conditional distributions and their moments. In addition, and because hypothetical initial wealth was randomly assigned to the respondent, it eliminates
the prospective endogeneity of initial herd size in determining the estimated
herd dynamics (Heckman, 1991).
In total, we have 460 observations, collected among 115 respondents for
rainfall conditions labeled as good/normal or bad. Of these, 19 do not include
a herd size prediction, usually because respondents were unable to distribute
7

The geographical concentration of pastoralists’ expectations regarding rainfall further
reinforces this interpretation: in two sites, over 90% of the respondents expected bad
rainfall, while in the other two sites, expectations were equally divided between ‘bad
rainfall’ and ‘good rainfall’.
8
In particular, we asked respondents to consider herd evolution “as if” in 1999, the last
major drought, or “as if” in a very good year, which we asked them to define based on
their own experience.

10

the stones across the board, a problem that occurred mainly for bigger initial
herd sizes, when the difference between the maximum and the minimum was
sometimes quite large. Of the remaining 441 observations, the respondents
had prior personal experience managing a herd of comparable size in 288
cases (65.3%). In addition, we have 61 similar observations for very good
and very bad years.
We finish this brief description of the data we use by presenting, in figure 1, the scatter plot and kernel regression relating expected herd size one
year ahead and initial herd size, conditional on ever having had a herd with a
similar size but unconditional on weather conditions. 9 Several points emerge
from comparing pastoralists’ subjective expectations of one year-ahead herd
dynamics (figure 1) with the dynamics revealed by Desta/Lybbert et al.’s
herd history data (in particular, the dashed line in Lybbert et al. (2004, p.
771, figure 4), which reflects one year ahead dynamics).
First, both these data and the prior studies exhibit multiple dynamic
equilibria consistent with the notion of a poverty trap. Second, however,
the equilibria identified by pastoralists appear to differ markedly from those
apparent in herd history data, both with respect to their location and stability. Notably, herd accumulation occurs for a wider range of initial herd
sizes, while herd losses seem a relatively marginal occurrence, contradicting
detailed studies of this system (Coppock, 1994) and the dynamics suggested
by herd history data.
These casual comparisons invite more disaggregated analysis. Our data
on herders’ subjective expectations of herd dynamics (Figure 1) represent
only one-year-ahead expectations under necessarily limited variability in rainfall regimes. By contrast, the pattern exhibited in the actual herd history
data used by Desta/Lybbert et al. are the result of a mixture of environmen9

We estimate Nadaraya-Watson nonparametric regressions with the Epanechnikov kernel and bandwidth of 4.545. The value of bandwidth was selected using Silverman (1986)
rule of thumb, as determined by the “bounds for Stata” package (Beresteanu and Manski,
2000).

11

Figure 1: Unconditional subjective expected herd dynamics

12

tal conditions over a period of 17 years.10 These differences are made clear
in table 3, which summarizes the data on expected herd size one year ahead,
conditional on state of nature and on having had a herd with a similar size,
and its representation in figures 2 and 3, where we present the scatter plot
and kernel regression relating expected herd size one year ahead and initial
herd size for bad and normal/good years. 11

Figure 2: Expected herd dynamics under bad rainfall conditions
These plots, and the summary statistics in table 3 suggest two insights.
First, the relation between expected and initial herd size is nonlinear only in
10

For example, Kamara, Swallow, and Kirk (2004) identify three major droughts
(1984/85, 1991/92 and 1995/96) and two periods of excessive rains (1980/81 and 1997/98)
in this region over the period covered by the Desta/Lybbert et al. data. To these natural
disasters, one may add the generalized ethnic clashes between the Boran and the Gabra
in 1992, following the fall of the Derg regime. Barrett and Santos (2014) explore how
changing rainfall distributions might impact observed herd dynamics.
11
To conserve space, we omit figures reflecting the data and nonparametric regressions
under extreme weather conditions, which show that during severe drought everyone expect
to lose cattle.

13

14

Table 3: Expected herd size, one year
Very Bad
E(herd)t+1
min mean max min
herdt ∈ [1 , 5)
0
0.6
1.6
0
0.8
3.5
12
0.3
herdt ∈ [5 , 15)
herdt ∈ [15 , 40) 1.4
6.0
13.9 5.5
herdt ∈ [40 , 60) 4.4 13.3 27.7 24.6

ahead:
Bad
mean
1.6
7.8
23.3
42.6

the effect of rainfall
Good
max min mean
5.6
0.8
4.5
15.6 4.5
12.8
50.9 14.1 36.3
79.1 63.0 74.4

and initial wealth
Very Good
max min mean max
6.9
1.8
3.7
6.6
21.2 3.3
12.5 21.6
57.9 18.3 31.9 50.6
89.9 56.3 64.9 78.4

Figure 3: Expected herd dynamics under good or normal rainfall conditions
the case of bad rainfall conditions. Under good or normal climatic conditions
(and perhaps unsurprisingly), almost all herders expect herd growth no matter the initial herd size. This disaggregation implies that adverse weather
shocks drive the nonlinear dynamics revealed by the analysis of herd history
data.
Second, the dispersion around the expected herd growth values is much
bigger under conditions of bad rainfall than in a normal/good year. Herders
exhibit far more heterogeneous beliefs about their ability to deal with adverse
states of nature than with favorable ones. If, following Schultz (1975), one
interprets this variation as at least partly reflecting pastoralist herding ability
– assuming each pastoralist accurately perceives his or her own herd dynamics
given his or her individual aptitude for herding – then perhaps ‘the ability
to deal with disequilibria’ plays a significant role in wealth dynamics.

15

3

Expected herd dynamics in a stochastic environment

In order to generate herders’ subjective expectations of herd dynamics under
a mixture of states of nature we need to integrate data on herd growth
expectations conditional on rainfall (the elicited expectations data previously
described) with historical rainfall data (in practice, monthly rainfall data for
the four sites over the period 1991-2001). 12 With this information we can
then simulate herd evolution over longer periods than just one year ahead.
Since we must predict out-of-sample in simulating herd evolution for large
values of initial herd size, we estimate the parametric relation between initial
and expected herd sizes (hereafter, herd1 and herd0 , respectively) conditional
on each of the four rainfall scenarios (drought (very bad), bad, normal/good
, and very good). We estimate this relation with a respondent fixed effect
specification, αi , taking advantage of having repeated observations, r, across
different herd size intervals on each individual, i. We thus estimate
herd1

ir

= f(herd0 ir ) + αi + ir

(1)

where f(herd0 ir ) is a polynomial function of initial herd size.13 Table 4
12

Average rainfall was 490 mm/year, with a standard deviation of 152 mm/year. Given
the skewness and the kurtosis of this distribution, we cannot reject the null hypothesis
that rainfall follows a normal distribution. The minimum annual rainfall over the period
was registered in 1999 (259 mm) and the maximum in 1997 (765 mm). The probability of
such events is 0.064 and 0.035. Given these results, we assumed, for simulation purposes, a
symmetric distribution, with a probability of extreme events (drought; or very good year)
equal to 0.10. In a separate analysis (Barrett and Santos, 2014) we show that the results
are relatively sensitive to changes in the rainfall distribution, reflecting the dependency of
this system on rainfall and its vulnerability to climate change
13
Besides the assumptions on the functional form of f(•), we also assumed that
ir ∼ N(0,σ 2 ). Other specifications, that replace the fixed effect with other regressors
that could affect subjective expectations, such as gender, age, experience and migrant status, were considered, but none of those variables proved statistically significant, so we omit
these results. We omit higher order polynomial terms in the very good and good/normal
year specifications because they added nothing given the good fit already achieved with a

16

presents the estimates, which reflect the same results displayed visually in
figures 2 and 3, and suggested in table 3: unambiguous, effectively linear
expected growth under normal/good/very good rainfall conditions, and a
nonlinear relation between herd1 and herd0 under conditions of poor rainfall
and drought, and with considerable dispersion so that the precision of those
estimates (as measured by the R2 ) is far less than under favorable rainfall
regimes.

Table 4: Estimates of Expected Herd Dynamics Conditional on Rainfall
Variable
herd0

Very Good
1.293
(0.000)

herd20
herd30
0.897
(0.448)
N
61
2
R
0.986
Note: Values within

constant

Good
1.477
(0.019)

Bad
Very bad
0.528
0.246
(0.224)
(0.246)
0.026
0.009
(0.010)
(0.010)
-0.00039
-.00017
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
0.179
0.513
-0.575
(0.416) (1.185)
(1.083)
96
192
61
0.994
0.792
0.589
parenthesis are robust standard errors

We then use these estimates to simulate the expected evolution of herd
sizes 14 Figure 4 presents the basic structure of the simulation procedure
we used, while figure 5 presents the mean of 10-year ahead herd size for 500
replicates of this simulation with initial herd sizes between 1 and 60.
simple linear specification with fixed effects.
14
We calibrate these estimates to impose basic biological rules for livestock. More precisely, we do not allow for negative herds and impose that biological growth under good
rainfall conditions is delayed in 2 years, i.e., enough for cows to reproduce in accordance
with basic gestational patterns. We also constrain the predicted values for initial herd
sizes above 52 (poor rainfall) and 45 (drought) to be linear, with a slope of 0.033 and
0.009, respectively, preventing unbelievable predictions due to the parameter estimates at
the boundaries of our sample.

17

t-1
predict herdt
(herd0 given)

t
→ rainfall draw
↓
call ht+1 =f(ht | rainfall )
↓
predict ht+1 →

t+1

repeat as in t

Figure 4: Simulation procedure
The results are remarkably similar to the dynamics revealed by the herd
history data (the solid line in Lybbert et al. (2004, p. 771, figure 4)), both in
the general shape of the curve and in the location of the different equilibria.
This strongly suggests that the mismatch observed earlier between the one
year ahead transitions predicted by the two data sets (figure 1 and the dashed
line in Lybbert et al. (2004, p. 771, figure 4)) arose because of differences
in the underlying distribution of the states of nature; once we account for
historical rainfall patterns and simulate the longer-term herd dynamics, it
appears that Boran pastoralists’ subjective expectations reflect a remarkably
accurate understanding of the nature of how their herds have evolved over
the past generation. In particular, they expect that someone with a herd
below approximately 15 cattle will eventually lose almost all of his wealth,
collapsing into a destitute equilibrium with just 1 cow.
Can we be sure that multiple equilibria exist? Given the small sample
size, the answer is “no”; the lower confidence band crosses the equilibrium
line only once, from above, at the lower level equilibrium (1 animal). But as
we show below, this merely reflects our current assumption that all herders
follow the same growth path. When we disaggregate by herder ability, the
precision of our estimates improves significantly.
Concentrating on our average estimates, do these nonlinearities lead to
a poverty trap? The answer depends, in part, on what one means by a
“poverty trap”. In Table 5 we quantify the probability of moving between

18

Figure 5: Simulated expected herd dynamics
equilibria over a 10 year period given the stochastic nature of these shocks.
There is a positive probability that a herder starting with a herd between 1
and 4 cattle will, 10 years later, have grown his herd. Indeed, there is even a
very small (< 1 percent) probability that he finishes above the accumulation
threshold. Hence, under the strictest interpretation of a poverty trap – that
initial conditions totally determine future wealth and the system is nonergodic, thus the probability of growing to a higher equilibrium is zero –
finds no support in our data. However, the probability of moving out of
poverty is quite low (less than 12%), suggesting that, in this context, the
idea of a poverty trap is most usefully conceptualized as a high probability
that agents will remain at lower levels of welfare, a weaker but perhaps more
19

Table 5: Estimated herd size ten year transition matrix
herdt+10
herdt
1-4
5-14
15-39
>40

0-4

5-14

15-39

>40

0.879
0.575
0.204
0.136

0.113
0.262
0.280
0.230

0.009
0.133
0.255
0.291

0.000
0.030
0.261
0.342

realistic interpretation of the concept in stochastic environments (Azariadis
and Stachurski, 2005).
Summarizing the results so far, we find that Boran pastoralists accurately
perceive long-term herd dynamics characterized by multiple wealth equilibria
consistent with the notion of a poverty trap: shocks almost totally prevent
wealth accumulation that would allow herders at a low initial wealth level
from escaping poverty. However, these dynamics seem entirely the result of
an asymmetry in growth rates under different rainfall conditions. Growth is
universally expected in good years while S-shaped dynamics seem to result
from wealth-differentiated capacity to deal with bad rainfall conditions. 15
Our data also show that, even in bad years, not all herders expect their
herds to shrink. The considerable dispersion of beliefs about herd dynamics
under adverse states of nature suggests that herder-specific characteristics,
which we summarize as ability, may likewise play a central role in conditioning wealth dynamics among these Ethiopian herders. The next section
investigates this hypothesis.
15

This could explain why, for example, Mogues (2011) studying livestock accumulation
in other regions of Ethiopia in the period 2000-03, with no major shocks in between, does
not find evidence of such nonlinearities, and why Barrett et al. (2006) find evidence of an
S-shaped curve for asset dynamics in the northern Kenya PARIMA sample, which included
a major drought ending in 2001.

20

4

Ability and expected herd dynamics

Herding in semi-arid environments is a difficult livelihood. One must know
how to treat livestock diseases and injuries, protect cattle against predators,
manage their nutrition, navigate to distant grazing and watering sites, assist
in difficult calving episodes, etc. Not everyone learns and practices these
diverse skills equally well. One would naturally expect herders with greater
animal husbandry skills to enjoy faster herd growth and to be less subject
to adverse shocks to herd size than less skilled herders. Put differently, the
herd dynamics explored in the historical data and in the previous section
may ignore salient differences in herder ability.
We explore the impact of differences in herding ability upon herd dynamics by using the PARIMA panel data on pastoralist households, described
in section 2, to estimate herder ability using stochastic parametric frontier
estimation methods for panel data (Kumbhakar and Lovell, 2000). More
precisely, we estimate the herd growth frontier that explains herder i’s herd
size at the beginning of period t, hit , conditional on a vector of household
attributes, Xit−1 ,and herd size at the beginning of the prior period using a
composed error term that includes a symmetric random component reflecting
standard sampling and measurement error, ψ, and a one-sided term reflecting
observation-specific but time-invariant inefficiency, φi ≥0, which we assume
follows a truncated normal distribution, N + (µ, σ 2 ):
hit = f(hit−1 ) + βXit−1 − φi + ψit

(2)

We use an exogenous switching regressions specification for f (hit−1 ) so as
to incorporate the possibility of two different growth paths, depending on
whether the herder is above or below the 15 cattle threshold identified by
Lybbert et al. (2004).
Since these households were surveyed repeatedly from 2000-2003, we can
take advantage of multiple observations for each herder to compute consistent

21

herder-specific mean efficiency measures, i.e., each pastoralist’s proximity to
the herd frontier. The inefficiency parameter φi captures any time-invariant –
and period-average time-varying – unobservables associated with systematic
deviation from the herd growth frontier. This parameter can clearly capture
factors beyond the herder’s period-average unobserved ability/skill, such as
location-specific unobservables. But φi is almost surely strongly correlated
with skill. Moreover, it is an open question whether it matters for targeting
and programming if the features that cause systematic underperformance are
intrinsic, immutable individual skill or community-level or slow-changing individual characteristics. The key is that there exist distinct groups of households who routinely out-perform or under-perform their neighbors, however
we understand the structural genesis of those relative performance differences.
The interpretation of these estimates as proxies for ability can still be
contested on at least two grounds. First, the lagged values of herd size are
clearly related to lagged (and current) ability, hence our estimates of inefficiency are likely inconsistent. This would matter if we were interested in
cardinal measures of inefficiency. But we focus only on the ordinal measures,
grouping households into low and high ability cohorts. So long as the correlation between lagged wealth and ability does not affect the ordering of each
observation within the inefficiency distribution, the possible bias in point
estimates will be of no consequence for present purposes.
Second, we estimate inefficiency by imposing a specific functional form, a
specific distribution for the inefficiency parameter, and a specific accumulation threshold that, from the existing literature (in particular Lybbert et al.
(2004)), seems valid for the average herder in this setting. These assumptions
can introduce misspecification error that may be easily conflated with inefficiency (Sherlund, Barrett, and Adesina, 2002). As with the prior concern
about inconsistent parameter estimates, our reliance purely on the ordering
of the estimates sharply limits the relevance of such concerns. Nonetheless,

22

an alternative approach is to use more flexible, nonparametric efficiency estimation methods, in particular Data Envelopment Analysis, that can easily
allow for variable returns to scale without imposing a specific functional or
distributional forms (see Coelli et al., 2005). Our analysis is robust to this
alternative way of estimating inefficiency (results available from the lead author by request), so we maintain that the ordinal inefficiency estimates we
estimate provide a reasonable proxy for relative herder ability/skill and thus
serve present purposes well.16
Table 6 presents estimates of the herd growth frontier based on 2000-1,
2001-2 and 2002-3 annual observations for the 113 households for which we
have complete data on each of the covariates.17 The results indicate statistically significant (p-value = 0.053) differences in the asset dynamics above
and below the threshold, with expected herd growth (collapse) above (below)
the threshold. The estimated frontier is piecewise quadratic in herdt -herdt−1
space, as higher order polynomial terms of lagged herd size have no statistically significant effect.18 Household labor and land endowments have no effect
at the margin on expected herd growth, signaling that these are not limiting in this environment for most households. Male-headed households enjoy
significantly higher herd growth rates, which may partly capture household
composition effects (with male-headed households having more men avail16

The DEA estimates were obtained using the -dea- command in Stata (Ji and Lee,
2010). The results are available from the lead author by request.
17
Because one of the households is the successor of an initial household, we only have
data for the last two years. Hence, we’re using an unbalanced panel, with 338 observations.
18
Table 1 defines these variables and presents the descriptive statistics. We also estimated this regression using cubic and quartic terms, but none of the higher-order polynomials were statistically significantly different from zero and one could not reject the null
hypothesis that the higher-order terms jointly have no effect on next period’s herd size,
once one allows for the threshold effect. The variable “no cattle at t-1” is included to
control for the fact that herd growth is different when one has no cattle – growth can
then only occur through purchases or gifts, both of which are very infrequent (Lybbert
et al., 2004) – than when one has a positive herd size. Although the point estimate on
this variable is not statistically significantly different from zero, when we do not control
for this effect, the estimated coefficients on lagged herd size and its various interactions
become far more imprecise.

23

able to herd, especially on treks away from base camp lasting days or weeks,
holding labor availability constant). There exist statistically significant, albeit diminishing, marginal returns to herding experience. And there are
marginally significant fixed effects associated with location and year (in particular, for 2001-2, the year of recovery after the severe 1999-2000 drought),
the latter result reinforcing our earlier finding about state-dependent growth.
The estimated distribution of the inefficiency estimates (with cattle as the
units of measure) is presented in figure 6,19 allowing a visual analysis of the
within-sample variation.
Table 6: Stochastic parametric herd growth frontier estimates
variable
coefficient std. err. p-value
herd size at t-1*above threshold
1.022
0.093
0.000
herd size at t-1 squared * above threshold
0.000
0.001
0.689
0.890
0.307
0.004
herd size at t-1* below threshold
herd size at t-1 squared * below threshold
-0.009
0.022
0.681
no cattle at t-1
-1.126
1.245
0.366
-0.089
0.174
0.611
labor * above threshold
labor * below threshold
0.099
0.125
0.427
land
0.022
0.152
0.885
1.333
0.702
0.057
sex
experience
0.137
0.071
0.052
experience squared
-0.002
0.001
0.174
migrant
-0.605
0.998
0.544
2000-01
-0.740
0.531
0.164
1.553
0.525
0.003
2001-02
Dida Hara
1.870
1.110
0.092
Qorate
0.026
1.229
0.983
Wachille
0.827
1.131
0.465
constant
13.012
195.554
0.947
µ
14.671
195.551
0.940
N
338
2
R
0.230
19

Estimated using the Epanechnikov kernel, with a bandwidth of 0.24697.

24

Figure 6: Empirical density function of herd growth inefficiency estimates
Using the predicted value of each herder’s estimated inefficiency, we then
divide our sample into two sub-samples: lower ability (those in the 4th quartile of the inefficiency estimates, with φi > 15.38) and a complementary
category of higher ability herders.The observations are concentrated around
just a few points ranges of inefficiency estimates, suggesting that there may
be little value to further subdivision of the sample. 20 For each of these
two classes we re-estimate equation 1, obtaining estimates of the parametric
models that relate expected and initial herd size for each sub-sample, after
which we performed the same simulation as above.21 Figure 7 shows the
20

We also experimented with splitting the higher ability herders into two categories,
those of highest ability (the 1st quartile of the inefficiency distribution) and a residual
medium ability class (the 2nd and 3rd quartiles). The qualitative results are similar, so
we present the simpler approach here. Results of the most disaggregated analysis are
available from the lead author by request.
21
These 8 parametric models (4 states of nature x 2 ability classes) are qualitatively
similar to the ones presented in Table 4. To conserve space, we omit them here but make
them available from the lead author by request.

25

Figure 7: Simulated expected herd dynamics – the effect of ability
nonparametric conditional expectation function (and 95 percent confidence
intervals) of 10-year-ahead herd size obtained for 500 replicates with initial
herd sizes between 1 and 60 cattle for each ability class. The results are
easily summarized.
Although those in the lowest ability quartile exhibit S-shaped expected
herd dynamics, these lie everywhere beneath the dynamic equilibrium line
(the solid 45◦ line in figure 7). Thus, low ability herders are expected to
converge towards the low level dynamic asset equilibrium of 1-2 head of
cattle over time. Recall that all herders expect to grow their herds during
good and normal rainfall years. So this expected long-run herd size collapse
arises entirely from low ability herders difficulty in managing and recovering
26

from adverse weather shocks.
Higher ability herders likewise exhibit S-shaped expected herd dynamics.
However, they face multiple dynamic equilibria, with a threshold (i.e., unstable dynamic equilibrium) at 11-17 cattle, similar to the threshold estimated
by Lybbert et al. (2004) from the herd history data. Notice also that, when
we allow for different growth paths conditional on ability, we get much more
precise estimates of the herd dynamics within this system. In particular,
both confidence bands for the higher ability herders cross the dynamic equilibrium line in three points, two of which represent stable dynamic equilibria,
at 1-2 and 29-35 cattle, respectively. The implication, reflected in figure 7, is
that S-shaped herd dynamics characteristic of a multiple equilibrium poverty
trap are not followed by all herders. Low ability herders face a unique dynamic equilibrium at lower levels of welfare, giving rise to a different sort
of poverty trap than that faced by herders with higher ability, who expect
to accumulate wealth so long as they maintain an herd size above the 12-17
cattle threshold. These results clearly raise important practical questions
with respect to any asset redistribution or transfer policy, as ability is not
easily and quickly identified in conventional survey methods, at least not
by outsiders such as the governmental and nongovernmental agencies that
typically provide transfers and public safety net programs.

5

Expected growth and inequality among the
Boran

We now apply this simulation approach to analyze the expected evolution
of wealth and inequality in our sample of respondents. We use the same
approach as above on the subsample of 97 households that owned cattle
in 2003.22 Table 7 presents the results for expected average herd size 10
22
From our sample of 120 respondents, 5 were not interviewed in 2003 and 18 had no
cattle. Given that we did not elicit the expectations about herd evolution for stockless

27

years ahead and for expected inequality, based on 500 runs of our simulation
procedure, first when we disregard the effect of herder ability (column b),
then when we incorporate it (column c).
Table 7: Expected evolution of wealth and inequality among the Boran
t=0

Average herd size
Gini coefficient on herd size

(a)
12.76
(1.49)
0.46
(0.05)

t=10
(disregarding ability)
(b)
9.61
(3.34)
0.66
(0.04)

t=10
(considering ability)
(c)
15.85
(8.89)
0.71
(0.07)

The results are simple to interpret. When we take into consideration the
role individual heterogeneity plays in shaping wealth dynamics (column c),
we should expect both an increase in average herd size and a large increase
in inequality over time, as low ability herders collapse into destitution and
higher ability herders steadily grow their livestock holdings. If we simulate the evolution of the wealth of this population with a simpler approach
that neglects such differences (column b), then we still expect an increase
in inequality (although somewhat smaller), but with a decrease in average
wealth.

6

The policy challenge: targeting with unknown dynamics

The possibility that multiple mechanisms underpin wealth dynamics poses
a challenge for policymakers. To illustrate how an understanding of wealth
dynamics might affect the design and performance of an intervention, we
herders and that, to the best of our knowledge, there are no reliable estimates of the rate
of re-entry into pastoralism for herders who lost all their cattle, we dropped them from
the simulation. Among those with no cattle in 2003, 5 households (or 27%) were classified
as of being of low ability.

28

explore the effectiveness of herd restocking in this system, as this is perhaps
the most common form of post-drought assistance provided to pastoralists
by donors and governments in the region.
We simulate the effect of three different scenarios under the maintained
assumption that growth does depend on ability (as represented in figure 7)
and using a constant budget. In Scenario 1, all herds below five cattle (a
customary, Boran-defined poverty line) are given animals to boost their herd
to five head, irrespective of the recipient herder’s ability. This reflects the
dominant current paradigm of progressive transfers to the poorest. In our
simulations, in aggregate that rule leads to a transfer of 36 cattle to 17 beneficiaries in our 2003 sample of 97 households. Those 36 cattle become the
fixed “budget” that we maintain in the next two scenarios. In Scenario 2,
we simulate the effects of a transfer targeted so as to maximize the number of “viable” herders, that is, those that have a herd that is larger than
the estimated minimum accumulation threshold of 11 cattle. Although we
assume that growth depends on ability, we also assume that there exists no
effective mechanism to elicit herder ability; so transfers are conditioned solely
on observable herd sizes. Then in Scenario 3, we assume one can accurately
identify herder by ability group and, as with Scenario 2, again target transfers so as to maximize asset growth. Scenario 3 involves transfers to 16 higher
ability herders, with limited overlap in identity with the 17 recipients under
scenario 1. The main difference between these scenarios is evident in Figure
8, where we draw the expected herd growth associated with the transfer of
one cattle, conditional on herder ability.
Given expected herd dynamics over the decade following the hypothesized
transfer, the transfer is expected to generate herd growth, net of the one cattle
transfer (i.e., expected gains > 1), only for higher ability recipients with ex
ante herd size between 9 and 22 head. Herders of low ability or, if of higher
ability, with the smallest (or largest) herds are expected to lose some of their
post-transfer herd over the ensuing decade, signaling negative medium-to-

29

Figure 8: Expected gains from the transfer of one cattle
long term growth returns on livestock transfers to the poorest (or wealthiest)
herders of higher ability. The expected herd gain is maximized for a transfer
to a higher ability herder with an ex ante herd size of 15 cattle, a significantly
larger herd than is typical of restocking program participants, since such
interventions are typically targeted following some poverty reduction criteria,
like Scenario 1.
Table 8 presents the results of a comparison among these three different scenarios for targeting herd restocking transfers which reflect both this
discussion and, implicitly, the distribution of low and high ability types as
function of pre-transfer wealth, as represented in figure 9
As one would expect based on the growth dynamics of this system, restocking targeted to lower wealth households (specifically, those fewer than
five cattle) fails to promote growth among the poor. After 10 years, beneficiaries enjoy an expected gain of 0.86 cattle, but from an average transfer of
2.12 cattle. This implies a -4.4% compound annual return on investment in
30

31

3

2

1

Beneficiaries
Non-Beneficiaries
Beneficiaries
Non-Beneficiaries
Beneficiaries
Non-Beneficiaries

Scenario

17
80
23
74
18
79

Number

2.12
0
2
0
1.94
0

Average
transfer

Average
herd size
(2003)
2.88
14.86
10
13.62
10.05
13.38

Expected herd size
(2013)
w/ transfer w/out transfer
4.46
3.63
18.45
18.45
12.20
9.34
17.88
17.88
13.40
10.09
17.16
17.16

Expected gains
from
transfer
0.86
0
2.86
0
3.3
0

Table 8: Expected effects of restocking under different targeting assumptions

Figure 9: Distribution of high and low ability types as a function of initial
wealth
transfer resources, reflecting expected herd losses below the critical herd size
threshold. The growth-promoting impacts of herd restocking become more
satisfactory in the other two scenarios, that target those who can reach the
herd accumulation threshold through transfers rather than the ex ante poorest households. Under scenario 2, the average net returns to this policy after
10 years are 43% (3.6% annually). These returns significantly increase to
70% (5.4% annually), under scenario 3, showing that the payoff to the design
of a reliable mechanism for identifying herding ability is potentially considerable, given that ability seems to matter a great deal to wealth dynamics
in this system. But targeting the accumulation threshold is the main factor
that drives achieving a positive long-run rate of return on transfer resources.
This payoff naturally depends on the distribution of ability types. As
shown in figure 9 there is, in this system at least, a correlation between ex ante
wealth and ability that reflects the joint operation of the dynamics described

32

in this paper – with low ability types expected to fall into and remain
in poverty regardless of initial wealth – and the insufficiency of informal
insurance, particularly among the poor (Santos and Barrett, 2011). Roughly
half of the herders with less than five cattle are classified as low ability (which,
recall, we defined as being in the lower quartile of the distribution of our
estimates of technical efficiency). The frequency of low ability herders then
diminishes with wealth: 22% of the beneficiaries of transfers under Scenario 2
(with herds between 9-11 cattle) are classified as of low ability, and only little
more than 10% of the herders with wealth above the accumulation threshold
are classified as such. The challenge intrinsic to restocking projects targeted
at those with small herds is that it implicitly favors those with the least
ability to manage the livestock they receive. This finding lends support to
recent policy initiatives in the east African drylands that focus more on cash
transfers than livestock transfers to support the poorest community members.

7

Conclusions

Using unique data on subjective herd growth expectations conditional on
expected rainfall, we find that southern Ethiopian pastoralists appear to understand the nonstationary herd dynamics that long-term herd history data
suggest characterize their system, corroborating Lybbert et al. (2004) and
related results using different data and methods. Moreover, pastoralists’
responses reveals that multiple dynamic equilibria arise purely due to adverse shocks associated with low rainfall years and only among pastoralists
of higher herding ability. Lower ability herders appear to converge towards a
unique, low-level equilibrium herd size. When adverse weather events strike,
they lose livestock and, in expectation, cannot recover quickly enough before
the next drought hits. Thus, the data suggest that even among a seemingly
homogeneous population in an ethnically uniform region offering effectively
only one livelihood option – livestock herding – there exist complex wealth

33

dynamics characterized by distinct convergence clubs defined by individual
ability, with multiple dynamic equilibria existing for only a subset of those
clubs and a unique stable dynamic equilibrium for the other clubs.
These findings carry two very general policy implications. First, the need
for interventions to lift people out of – or to prevent their collapse into –
poverty traps, seems to depend on the nature of the adverse shocks, in particular whether their severity and frequency is such that growth under favorable
states of nature is often and sharply reversed, making accumulation below a
critical threshold unlikely (albeit not impossible). Risk mitigation or transfer
methods to limit the frequency or magnitude of shocks may be as or more
valuable than transfers to facilitate growth among the poorest. Second, the
appropriate design and targeting of social protection in this stochastic environment depend very much on individual characteristics, perhaps including
difficult-to-observe characteristics such as ability. Identifying ability may be
operationally difficult, but failure to take such characteristics into account
may lead to ill-conceived efforts and wasted scarce resources.

34

References
Azariadis, C., and J. Stachurski. 2005. “Poverty Traps.” In P. Aghion and
S. Durlauf, eds. Handbook of Economic Growth. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Barrett, C., and M. Carter. 2013. “The economics of poverty traps and persistent poverty: empirical and policy implications.” Journal of Development
Studies 49:976–990.
Barrett, C., T. Garg, and L. McBride. forthcoming. “Well-Being Dynamics
and Poverty Traps.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 8.
Barrett, C., and P. Santos. 2014. “The impact of changing rainfall variability
on resource-dependent wealth dynamics.” Ecological Economics 105:48–54.
Barrett, C.B., G. Gebru, J.G. McPeak, A.G. Mude, J. Vanderpluye-Orgle,
and A.T. Yirbecho. 2004. “Codebook for data collected under the improving pastoral risk management on East Africa rangelands (PARIMA)
project.” Unpublished, Cornell University.
Barrett, C.B., P.P. Marenya, J. Mcpeak, B. Minten, F. Murithi, W. OluochKosura, F. Place, J.C. Randrianarisoa, J. Rasambainarivo, and J. Wangila.
2006. “Welfare dynamics in rural Kenya and Madagascar.” The Journal of
Development Studies 42:248–277.
Baumol, W.J. 1986. “Productivity growth, convergence and welfare: what
the long run data show.” American Economic Review 76:1072–85.
Beresteanu, A., and C.F. Manski. 2000. “Bounds for Stata: draft version
1.0.” Unpublished, Northwestern University.
Bowles, S., S. Durlauf, and K. Hoff. 2006. Poverty traps. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

35

Canova, F. 2004. “Testing for convergence clubs in income per capita: a
predictive density approach.” International Economic Review 45:49–77.
Card, D. 1995. “Earnings, schooling and ability revisited.” Research in Labor
Economics 1:30–67.
Carter, M. 1997. “Environment, technology and the social articulation of risk
in West African agriculture.” Economic Development and Cultural Change
45:151–163.
Carter, M., and C. Barrett. 2006. “The economics of poverty traps and persistent poverty: An asset-based approach.” The Journal of Development
Studies 42:178–199.
Carter, M.R. 1998. “On the economics of realizing and sustaining an efficient redistribution of productive assets.” In E. O. Wright, ed. Recasting
Egalitarianism: New rules for accountability and equity in markets, communities and states. London: Verso.
Coelli, T.J., D.S.P. Rao, C.J. O’Donnell, and G.E. Battese. 2005. An Introduction to Efficiency and Productivity Analysis. New York: Springer.
Coppock, D.L. 1994. The Borana plateau of southern Ethiopia: synthesis of
pastoral research, development and change, 1980-91 . No. 5 in International
Livestock Centre for Africa Systems Study, Addis Ababa: ILCA.
Delavande, A. 2014. “Probabilistic expectations in developing countries.”
Annual Review of Economics 6:1–20.
Delavande, A., X. Gine, and D. McKenzie. 2011. “Measuring subjective expectations in developing countries: a critical review and new evidence.”
Journal of Development Economics 94:151–163.
DeLong, J.B. 1988. “Productivity growth, convergence and welfare: comment.” American Economic Review 78:1138–54.
36

Dercon, S. 1998. “Wealth, risk and activity choice: cattle in Western Tanzania.” Journal of Development Economics 55:1–42.
Desta, S. 1999. “Diversification of livestock assets for risk management in
the Borana pastoral system of southern Ethiopia.” PhD dissertation, Utah
State University, Logan, UT.
Evans, D., and B. Jovanovic. 1989. “An estimated model of entrepreneurial
choice under liquidity constraints.” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 808–
827.
Heckman, J. 1991. “Identifying the Hand of the Past: Distinguishing State
Dependence from Heterogeneity.” American Economic Review 81:75–79.
Hurd, M.D. 2009. “Subjective probabilities in Household Surveys.” Annual
Review of Economics 1:543–562.
Ji, Y., and C. Lee. 2010. “Data Envelopment Analysis.” The Stata Journal
10:267–280.
Kamara, A., B. Swallow, and M. Kirk. 2004. “Policies, interventions and
institutional change in pastoral resource management in Borana, southern
Ethiopia.” Development Policy Review 22:381–403.
Kraay, A., and D. McKenzie. 2014. “Do poverty traps exist? Assessing the
evidence.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28:127–148.
Kumbhakar, S., and C.A.K. Lovell. 2000. Stochastic Frontier Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Luseno, W.K., J.G. McPeak, C.B. Barrett, G. Gebru, and P.D. Little. 2003.
“The value of climate forecast information for pastoralists: evidence from
Southern Ethiopia and Northern Kenya.” World Development 31:1477–94.

37

Lybbert, T., C.B. Barrett, S. Desta, and D.L. Coppock. 2004. “Stochastic
wealth dynamics and risk management among a poor population.” Economic Journal 114:750–777.
Lybbert, T., C.B. Barrett, J. McPeak, and W.K. Luseno. 2007. “Bayesian
herders: asymmetric updating of rainfall beliefs in response to external
forecasts.” World Development 35:480–497.
Manski, C.F. 2004. “Measuring expectations.” Econometrica 72:1329–1376.
McPeak, J., P. Little, and C. Doss. 2011. Risk and social change in an African
rural economy. London: Routledge.
Mogues, T. 2011. “Shocks and asset dynamics in Ethiopia.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 60:91–120.
Morgan, M.G., and M. Henrion. 1990. Uncertainty. A guide to dealing with
uncertainty in quantitative risk and policy analysis.. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rosenzweig, M., and H.P. Binswanger. 1993. “Wealth, weather risk and the
composition and profitability of agricultural investments.” Economic Journal 103:56–78.
Sachs, J.D. 2005. The end of poverty: economic possibilities for our times.
New York: Penguin Press.
Santos, P., and C. Barrett. 2011. “Persistent poverty and informal credit.”
Journal of Development Economics 96:337–347.
Schultz, T.W. 1975. “The value of the ability to deal with disequilibria.”
Journal of Economic Literature 13:827–846.
Sherlund, S.M., C.B. Barrett, and A.A. Adesina. 2002. “Smallholder technical efficiency controlling for environmental production functions.” Journal
of Development Economics 69:85–101.
38

Silverman, B. 1986. Density estimation for statistics and data analysis. London: Chapman & Hall.
Toth, R. 2015. “Traps and Thresholds in Pastoralist Mobility.” American
Journal of Agricultural Economics 97:315–332.
United Nations Millenium Project. 2005. Investing in Development: A practical plan to achieve the Millenium Development Goals. New York: United
Nations Development Program.

39

