NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPORTANCE OF UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE AS AN AUTOMATIC
STABILIZER
Marco Di Maggio
Amir Kermani
Working Paper 22625
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22625

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

We thank Daron Acemoglu, Raj Chetty, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Steven Davis, Mark Duggan,
Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Erik Hurst, Enrico Moretti, Andreas Muller, Arash Nekoei, Luigi
Pistaferri, David Sraer, Ricardo Reis, David Romer, Jesse Rothstein, Danny Yagan and seminar
participants at the NBER SI Monetary Economics workshop, the NBER Fall Public Economics
meeting, the 11th CSEF-IGIER Symposium on Economics and Institutions, Columbia University
and UC Berkeley for numerous comments and discussions. We also thank Walker Ray, Calvin
Zhang and especially Dmitri Koustas for outstanding research assistance. All remaining errors are
ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marco Di Maggio and Amir Kermani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Importance of Unemployment Insurance as an Automatic Stabilizer
Marco Di Maggio and Amir Kermani
NBER Working Paper No. 22625
September 2016
JEL No. E24,E62,H53,J65
ABSTRACT
We assess the extent to which unemployment insurance (UI) serves as an automatic stabilizer to
mitigate the economy's sensitivity to shocks. Using a local labor market design based on
heterogeneity in local benefit generosity, we estimate that a one standard deviation increase in
generosity attenuates the effect of adverse shocks on employment growth by 7% and on earnings
growth by 6%. Consistent with a local demand channel, we find that consumption is less
responsive to local labor demand shocks in counties with more generous benefits. Our analysis
finds that the local fiscal multiplier of unemployment insurance expenditure is approximately 1.9.

Marco Di Maggio
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 265
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdimaggio@hbs.edu
Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
kermani@berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

Fiscal response to any recession is signi…cantly handicapped by the political di¢ culties that
impede timely expansionary …scal policy. The slow recovery from the "Great Recession" has
prompted a lively debate on whether the unconventional monetary policy measures succeeded
in boosting aggregate demand. In principle, automatic stabilizers bypass these di¢ culties
and can be a key factor in easing the consequences of negative economic shocks.1 However,
despite the relevance of this issue, the economic literature provides very little guidance on
whether automatic stabilizers are able to bu¤er shocks.2
This paper evaluates the extent to which unemployment insurance (UI) attenuates the
decline in real economic activity in response to local labor demand shocks. There are several
channels through which UI might moderate cyclical ‡uctuations. For instance, more generous
UI may stabilize aggregate demand by attenuating ‡uctuations in disposable income (Brown
(1955)) or redistributing funds to individuals with a higher propensity to consume (Blinder
(1975)).3 On the other hand, by increasing …rms’hiring costs, more generous unemployment
bene…ts may also accentuate economic ‡uctuations by discouraging job creation (Hagedorn
et al. (2013)). In other words, the role of UI as an automatic stabilizer and the relevance of
each channel through which it may impact on the economy are empirical questions. This paper shows that UI appears to have a bene…cial e¤ect on the economy by decreasing sensitivity
to shocks and reducing the variability in aggregate income, employment and consumption.
Ideally, we want to isolate the impact of UI on the response of local economic activity
to shocks by comparing outcomes in regions that have similar characteristics and are hit
by similar labor demand shocks orthogonal to the local labor supply, but that di¤er in the
1

They were quantitatively important; the Congressional Budget O¢ ce estimates that automatic stabilizers
accounted for a signi…cant fraction of the increase in government expenditure during the Great Recession:
"In …scal year 2012, CBO estimates, automatic stabilizers added $386 billion to the federal budget de…cit,
an amount equal to 2.3 percent of potential GDP. That outcome marked the fourth consecutive year that
automatic stabilizers added to the de…cit by an amount equal to or exceeding 2.0 percent of potential GDP,
an impact that had previously been equaled or exceeded only twice in the past 50 years, in …scal years 1982
and 1983." (Available here: http://www.cbo.gov/publication/43977)
2
For a recent work on the role of automatic stabilizers see McKay and Reis (2013).
3
See Krueger et al. (2015) as a recent example of theoretical work studying this channel.

2

generosity of their unemployment insurance programs. We approximate this ideal setting by
following Bartik (1991) and Blanchard and Katz (1992) in constructing a measure of the predicted change in demand-driven labor shocks in a county, given by the interaction between
its initial industrial composition and nationwide changes in employment in narrowly de…ned
manufacturing industries. For instance, this Bartik shock measure should capture the di¤erential e¤ects of a national manufacturing shock on counties di¤ering in local manufacturing
composition. The key identifying assumption is that this measure is not related to countyspeci…c labor supply shocks that may also a¤ect labor market outcomes. By controlling for
county …xed e¤ects, we focus on short-term ‡uctuations in the labor demand, and general
trends in labor supply –for example due to changes in demographics or immigration- cannot
contaminate our experiment. Our estimated coe¢ cient is the interaction between this Bartik
shock and UI generosity.
Since we want to show that local economies are less responsive to local labor demand
shocks where UI is more generous, our main measure of generosity is the average income
replacement rate at the state level for the period 1996-2000. This static measure of unemployment bene…ts, which does not include UI extensions, is less susceptible to endogeneity
problems, in that extensions are likely to be driven by local labor conditions. This approach
also allows us to disentangle the direct e¤ect of bene…t extensions from their e¤ects on the
economy’s sensitivity to shocks.4 To account for the fraction of the worker’s income that
is replaced when he becomes unemployed, using micro data from the Current Population
Survey (CPS) we compute the replacement rate conditional on being unemployed.5 We control for several observable regional characteristics, in addition to including year and county
…xed e¤ects. Moreover, in a series of robustness checks we provide further evidence that our
results are not driven by other heterogeneity between regions.
We start our analysis by estimating the importance of the e¤ect of UI on aggregate
4

Moreover, our results are robust to using a contemporaneous measure of UI generosity.
States di¤er signi…cantly in the generosity of bene…ts, which range from $275 a week in Florida to $646
a week in Massachusetts.
5

3

demand over the 1999-2013 period. This can be gauged by observing how employment growth
responds to shocks in counties with di¤erent replacement levels. In more generous counties
employment growth is signi…cantly less responsive to local labor demand shocks. A one
standard deviation increase in generosity reduces the elasticity of employment growth with
respect to local shocks by about 7%. One potential concern with these estimates is that they
could be driven by heterogeneity across counties, and speci…cally by di¤erences in industrial
characteristics. For instance, counties may be more or less cyclical as a function of their
leading industries, and this might well be correlated with the generosity of unemployment
bene…ts. To control for this, we compute the fraction of employed people in each sector
and control for the interaction between the Bartik shock and the fraction of employees in
the di¤erent sectors in all of our speci…cations. This allows counties whose main industry is
manufacturing, for example, to react to the Bartik shock in a di¤erent way than those where
services dominate. We also control for a series of economic and demographic characteristics
of the counties and their interaction with the Bartik shocks.
To examine the channels through which unemployment insurance could bu¤er negative
economic shocks, we decompose the e¤ect of generosity on employment growth between
the tradable and the non-tradable sectors as de…ned by Mian and Su… (2014). We …nd that
employment in the non-tradable sector, which is mostly driven by local consumption demand,
reacts less to labor demand shocks in counties with more generous bene…ts, but employment
in the tradable sector does not. Second, we analyze the sensitivity of consumption to shocks.
We employ two main measures. First, we show that durable goods consumption, proxied by
car sales, is less responsive to local labor demand shocks where UI is more generous. We …nd
that a one standard deviation increase in generosity reduces the local shock elasticity of car
sales growth by 12-15%. The main advantage of this measure is that car sales are registered in
the place of residence, which avoids misleading factors such as workers consuming in counties
other than where they live.6 Second, we use data on total aggregate consumption at state
6

Admittedly this result is almost certainly an overestimate, in that new car purchase is one of the
components of household consumption most sensitive to disposable income and our measure of car sales only

4

level, which includes both durables and non-durables, and get very similar results with a
one-standard-deviation increase in bene…ts attenuates consumption elasticity by 7%. This
con…rms the hypothesis that unemployment insurance has a signi…cant impact on aggregate
consumption by moderating ‡uctuations in the disposable income of the individuals with the
highest marginal propensity to consume. Collectively, these results strongly suggest that it
is through the demand channel that UI attenuates the economy’s sensitivity to shocks.7
We complement the foregoing results by estimating the response of earnings growth to
shocks in counties of di¤ering generosity. We …nd that more generous counties react less
strongly to adverse shocks, as captured by a negative interaction between the Bartik shock
and UI generosity. The result is both statistically and economically signi…cant. In fact, a
one standard deviation increase (equivalent to 4-7%) in UI generosity decreases the e¤ect of
shocks by about 9%.8
To provide evidence that our results do not hinge on the county-level variation, we con…rm our main results using data at state level and at commuting zone level. The advantage
of the state level data is that it mirrors the main source of di¤erences in UI generosity, which
depends on state law, and allows us to con…rm the results for total consumption growth
rather than car sales. The commuting zones encompass all metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas in the United States, and as Tolbert and Sizer (1996) and Autor and Dorn (2013)
suggest, these are the appropriate geographic units to delineate local labor markets. Moreover, commuting zones can be used to estimate a local …scal multiplier because spillovers
among CZs are less pronounced than among counties. We …nd that the …scal multiplier is
about 1.9. This relates our paper to the series of recent papers using cross-state variation
to estimate …scal multipliers, which provide very similar estimates even though they use a
captures the extensive but not the intensive margin.
7
A similar channel is proposed by Kekre (2015), who show that a marginal increase in UI generosity a¤ects
output and employment through a redistribution e¤ect on aggregate demand, and supportive evidence is
provided by Coglianese (2015).
8
We supplement this evidence by analyzing the response of average wages to shocks, …nding that they are
signi…cantly less sensitive to economic ‡uctuations in the counties where jobless bene…ts are most generous
than where they are least generous.

5

di¤erent source of variation in government spending.
We also run additional robustness checks. First, we show that our results are not sensitive
to the speci…c de…nition of UI generosity used, insofar as they hold when generosity is
measured as the replacement rate times take-up rate as computed from CPS, or when we
employ the replacement rates provided by the BLS or simply the log of the maximum weekly
bene…t as a proxy for the bene…t generosity.
Second, to control for time-varying heterogeneity, such as other state policies that might
a¤ect the local economic conditions and at the same time be correlated with UI generosity,
we control for the generosity of other government transfers, the presence of right-to-work
laws and the minimum wage in the state and their interaction with the Bartik shock. All
our results remain una¤ected. A related concern centers on di¤erences in experience-rating
taxes across states. In earlier work, Card and Levine (1994) found that states and industries
facing higher marginal unemployment experience taxes have lower employment volatility.
Unfortunately, we were unable to update their measure to our time period, since their data
for determining the marginal tax costs in 1979-1987 are not publicly available. We employ a
simple alternative approximation of the tax schedule: the maximum minus the minimum UI
tax rate in a state. We calculate an industry-weighted average of Card and Levine’s measure
of mean marginal tax costs in 1979-1987 (data available in the appendix of the working-paper
version) and compare their measure with the maximum minus minimum rates in a midpoint
year, 1983. First, we con…rm that there is a strong correlation between our measure and the
measure of the …rm’s marginal tax cost proposed by Card and Levine (2000), which gives us
con…dence that our measure can be a very good proxy for the …rms’tax incentives to locate
in a state based on the cost of …ring. Using this marginal tax rate as a proxy and additional
control, again the result is largely una¤ected.
To provide further evidence that our results are driven by the demand channel, we provide
evidence of intersectoral spillovers by computing the Bartik shocks excluding non-tradable
and construction sectors and examining the spillovers of shocks that originate in these sector

6

to the employment in the non-tradable sector. We show that the spillovers of shocks that
originate in the tradable sector to the non-tradable one are lower in regions with more
generous bene…ts. This procedure should capture the e¤ects deriving from workers being
…red, for instance, in the car manufacturing sector due to a general decline of the auto
industry, who will then decrease their consumption of non-tradable goods, which depresses
employment in non-tradables and total earnings growth.
We also set out two additional results that exploit heterogeneity across shocks and regions. We hypothesize that UI generosity should be more important for negative shocks,
because UI payments themselves are more responsive to negative shocks than to positive
ones and because consumption is more sensitive to negative shocks than to positive ones
when households are …nancially constrained (e.g. Aiyagari (1994)). We provide evidence
for this hypothesis by dividing the Bartik shocks into shocks below the median and above
the median and showing that our main coe¢ cient is negative and statistically signi…cant
only for the bottom half, whereas the interaction between UI and the Bartik shocks becomes
smaller and insigni…cant for shocks above the median. Similarly, if our results are indeed
driven by stronger demand from jobless workers we expect our e¤ects to be larger when the
unemployment rate is higher, i.e. when the unemployment rate is higher the total output can
be more sensitive to demand shocks. We provide evidence consistent with this hypothesis
by interacting the Bartik shock and the measure of UI generosity with the unemployment
rate in the previous year. This result also supports the hypothesis that the …scal multiplier
might vary over the business cycle (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012)).
Since a number of federal and state policy measures were taken during the Great Recession in response to local labor market conditions, such as the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act and the JOBS Act, we need to make sure that they are not responsible for
our results. To do so, we exclude all the observations after 2008, …nding that the magnitude
and the statistical signi…cance of our results are quite una¤ected.
All in all, our …ndings can help to inform the debate on the importance of automatic

7

stabilizers. While generous unemployment insurance programs may adversely a¤ect the level
of unemployment, we show that through the demand channel they signi…cantly attenuate the
volatility of economic outcomes by reducing the demand sensitivity to local demand shocks.

1.1

Related Literature

We contribute to the growing literature on the economic role of automatic stabilizers, in
particular unemployment bene…ts. Blanchard et al. (2010), for instance, argue that better
automatic stabilizers are crucial for more e¤ective macroeconomic policy. Other papers, such
as Auerbach and Feenberg (2000), Auerbach (2009), Feldstein (2009) and Blinder (2004),
emphasize their importance in shaping the economy’s response to shocks.
McKay and Reis (2013) propose a business-cycle model to study automatic stabilizers
in general equilibrium. They capture the channels through which stabilizers mitigate the
business cycle and quantify their importance. Speci…cally, McKay and Reis (2013) show
that redistributive policies, such as UI, can have a signi…cant e¤ect in dampening aggregate
shocks when monetary policy does not fully respond to ‡uctuations in aggregate activity.9
This resembles our setting where monetary policy is set at the national level and is not
contingent on the local economic shock.10 We provide empirical support for the UI role as
a stabilizer by observing that consumption responds less to adverse shocks in counties with
more generous UI, because the unemployed have more disposable income.11
Some recent work has focused on the e¤ects of UI extensions during the Great Recession, with mixed results. On the one hand, Hagedorn et al. (2013) argue that the general
equilibrium e¤ect operating through the response of job creation to bene…t extensions is
9

See Beraja et al. (2015) for a model in which regional economies di¤er from their aggregate counterparts
as the types of shocks driving the local and aggregate business cycles di¤er.
10
Another related paper is Dolls et al. (2012) which analyzes the e¤ectiveness of the tax and transfer
systems in the EU and the US to provide income insurance through automatic stabilization in the recent
economic crisis.
11
A related work, inquiring into how UI a¤ects …rms’policies, is Agrawal and Matsa (2013). This paper
exploits changes in state unemployment insurance laws as a source of variation in the costs borne by workers
during layo¤ spells, …nding that …rms choose conservative …nancial policies partly to mitigate workers’
exposure to unemployment risk.

8

quantitatively important. They employ a regression discontinuity design focusing on U.S.
state borders to show that bene…t extensions raise equilibrium wages and lead to a sharp
contraction in vacancy creation and a rise in unemployment.12 On the other hand, Rothstein (2011) estimates that UI extensions had signi…cant but small negative e¤ects on the
probability of bene…t recipients’exiting unemployment and Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) …nd that bene…t extensions have a limited role in in‡uencing macroeconomic
outcomes.13 The present contribution di¤ers in several respects. First, Hagedorn et al.
(2013), Rothstein (2011), and Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) analyze the direct impact of UI extensions, whereas our paper seeks to determine, for a given level of UI,
how much the sensitivity of local economic activity to labor demand shocks (as captured by
the Bartik measure) depends on bene…t generosity. Second, our results complement these
…ndings by showing that while UI extensions may a¤ect the level of employment, generosity
also signi…cantly bu¤ers the volatility of real economy activity. In other words, UI might
have a bene…cial e¤ect on the economy by decreasing sensitivity to shocks and reducing
the variability of aggregate consumption, employment and earnings. Third, previous works
de…ne variation in generosity as the number of weeks of eligibility, whereas the main source
of variation in our data stems from the workers’income replacement rate and the UI coverage. The e¤ects – on moral hazard, say – between modifying the duration and altering
the size of bene…ts may di¤er quite substantially. Furthermore, our results parallel recent
works by Kekre (2015) and Coglianese (2015). The former shows that a marginal increase
in UI generosity a¤ects output and employment through a redistribution e¤ect on aggregate
demand, which corroborates the mechanism we propose, while the latter investigates the
UI extensions during the Great Recession and, consistent with our empirical results, …nds
evidence of unemployment insurance boosting aggregate demand.14
12

Similarly, Hagedorn et al. (2015), analyzing the Congressional decision in December 2013 to end the
federal bene…t extensions, they provide evidence that 1.8 million additional jobs were created in 2014 due to
the bene…t cut.
13
Relatedly, Christiano et al. (2013) show that during the zero lower bound, an expansion of UI would
not result in an increase in unemployment rates.
14
This paper is also related to the literature studying the general equilibrium e¤ects of UI extensions, e.g.

9

Methodologically, our paper also relates to Blanchard and Katz (1992), Bound and Holzer
(2000), Autor and Duggan (2003), Notowidigdo (2011) and Charles et al. (2013) which
employ the Bartik (1991) procedure to capture the e¤ects of local labor demand shocks. We
complement this evidence by showing that the bene…ts have aggregate e¤ects as an automatic
stabilizer, reducing the sensitivity of the local economy to local labor shocks. We also
contribute to the emerging cross-sectional literature on …scal multipliers (e.g. Serrato and
Wingender (2010a), Shoag et al. (2015) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014)) which di¤ers
from the traditional empirical macroeconomics literature relying on time-series variation (e.g.
Ramey and Shapiro (1998), Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and Ramey (2011b)). We exploit
the variation in unemployment bene…t generosity, not government spending, to investigate
the sensitivity of local activity to shocks. Our estimate for the …scal multiplier, at about 2,
is close to those made in the previous literature.
Finally, several papers consider the e¤ects of generosity on individuals. Gruber (1997),
Browning and Crossley (2001) and Bloemen and Stancanelli (2005), among others, …nd
that increases in bene…ts mitigate the drop in consumption during downturns, enabling the
jobless to smooth their consumer spending.15 Another strand of the literature has shown
that unemployment insurance can reduce the incentives of the unemployed to …nd a new
job, e.g Solon (1985), Mo¢ tt (1985), Meyer (1990), Katz and Meyer (1990) and Card and
Levine (2000).16 The reason being that bene…ts undercut the incentive to …nd work by
distorting the relative price of leisure and consumption, i.e. a substitution e¤ect. Chetty
(2008) shows that in an environment with liquidity constraints this reduction in search
is not necessarily ine¢ cient and provides evidence of a liquidity e¤ect in addition to the
conventional substitution e¤ect, as workers have more cash on hand while unemployed.17
Levine (1993), Lalive et al. (2015), Marinescu (2014), Valletta (2014), and Johnston and Mas (2015).
15
Another related work by Romer and Romer (2014) …nds a large, immediate, and statistically signi…cant
response of consumption to permanent increases in Social Security bene…ts.
16
For comprehensive reviews of this literature see Atkinson and Micklewright (1991) and Krueger and
Meyer (2002).
17
Relatedly, Kroft and Notowidigdo (2011) analyze how the level of bene…ts trades o¤ the consumption
smoothing e¤ect with the moral hazard cost over the business cycle, showing that the latter is procyclical
while the bene…t is non-cyclical.

10

However, the introduction of insurance for unemployed individuals who elect to go into
business for themselves could spur entrepreneurial activity signi…cantly by strengthening
their incentive to start a new …rm (Hombert et al. (2014)). Such studies as Van Ours and
Vodopivec (2008), Card et al. (2007), Lalive (2007), and Nekoei and Weber (2014) have
analyzed the impact of UI generosity on the quality of job matches. We complement these
…ndings by showing that the general-equilibrium considerations of unemployment bene…ts
are important and should be considered in designing an optimal unemployment insurance
system.18 Finally, we examine the local general equilibrium e¤ect of bene…t generosity, not
the e¤ect on the behavior of unemployed individuals.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the empirical
strategy, and Section 3 provides details on the data sources and summary statistics. Section
4 presents and interprets the main results on the e¤ect of UI on the economy’s sensitivity to
shocks. Section 5 presents further evidence testing the robustness of our results. Section 6
employs our results to estimate a local …scal multiplier of unemployment insurance bene…ts,
and Section 7 concludes.

2

Empirical Methodology

To investigate how heterogeneity in generosity might a¤ect local responses to labor demand
shocks, we need to …nd a valid instrument for changes in local labor demand. We follow
Bartik (1991) and Blanchard and Katz (1992) constructing an index by interacting crosssectional di¤erences in industrial composition with national changes in industry employment
18

Other works on the role of UI during the Great Recession include Mueller et al. (2013), which employs the
arbitrary pattern of unemployment bene…t extensions to identify the e¤ect of their exhaustion on applications
for disability insurance; and Hsu et al. (2014) which exploits the heterogeneity in generosity across U.S.
states and over time to show that unemployment bene…ts prevented 1.4 million mortgage foreclosures. We
complement these studies by showing that jobless bene…ts also support aggregate demand, permitting not
only mortgage payments, but also more spending on consumer goods and services.

11

shares –the “Bartik shock”strategy. The Bartik shock is de…ned as follows:

Bartiki;t =

K
X

'i;k;

i;k;t

i;k;t 1
i;k;t 1

k=1

Where 'i;k; is the employment share of industry k in area i in the base year
i;k;t

= 1998, and

is the national employment share of industry k excluding area i in year t.19

Our baseline speci…cation is:

Yi;t =

where

1 (Bartiki;t

U Ii; ) +

2 Bartiki;t

+

3 Bartiki;t

Xi +

i

+

t

+ "i;t ;

(1)

Yi;t represents the growth rate of the main dependent variables. We estimate this

speci…cation using as weights the population in 2000.20 Following Monte et al. (2015), since
individuals might live and consume in a region but work in another one, we adjust for worker
‡ows and make all variables based on the place of residence.21 The coe¢ cient of interest is
1,

which captures how the sensitivity of

Y is a¤ected by the generosity of unemployment

bene…ts (U I), i.e. it shows whether regions with more generous unemployment bene…ts are
more or less responsive to Bartik shocks. The coe¢ cient
Bartik shock, therefore

1
2

2

captures the main e¤ect of the

captures how the sensitivity to shocks changes with the generosity

of unemployment bene…ts. We also control for a number of county-level characteristics (Xi ),
such as the share of employees in each industrial sector and their interactions with the Bartik
shock. We also include county and year …xed e¤ects; that is, we allow for any general trend
(such as changes in demographics) at the county level.22 Since the main source of variation
19

Each four-digit ISIC code is one industry. We also repeated our analysis with three-digit ISIC codes and
the results are quantitatively and qualitatively the same. Please see the technical appendix for a detailed
description of how we construct the main variables.
20
Throughout the paper (except table A.8) all regressions are weighted by the population of the unit
of observation (i.e. county, state or CZ) in 2000. Table A.8 in the appendix shows that the results are
qualitative the same when we do not weight observations by population.
21
We also provide evidence that our results hold when we run our speci…cations at the state and commuting
zone level, which do not require an adjustment for the place of residence.
22
As a robustness check, reported in the appendix Table A3, we also run a speci…cation in which we include

12

is at the state level, we cluster the standard errors at the state level.23
As noted by Chodorow-Reich and Wieland (2016) in the context of labor reallocation,
one of the main advantages of this Bartik research design is that, instead of focusing on the
speci…c shocks determining the changes in employment, such as trade policy, technology or
consumer tastes, we can employ the evolution of employment shares nationally to summarize
the e¤ects of the combination of these shocks for employment trends. The key identifying
assumption to make this a measure of plausibly exogenous labor demand shocks is that this
proxy must not be correlated with unobserved shocks to local labor supply. Speci…cally,
we are assuming that changes in industry shares at the national level are uncorrelated with
city-level labor supply shocks and can therefore be used as a demand-induced variation in
local employment.24 However, since we run our speci…cations at the annual frequency and
we control for county …xed e¤ects –which should capture long-term changes in labor supply
due to for instance to changes in demographics- this is less of a concern. We also need to
assume that in the absence of variation in the UI generosity, the predictive power of the
Bartik shock is similar across di¤erent regions or not correlated with the generosity of the
unemployment bene…ts.
We start our analysis with a graphical illustration of the main results. Figure 1 plots
the e¤ect of UI generosity in attenuating the impact of Bartik shocks, after we took out
the average for each county, on each of our main dependent variables (i.e. consumption,
employment in the non-tradable sector and employment in the tradable sector) using a spline
regression with a knot at the 33rd percentile of the shock. The blue line shows the e¤ect
lags of the main variables:
Yi;t

=

1 (Bartiki;t

+

4 Bartiki;t

U Ii; ) + 2 (Bartiki;t
1 + 5 Yi;t 1 + i +

U Ii; ) +
t + "i;t :
1

3 Bartiki;t

This is useful to show that our results are not driven by the persistency of the Bartik shocks or of the
dependend variables.
23
As Table A.9 in the Appendix shows, clustering at the county level would result in signi…cantly lower
standard errors.
24
Other papers employing a similar strategy include Bound and Holzer (2000), Autor and Duggan (2003),
Luttmer (2005), Notowidigdo (2011), David et al. (2013), and Chodorow-Reich and Wieland (2016).

13

for the counties with the least generous UI, those in the bottom quartile, while the red line
depicts the e¤ects for the most generous counties, those in the top quartile. The areas show
the 95% con…dence intervals and on the x-axis is the Bartik shock net of the county average
over the 1999-2013 period. For instance, for consumption growth the counties above the 75th
percentile in generosity exhibit very modest elasticity to Bartik shocks, even the most severe,
while counties below the 25th percentile are signi…cantly a¤ected. Similarly, the sensitivity
of employment growth in the non-tradable sector to labor shocks is signi…cantly smaller in
counties with more generous UI, while there is no signi…cant di¤erence between counties for
employment in the tradable sector. The asymmetry of our e¤ects is also encouraging: since
most of the dampening e¤ect comes from attenuating negative shocks, this is consistent with
variations in UI generosity being the main driver of this result, since UI payments are more
sensitive to large negative shocks than to positive shocks. This is only suggestive evidence,
of course, and these results could be driven by other omitted factors, which is why the next
few sections are devoted to demonstrating that they hold even after controlling for several
potential confounding factors.

3

Data and Summary Statistics

In 1935 the United States created a joint federal-state system of insurance for workers losing
their jobs. Each state sets its own UI tax schedules for employers, who also pay a federal
tax under the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA), to …nance federal extensions and
emergency loans to states’trust funds, among other objectives. The law requires state taxes
to be “experience-rated,”so that the e¤ective marginal rate rises with the number of claims
deriving from a …rm.
One key feature of this system is that the state can a¤ect the generosity of its program,
i.e. the level of bene…ts and the length of the bene…t period. The size of the weekly
bene…t payment naturally depends on previous wages, but each state also sets a cap on the

14

amount and limits the duration. During times of high unemployment, states may also enact
extensions to the regular bene…t period.
We employ four di¤erent measures of the “UI generosity”. First, we consider a statelevel measure: the empirical income replacement ratio estimated from the Annual Social
and Economic Supplement (ASEC) to the Current Population Survey (CPS). We work with
CPS data downloaded from IPUMS. Households are asked about their sources of income in
the previous year, and their employment history. To estimate average weekly UI bene…ts for
those receiving them, we divide the total unemployment bene…ts reported by a household by
the number of weeks of joblessness. We calculate average weekly earnings by dividing income
from wages and salaries by weeks worked in the year. We thus calculate an empirical “income
replacement ratio”as the ratio of average weekly bene…ts to average weekly wages. To keep
the sample size for each state reasonable, we examine a …ve-year average over 1996-2000,
which gives us the replacement ratio for those who actually receive bene…ts. Figure 1.A in
the Appendix depicts the substantial heterogeneity in generosity, darker regions being more
generous. The main advantage of this measure is that it measure exactly what should drive
the households’decisions: the fraction of income recovered by the unemployment insurance.
However, an important consideration missing from the previous measure is bene…t “takeup.” As noted in Blank and Card (1991), the take-up rate of UI bene…ts among the unemployed is far less than the eligible population for a variety of reasons, including di¤erences
in coverage eligibility, unionization rates, bene…t generosity, and rules enforcement. We
measure the “take-up rate” as the share of the unemployed in a state who actually receive
unemployment bene…ts. We multiply this rate by the replacement ratio to produce a second
measure of generosity, namely the average replacement ratio conditional on unemployment
as opposed to conditional on receiving the unemployment bene…ts. This is helpful in capturing heterogeneity across states in the take-up rates, but the take-up rate itself might be
a¤ected by changes in UI policy, as they would a¤ect the workers’incentives to apply for it.
Our third measure exploits di¤erences in generosity between states and wage distribution

15

within states. The Department of Labor publishes information on each state’s bene…t schedule. We measure the generosity of each state’s bene…ts in 2000 as the ratio of the maximum
weekly bene…t to the average weekly wage in each county in 2000.25 We use this normalization to capture the fraction of income replaced and to take account of the fact that the
same dollar amount could have signi…cantly di¤erent e¤ects in the same state but in counties
with di¤erent living costs. This measure captures well the di¤erences in purchasing power
across states. Finally, we also show that our results are robust to employing the replacement
rates provided by the BLS which are computed as the weekly bene…t amount divided by
the average wage of UI recipients. Note that since extensions are endogenous to local labor
market conditions, we measure generosity only as of 2000.26 We investigate the impact of
the programs from 1999 to 2013.27
We have used numerous sources of data for our dependent variables and controls. Here
we mention the most signi…cant. The Bureau of Economic Analysis provides time-series data
on aggregate earnings (not including dividends, interest income and rents), average wages,
and industrial composition; employment growth by industry for each county, the basis for
computing the Bartik shocks, is computed using yearly data from County Business Patterns
(CBP), which is also exploited to calculate employment growth in “non-tradable”industries,
i.e. retail trade and hospitality, and “tradables,” namely manufacturing. To calculate the
aggregate e¤ects of UI generosity on county-level consumption, we use a dataset for all new
car sales in the United States provided by R. L. Polk & Company (Polk).
We employ a variety of controls in our speci…cations interacted with the Bartik shock.
25

In the appendix, we show that our results also go through when we use the log of maximum bene…ts as
measure of UI generosity.
26
During the Great Recession two major federal programs were in e¤ect: Extended Bene…ts and Emergency
Unemployment Compensation. The Extended Bene…ts (EB) program, which was adopted in 1970 and
typically funded in equal parts by state and federal governments, provides an additional 13 weeks of bene…ts
when the state’s insured unemployment rate rises above 5% and is at least 20% higher than its average over
the previous two years. The Emergency Unemployment Compensation (EUC) program, enacted in June
2008, was instead entirely federally funded and o¤ered up to 53 weeks of additional bene…ts.
27
We use 1999 as the …rst year since the employment data in CBP before 1998 is reported based on the
SIC classi…cation and we do not want our result to be confounded by the change in the classi…cation of the
industries. Due to data limitations, we only consider the 2001-2011 period for the analysis of car sales at
the county and state level.

16

We control for the share of employment in construction, manufacturing, services and public sector, as well as the share of self-employment (hence ineligible for UI bene…ts) using
data from BEA (Economic Pro…le Table CA30 and Table CA25). To control for political
di¤erences across counties, which might contribute to greater generosity in other bene…ts or
government programs, we control for the county’s Democratic vote share in 2000 using election data from CQ Press available from the Census. Finally, we control for median income
and the share of the county population with high school and college education, using data
from the 2000 Census available on its website.
Table 1 shows the county-level summary statistics for our sample. The …rst row reports
the maximum weekly bene…t, which ranges from $190 to over $400 a week.28 The next row
shows that the number of weeks does not vary; for every state except Massachusetts, the
maximum bene…t period is 26 weeks. We then report our main measures of UI generosity,
namely the income replacement rate conditional on being unemployed and our two alternative
measures, the ratio of the maximum weekly bene…t to the weekly wage and the replacement
rate times the take-up rate.29 The table shows that for all three measures there is signi…cant
heterogeneity across states, which con…rms Figure 1. Among the static variables we also
report some county-level controls, such as the sectorial shares of employees in manufacturing,
construction, services and government. Panel B reports the statistics for our time-varying
variables. There is a signi…cant variation in the magnitude of the Bartik shock, as its standard
deviation is about 2%. The impact of unemployment insurance is inherently asymmetrical,
as it has an e¤ect only when the Bartik shocks are negative.
Figure 1.B in the appendix shows that UI generosity is extremely persistent over time. In
this …gure, we plot the correlation between the average income replacement ratio in 1990-1995
28

Tables A.1 and A.2 in the appendix provide the summary statistics for the state and the county level
variables.
29
We only consider UI transfers because, as is shown by Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2013),
these account for 88% of all the transfers related to employment status (supplemental nutritional assistance
(SNAP), welfare assistance (AFDC/TANF), and health care account for practically all the rest). Moreover,
these non-UI transfers are mainly federal so their generosity does not vary by state.

17

and 2000-2005 weighted by population.30 In addition, Table 2 gives the correlations between
the di¤erent measures of generosity and a number of county characteristics, such as other
government transfers, the proportions of employees in the di¤erent sectors, of self-employed,
of high-school graduates and the Democratic vote share. We …nd that the main predictors
of generosity are the Democratic vote percentage, wages and the proportion of individuals
in industry. To control for these di¤erences across counties, in all of our speci…cations, we
control for all of the characteristics in Table 2 and their interaction with the Bartik shock.
For robustness, we run our analysis at a variety of levels of geographic aggregation. Our
main analysis is at county level, and we adjust for worker ‡ows across neighboring counties by
taking weighted averages of key variables based on worker migration patterns used in Monte
et al. (2015) so that all of our variables of interest are based on the place of residence. In
addition, we use measures of aggregate earnings and average wages from the BEA, adjusted
to be on a county-of-residence basis. We also run our analysis at two additional levels of
aggregation: commuting zone (CZ) and state. CZs –there are 709 in the U.S. –are groups
of counties that share a common labor market as re‡ected in commuting patterns.31 This
level of analysis controls better for worker employment and consumption patterns across
counties. The state-level analysis provides two additional bene…ts. First, it corresponds
to the main source of di¤erences in the generosity of unemployment insurance bene…ts, so
running regressions at the state level provides an additional robustness test, albeit at the cost
of a good part of the variation in the Bartik shock relative to the county-level speci…cations.
Second, BEA’s Regional Accounts o¤er a more comprehensive measure of consumption at
the state level, which we can use to capture the demand channel.32
30

The other two measures of UI generosity are also highly persistent; similar graphs can be found in the
supplementary appendix (Figures A.1-A.4).
31
Note that each time we use a di¤erent geographical area, we calculate a new bartik shock in which we
take out that state or CZ.
32
Summary statistics for CZ and state level data are presented in the appendix.

18

4

Main Results

First we investigate the e¤ect of unemployment bene…t generosity on employment and consumption, to get an estimate of how generosity acts on the sensitivity of the economy to
local labor shocks. We then turn to the e¤ects on earnings growth. In this way we analyze
the channels through which UI can a¤ect the economy. To facilitate interpretation of the
results, in the tables we demean all the interaction coe¢ cients and UI generosity is normalized to have a standard deviation equal to 1. Hence, we can assess the e¤ect of one-standard
deviation increase in UI generosity on the sensitivity of the local economy to local shocks as
the ratio between the interaction coe¢ cient and the main e¤ect:

4.1

1= 2

in (1).

Employment Growth

We start our analysis of how unemployment insurance could help stabilize the local economy
by a¤ecting the change in employment. For instance, more generous UI makes households’
disposable income and therefore their demand less sensitive to their employment status. This
also means that there will be weaker spillovers of a shock from one sector to another. We
investigate this hypothesis by estimating the sensitivity of employment growth to shocks in
Table 3.
In those counties with more generous bene…ts employment growth is signi…cantly less
responsive to local labor demand shocks. The e¤ect is also economically signi…cant, as a onestandard-deviation increase in generosity reduces the elasticity of employment growth with
respect to local shocks by about 9%. Column (2) shows that the results remain signi…cant
after controlling for county and year …xed e¤ects.33
A source of potentially relevant heterogeneity across counties is industrial characteristics.
For instance, counties could be more or less cyclically sensitive as a function of their main
industrial sector, which could also be correlated with the availability of unemployment ben33

Controlling for year …xed e¤ects may a¤ect the magnitude of the main coe¢ cient 2 ; because by capturing
the variation in the Bartik shock common to di¤erent regions, it reduces the total variation and the Bartik
shock’s predictive power.

19

e…ts. To check this possibility, we compute the fraction of the work force in each sector since
1998 for each county as provided by BEA, and then take the average for each sector over the
sample period 1998-2013. The sectors are construction, manufacturing, government (which
includes federal, military, state and local government) and services. As additional controls we
consider the interaction between the Bartik shock and all the controls in Table 2, such as the
fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing, government (which includes federal,
military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries, the democratic
share and the fraction of individuals with college and high-school degrees. For instance, this
speci…cation allows manufacturing counties to react di¤erently than mainly service-based
counties. We …nd that the results remain signi…cant both statistically and economically,
indicating that they are not explained by di¤erences in the main employment sectors.
To inquire into the demand channel thesis, we distinguish between the tradable and nontradable sectors as de…ned by Mian and Su… (2014) and compare the sensitivity of each to
Bartik shocks. The non-tradable sector consists mainly of restaurants and retail shops as
well as services; but it does not include construction.34 The results are given in Columns
(4)-(6) for the non-tradable sector, Columns (7)-(9) for tradables. We start with the baseline
speci…cation, with no controls, then control for county and year …xed e¤ects (Columns 5 and
8), and then for county industrial composition (Column 6 and 9). We …nd that UI generosity
reduces the sensitivity of the change in employment in the non-tradable sector by about 1620% but has very little e¤ect on the tradable sector either economically or statistically. This
strongly suggests that our results are driven by the higher level of local aggregate demand
produced by the greater disposable income of the unemployed.
34

Tradable and non-tradable employment together account for about 25% of the total employment, since
many industries are not classi…ed in either group. Please refer to the appendix for a detailed de…nition of
each industry.

20

4.2

Consumption Growth

Further evidence that the demand channel is the key mechanism driving our results comes
from an examination of the impact of bene…t generosity on consumption. To examine the
aggregate demand e¤ect, we investigate the county-level response of consumption –de…ned as
car sales –to shocks. A caveat for this measure of consumption is that it might overestimate
the overall attenuation of changes in consumption because car buying is one of the most
volatile components of consumption and captures only the extensive margin, i.e. the number
of cars sold. On the other hand, unlike other measures of consumption, in our data car sales
are measured in the county of registration, not that of purchase, which means it captures
consumption in the county of residence and not other counties that might have more highly
developed commercial districts. This eases concerns about spillover e¤ects. This point will
be especially important for our border design (section 5.8). Furthermore, in section 5.2
we run our regressions at the state level, for which we have very detailed information on
durable and non-durable consumption, which alleviates concerns about external validity of
this measure.
The results are given in Table 4. The intuition behind our tests is that if generous
bene…ts give the unemployed more disposable income, they will presumably reduce their
consumption less sharply supporting aggregate demand and improving the local economy’s
resilience. Column (1) gives the baseline estimates with no controls; Column (2) adds county
and year …xed e¤ects. A one-standard-deviation increase in generosity reduces the elasticity
of consumption growth to local labor shocks by about 18%. This e¤ect remains signi…cant
and largely consistent for di¤erent speci…cations.
Column (3) also includes the interaction between other county characteristics and the
Bartik shock, as in the previous speci…cations, to allow for the possibility that consumption
might be more responsive to shocks in manufacturing rather than service counties.
These results relate to the work of Gruber (1997). Using household data, Gruber (1997)
provides direct evidence of the consumption smoothing bene…ts of UI by exploiting di¤erences
21

in the generosity of bene…ts across states. We complement these results by showing that not
only the direct e¤ect of more generous UI but also the local general equilibrium e¤ect will
result in a more smooth consumption response to negative shocks.

4.3

Aggregate Earnings Growth

To examine the e¤ects of UI on the economy we complement the previous analysis by investigating the response of aggregate earnings growth to shocks in counties with di¤ering
bene…t generosity. We use aggregate earnings data from BEA (BEA Table CA30). The main
advantage of earnings data rather than income data is that it does not count dividends or
government transfers, which are unrelated to local economic activity and it is adjusted by
the place of residence. Table 5 reports the results.
Column (1) considers the less restrictive speci…cation, while Column (2) controls for
unobserved di¤erences across counties with county …xed e¤ects. Other shocks common to all
counties are captured by year …xed e¤ects. Earnings growth in counties with more generous
unemployment bene…ts tend to be less sensitive to adverse shocks, as is shown by the negative
sign on the interaction between the Bartik measure and UI generosity. The result is both
statistically and economically signi…cant. In fact, a one-standard-deviation increase in UI
generosity attenuates the e¤ect of the shocks on aggregate earnings by about 8%. Column
(3) controls for several county characteristics, such as the structure of the local economy by
industrial sector, as in the previous sections.
In sum, we …nd that variation in the generosity of unemployment insurance signi…cantly
a¤ects the elasticity of earnings growth to local labor supply shocks. Quantitatively, the
impact of Bartik shocks on earning growth is about 15% lower in counties in the top quartile
of UI generosity than in those in the bottom one.

22

5

Further Evidence and Robustness Checks

This section set out additional results showing the validity of our identi…cation strategy
by using alternative measures of UI generosity, by considering di¤erent geographical aggregation levels, by controlling for other potentially contaminating factors, by exploiting the
heterogeneity in the data, by restricting attention to counties at the state border, and by
examining several alternative explanatory hypotheses.

5.1

Alternative Measures of Unemployment Insurance Generosity

Our baseline measure of generosity employs UI bene…t payments directly to compute the
income replacement rate: the ratio of total bene…ts to the worker’s weekly wage when employed. However, our results do not hinge on this particular proxy for generosity. Table 6
reports our main speci…cation using two additional measures: the replacement rate times the
take-up rate as measured in the CPS (Panel A) and the ratio of the maximum weekly bene…t
to the average weekly wage in the county in 2000 (Panel B).35 The …rst measure takes into
account that many jobless persons are not eligible for bene…ts: temporary employees and
the self-employed, those who left their jobs voluntarily, and those whose industries are not
covered by unemployment insurance, such as construction. To compute the take-up rate,
we measure the share of unemployed individuals who actually receive UI bene…ts, which is
slightly less than 40%. The second measure takes advantage of the very signi…cant variation in the weekly bene…t which ranges from $275 a week in Florida to $646 a week in
Massachusetts. Rerunning the main speci…cation with these new measures produces results
comparable with the baseline in terms of both statistical and economic signi…cance. In other
words, our results do not depend on the particular proxy used but are driven mainly by
di¤erences in the unemployment generosity.
35

Table A.4 reports similar results when we use: (1) the log of the maximum weekly bene…ts not normalized
by average wages as proxy for the UI generosity; and (2) when we employ an alternative measure provided
by the BLS de…ned as the weekly bene…t amount divided by the average wage of UI recipients.

23

5.2

State and Commuting Zone

To show that our main results do not hinge on county-level variation, we con…rm them
using data at state and commuting zone levels.36 The useful feature of state level data
is that it corresponds to the main source of di¤erences in UI generosity, namely state law
and allows the results to be checked with reference to total consumption growth, not just
car sales. Table 7 reports the results. Employment growth in the non-tradable sector is
less sensitive to shocks when UI is more generous, while for the tradable sector there is no
signi…cant e¤ect (Columns 1-3). Since our county-level measure of consumption captures
only one of its major components, we also collect BEA data at state level on total aggregate
consumption (durables and nondurables). Columns (4)-(6) reports the results. We …nd that
a one-standard-deviation increase in generosity reduces the sensitivity of total consumption
to negative employment shocks by about 7%. This strongly suggests that our …ndings are not
driven by special features of the auto industry but are due to the broader aggregate demand
channel. Even if less signi…cant, Column (7) con…rms the results on earnings growth.37
Panel B also reports the results for the alternative measure of UI generosity. Table A.6 in
the appendix shows that these results are robust to the inclusion of state-speci…c linear and
quadratic trends.
The results for commuting zones are given in Table 8. Commuting zone comprise all US
metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas, and as Tolbert and Sizer (1996) and Autor and
Dorn (2013) suggest, they are the logical geographic units for de…ning local labor markets.
We show that our results are not driven by workers consuming in areas where they do not
live or by spillovers between counties.38 Both the magnitude and the signi…cance of the
36

For the CZ and State level results, we re-computed the Bartik shocks for state or CZ i by taking out
that state or CZ i. In other words, we do not simply take the average of the county-level Bartik shocks.
37
It should be noted that the main reason for the changes in the coe¢ cient of the main e¤ect of Bartik
shock in the state level result is the fact that a higher fraction of state-level bartik shocks are absorbed with
the time …xed e¤ects. As can be seen in Table A.7 in the Appendix, not including the time …xed e¤ects
results in main coe¢ cients that are very similar to the ones estimated in the county-level regressions.
38
Note that for the CZ speci…cations, we do not do any other adjustment for commuting ‡ows (e.g. Monte
et al. (2015)).

24

results are quite similar to the county-level results. Panel B reports similar results for the
alternative measure of UI generosity.
We use the result in Panel B of Table 8 to calculate the local …scal multiplier for two main
reasons. First, using the commuting zones results ensure that there are weaker spillovers to
other regions. Second, by using the unconditional replacement rate measure of unemployment bene…ts, we avoid making any speci…c assumption about the take-up rate of unemployment bene…ts.

5.3

State Policies

A potential concern is the possible presence of other state policies, correlated with UI generosity, that a¤ect the sensitivity of the economy to local labor shocks. For instance, Holmes
(1998) shows that right-to-work laws produce an endogenous sorting of …rms into states,
which could well a¤ect our estimates if the laws are correlated with UI generosity. Or the
level of the minimum wage might also a¤ect unemployment by making wages less responsive and inducing labor market rationing. Furthermore, there might be other government
transfers correlated with UI generosity that might contaminate our estimates.
Since these interstate di¤erences might also drive the sensitivity of the local economy to
supply shocks, we test the robustness of our estimates by including the interaction between
the Bartik shock and the presence of right-to-work laws, the minimum wage level and the log
of other government transfers interacted with Bartik shocks (Table 9).39 The data on these
two policies comes from Holmes (1998) and Dube et al. (2010). The pattern is very similar
to those found above. More generous UI reduces the sensitivity of earnings, non-tradable
sector employment and car sales to negative shocks, while there is no comparable e¤ect on
employment in the tradable sector. This reassures us that our estimates are truly capturing
the e¤ect of di¤erences in the generosity of jobless bene…ts and not other policy variations
that could a¤ect county-level sensitivity to economic ‡uctuations.
39

The main government transfers include food stamps, income maintenance, disability, and medical bene-

…ts.

25

5.4

UI Tax and Firms Sorting

Theoretically our baseline results could be explained by a combination of the di¤erences in
UI generosity and an endogenous sorting of …rms into di¤erent states based on marginal
UI tax cost. For instance, …rms whose activity is less cyclical or less sensitive to economic
shocks might …nd it optimal to locate in states where the UI tax is less sensitive to their
…ring decisions, as their layo¤ risk is smaller. Although this is unlikely to explain our results
entirely, we directly address this concerns using data on the top and bottom UI tax rates
in each state. Interestingly, as Figure 2.A in the appendix shows, there is a very strong
positive correlation between the di¤erence in the maximum minus the minimum UI tax and
the marginal tax cost computed by Card and Levine (2000), which uses proprietary data.40
Accordingly, we use the di¤erence in marginal tax rates to proxy for the cost borne by …rms,
which should a¤ect location decisions.
First of all, Figure 2.B in the appendix shows that our measure of generosity is not
signi…cantly correlated with the unemployment insurance tax rate. Yet since it might still
a¤ect our results indirectly, we also control for the interaction of the Bartik shock with
the di¤erence in UI tax rates and with the log of the taxable wage base (Table 10). Our
baseline …ndings are robust to this speci…cation as well. And in fact if there were sorting, it
should a¤ect …rms in the tradable and the non-tradable sectors alike, but we do not …nd any
signi…cant e¤ect in the tradable sector. This con…rms that our results cannot be explained
by the sorting of …rms into states depending on the marginal UI tax rate.

5.5

Alternative Bartik shocks

In obtaining the foregoing results we have computed the Bartik shocks for all sectors. However, we now show that there is signi…cant intersectoral spillovers by excluding from the
computation of the Bartik shocks the construction and the non-tradable sectors. Table 11
40

The di¤erence in the maximun minus the minimum UI tax is for the year 2002 as this is the …rst year
for which we have the data.

26

shows the e¤ects of these shocks on real economic activity. Intuitively, this procedure captures the e¤ects of workers being dismissed, for instance, in the car manufacturing sector,
which will decrease their demand in the non-tradable sector, e.g. restaurants, retail outlets
and services. This in turn will depress the economy, lowering employment in non-tradables
as well and depressing earnings. Table 11 shows that these e¤ects, which might be due to
spillovers or general equilibrium factors, are mitigated where UI is more generous. Specifically, let us emphasize the …nding that shocks to other sectors are strong predictors of
employment in the non-tradable sector and the fact that up to a third of these spillovers are
attenuated when UI is more generous (Column 2). We also …nd that car sales and earnings
growth are less responsive to shocks in the tradable sector when UI is more generous.

5.6

Heterogeneous E¤ects

In this section we exploit two sources of heterogeneity –the magnitude of shocks and local
economic conditions –to provide further evidence in support of the mechanism hypothesized.
5.6.1

Asymmetric E¤ects

Up to now, we have considered all Bartik shocks together, not di¤erentiating between positive
and negative shocks. But we hypothesize that UI generosity should be more important for
negative shocks, because UI payments themselves are more responsive to negative shocks
than to positive ones and because consumption is more sensitive to negative shocks than to
positive ones when households are …nancially constrained (e.g. Aiyagari (1994)). Moreover,
the presence of asymmetric e¤ects is consistent with an aggregate supply curve whose slope
rises with output, as well as with the empirical work of Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012).
Evidence consistent with this hypothesis is given in Table 12. "Below Median Bartik
Shock" identi…es the bottom half in the magnitude of the Bartik shock, while "Above Median
Bartik Shock" the top half. In Column (1) the dependent variable is employment growth,
while in Columns (2) and (3) show that growth in the non-tradable and the tradable sectors,
27

respectively. In Column (4) we investigate the e¤ect of UI and Bartik shock on the growth
of car sales as measured by Polk for the period 2001-2011. Column (5) investigates the e¤ect
on earnings growth.
We …nd that the coe¢ cient of our main dependent variable is negative and statistically
signi…cant in the case of negative labor demand shocks, while the interaction between UI and
the Bartik shocks becomes smaller and insigni…cant for positive shocks. The most signi…cant
results are those for consumption growth and for employment growth in the non-tradable
sector; for the other variables the results are less pronounced.41 Overall, Figure 1 stands
con…rmed: that is, more generous unemployment bene…ts attenuate the sensitivity mainly
to negative shocks and has no e¤ect in the case of positive.
5.6.2

Unemployment Rate

When can we expect unemployment insurance to be most e¤ective in attenuating economic
‡uctuations, in other words, when is its multiplier e¤ect greatest? Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) …nd large di¤erences in spending multipliers between recessions and expansions, …scal policy being considerably more e¤ective in the former. Accordingly, we hypothesize that the dampening e¤ect of more generous UI is larger when the local economy is
further away from the full employment, then the positive aggregate demand response of jobless bene…ts should be more e¤ective in reducing the economy’s sensitivity to shocks during
downturns. We test this thesis by interacting our main coe¢ cient of interest, Bartiki;t

U I,

with the lagged county unemployment rate in the preceding year. We chose the previous
year’s rate rather than the current year’s in order to minimize the endogeneity concerns.
Table 13 reports the results: the dampening e¤ect of UI generosity is larger when unemployment rate is larger for employment growth in the non-tradable sector and earnings growth.
41
Note that total employment is not a weighted average of the employment in the tradable and nontradable sectors, because they only account for at most 25% of total employment. The remaining are sectors
that cannot be classi…ed in either category (see the technical appendix for more details).

28

5.7

Excluding the Great Recession

An important source of unobserved heterogeneity that could contaminate our results is the
policies undertaken during the Great Recession. For instance, during the …nancial crisis there
were several extensions of UI and a number of federal interventions to support unemployed
workers, which may have a¤ected counties’ sensitivity to Bartik shocks. If this is so, our
result could be distorted by such policies. To address this concern, we restrict our sample
to the years before 2008 (Table A.5 in the Appendix). All of our results, except that for
earnings growth, remain both economically and statistically signi…cant. We can conclude
that the lower sensitivity of employment and consumption growth to local labor shocks in
counties with more generous UI does not depend on recession-induced increase in bene…ts.

6

Fiscal Multiplier

The Great Recession has revived interest in the stimulus provided by changes in government
spending and taxation. We contribute to the discussion by using our estimates to obtain
a local …scal multiplier for UI expenditures. In this calculation, we use the result based
on the commuting zones when we measure unemployment bene…ts with the unconditional
income replacement rate. Commuting zones have the advantage of being subject to weaker
spillovers between regions: most of the e¤ect of the UI payments on local earnings is captured
by the change in the total earnings of that commuting zone. Using the unconditional income
replacement rate already takes into account that not every unemployed worker receives the
unemployment bene…ts, and does not require any speci…c assumption about the take-up rate.
Let us start from the following speci…cations:

Earning Growthi;t =

1 (Bartiki;t

U Ii; ) +

29

2 Bartiki;t

+

3 Bartiki;t

Xi +

i

+ "i;t ; (2)

and
U I P ayment per capitai;t =
and let us de…ne

UI

Bartiki;t +

i2

(3)

+ "it

the standard deviation of the UI generosity payment and

UI

its

mean.
We want to compute the local multiplier on earnings . To be clear, we are not interested
in the direct e¤ect of UI extensions on income. Instead, we would like to compare the reaction
of two similar economies, one with more generous UI and one with less generous UI, to the
same Bartik shock. Formally, we compare the change in the earnings due to a Bartik shock
of size x of a local economy with UI generosity that is one standard deviation above the
average (

UI

+

U I ),

with the response of an economy with an average UI generosity to the

same shock, and we divide that by the di¤erence in the UI payments in these two economies.
Formally, we can de…ne the local multiplier as

=

(EarningsjBartik = x; U Igen =
(U I P aymentjBartik = x; U Igen =

UI
UI

+
+

UI )
UI )

(EarningsjBartik = x; U Igen = U I )
(U I P aymentjBartik = x; U Igen = U I )

Using equation (2) we can estimate the change in earnings caused by the increase in the
generosity of UI as follows:

(EarningsjBartik = x; U Igen =
=

x

UI

UI

+

UI )

(EarningsjBartik = x; U Igen =

avg: Earnings per capita

UI )

P opulation

Note that this is directly derived from (2). The regression results reported in Table 8.B are
based on normalized values of UI generosity and therefore increasing UI generosity by

UI

is equivalent to an increase in the UI generosity by one unit.
For the calculations of the e¤ect of an increase in the generosity of unemployment insurance on the UI payments, we focus on its direct e¤ect. Speci…cally, we assume that if
UI payments are

percent more generous, the total UI payments for the same shock will

30

increase by

percent. This calculation ignores two factors. First, it ignores the local general

equilibrium e¤ect that by making unemployment bene…ts more generous, the local economy
becomes less responsive to local labor demand shocks. According to our calculations and
the result on the e¤ect of UI generosity of UI on employment (Table 8.B), this may result
to overestimate the increase in the UI payments by at most 5%. Second, an increase in UI
generosity may also increase the length of the unemployment spell, which increases the total
UI payments and leads us to underestimate the e¤ect of increase in UI generosity on the
increase in UI payments.
Using Equation (3), we calculate the direct e¤ect of the increase in UI generosity on UI
payments as:

(U I P aymentjBartik = x; U Igen =
=[

bartikit

(

=

where

UI = UI

UI

+

UI

+

UI )

UI ) = UI

bartikit

(U I P aymentjBartik = x; U Igen =
bartikit ]

UI = UI

P opulation

P opulation

captures how many percentage points the generosity of UI will increase when

we increase the UI generosity by

UI ,

i.e. how much the payment will increase as a result of

an increase in the generosity of UI. Therefore, we can rewrite the multiplier as:

=

avg: Earnings per capita

1
UI
UI

=

0:07 $27:5k
$3:3k

0:04
0:13

1

= 1:90

Notice that although the UI payments are a small fraction of the total earnings, because
they are very cyclical and more responsive to local shocks than the total income they have a
signi…cant e¤ect on dampening the e¤ects of local economic shocks. The fact that

= $3:3k

means that a one-standard-deviation increase in the Bartik shock, equivalent to 2.3%, results

31

UI )

in an increase of about $80 in UI payments yearly per capita.42
This relates our paper to the series of recent papers using cross-state variation to estimate
…scal multipliers.43 Moreover, our estimates are very consistent with those found in other
papers that use a di¤erent source of variation in government spending. For instance, Serrato
and Wingender (2010b) exploit the fact that a large number of federal spending programs
depend on local population levels and exploit changes in the methodology that the Census
uses to provide a count of local populations to estimate a …scal multiplier of 1.57. Shoag
et al. (2010) instruments state government spending with variations in state-managed bene…t pension plans and …nd that government spending has a local income multiplier of 2.12
and an estimated cost per job of $35,000 per year. More recently, Chodorow-Reich et al.
(2012) examine the e¤ect of the $88 billion of aid to state governments through the Medicaid
reimbursement process contained in The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
of 2009 on states’ employment and …nd a multiplier of about 2. Whereas Nakamura and
Steinsson (2014) employ data on military procurement spending across U.S. regions their
di¤erential e¤ects across regions to estimate an "open economy relative multiplier" of approximately 1.5.
Our estimates are broadly consistent with the range of estimates for …scal multipliers on
income and employment provided by the existing studies, which also reassures us that our
methodology is not capturing other unobserved di¤erences across counties that might bias
our results upwardly.
42
It should be noted here that as shown by Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), the implication of this local
…scal multiplier for the aggregate multiplier is highly sensitive to how strongly aggregate monetary policy
leans against the wind. In other words, this local multiplier can result into a larger aggregate multiplier in
periods in which the zero lower bound is binding and into a smaller aggregate multiplier in normal times.
43
For a survey of the literature on national output multipliers see Ramey (2011a).

32

7

Concluding Remarks

This paper evaluates the extent to which unemployment insurance attenuates the sensitivity
of real economic activity to local labor demand shocks. Our strategy follows Bartik (1991)
and Blanchard and Katz (1992) in constructing a measure of the predicted change in demanddriven labor shocks at county level. This measure is interacted with county-level bene…t
generosity in the year 1998.
Two principal …ndings emerge. First, estimating the response of earnings growth to
shocks in counties di¤ering in relative UI generosity, we …nd that where unemployment
bene…ts are more generous, the local economy tends to react signi…cantly less sharply to
negative shocks.
Second, we provide evidence that the main channel through which this e¤ect is produced
is demand: car sales are less sensitive to negative shocks in counties with more generous
UI. Moreover, only the non-tradable sector, where activity is driven mainly by local demand
conditions, shows variations in employment corresponding to the interstate variation in UI
generosity. These results are robust to checks for unobserved heterogeneity between areas
and other policy measures that might a¤ect the responsiveness of the economy to shocks.
Overall, the paper o¤ers new evidence to contribute to the debate on the importance of
automatic stabilizers, demonstrating that more generous unemployment bene…ts, working
through the demand channel, signi…cantly attenuate the volatility of economic ‡uctuations.

33

References
Agrawal, A. K. and D. A. Matsa (2013). Labor unemployment risk and corporate …nancing
decisions. Journal of Financial Economics 108 (2), 449–470.
Aiyagari, S. R. (1994). Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 659–684.
Atkinson, A. B. and J. Micklewright (1991). Unemployment compensation and labor market transitions: a critical review. Journal of economic literature, 1679–1727.
Auerbach, A. and D. R. Feenberg (2000). The Signi…cance of Federal Taxes as Automatic
Stabilizers. Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (3), 37–56.
Auerbach, A. J. (2009). Implementing the New Fiscal Policy Activism. American Economic Review 99 (2), 543–49.
Auerbach, A. J. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012). Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
Policy. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2), 1–27.
Autor, D. and D. Dorn (2013). The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization
of the US labor market. The American Economic Review 103 (5), 1553–1597.
Autor, D. H. and M. G. Duggan (2003). The rise in the disability rolls and the decline in
unemployment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 157–205.
Bartik, T. J. (1991). Who bene…ts from state and local economic development policies?
Books from Upjohn Press.
Beraja, M., E. Hurst, and J. Ospina (2015). The Aggregate Implications of Regional
Business Cycles.
Blanchard, O., G. DellŠAriccia, and P. Mauro (2010). Rethinking macroeconomic policy.
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42 (s1), 199–215.
Blanchard, O. and R. Perotti (2002). An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic
E¤ects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output*. The Quarterly
34

journal of economics 117 (4), 1329–1368.
Blanchard, O. J. and L. Katz (1992). Regional evolutions. Brookings papers on economic
activity, 1–75.
Blank, R. M. and D. E. Card (1991). Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Unemployment: Is There an Explanation? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (4),
1157–1189.
Blinder, A. S. (1975). Distribution e¤ects and the aggregate consumption function. The
Journal of Political Economy, 447–475.
Blinder, A. S. (2004). The case against the case against discretionary …scal policy. Center
for Economic Policy Studies, Princeton University.
Bloemen, H. G. and E. G. Stancanelli (2005). Financial wealth, consumption smoothing
and income shocks arising from job loss. Economica 72 (287), 431–452.
Bound, J. and H. J. Holzer (2000). Demand shifts, population adjustments, and labor
market outcomes during the 1980s. Journal of labor Economics 18 (1), 20–54.
Brown, E. C. (1955). The static theory of automatic …scal stabilization. The Journal of
Political Economy, 427–440.
Browning, M. and T. F. Crossley (2001). Unemployment insurance bene…t levels and
consumption changes. Journal of public Economics 80 (1), 1–23.
Card, D., R. Chetty, and A. Weber (2007). Cash-on-Hand and Competing Models of
Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market*. The Quarterly journal
of economics 122 (4), 1511–1560.
Card, D. and P. B. Levine (1994). Unemployment insurance taxes and the cyclical and
seasonal properties of unemployment. Journal of Public Economics 53 (1), 1–29.
Card, D. and P. B. Levine (2000). Extended bene…ts and the duration of UI spells: evidence
from the New Jersey extended bene…t program. Journal of Public economics 78 (1),
35

107–138.
Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2013). Manufacturing decline, housing booms, and non-employment. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chetty, R. (2008). Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance.
Journal of political economy 116 (2), 173–234.
Chodorow-Reich, G., L. Feiveson, Z. Liscow, and W. G. Woolston (2012). Does state …scal
relief during recessions increase employment? Evidence from the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (3), 118–145.
Chodorow-Reich, G. and L. Karabarbounis (2013). The cyclicality of the opportunity cost
of employment. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chodorow-Reich, G. and L. Karabarbounis (2016). The Limited Macroeconomic E¤ects
of Unemployment Bene…t Extensions. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Chodorow-Reich, G. and J. Wieland (2016). Secular Labor Reallocation and Business
Cycles. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2013). Unemployment and business cycles. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Coglianese, J. (2015). Do Unemployment Insurance Extensions Reduce Employment?
available at http://scholar.harvard.edu/…les/coglianese/…les/coglianese2 015u ie xtensions:pdf :
David, H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013). The China syndrome: Local labor market e¤ects of import competition in the United States. The American Economic Review 103 (6), 2121–2168.
Dolls, M., C. Fuest, and A. Peichl (2012). Automatic stabilizers and economic crisis: US
vs. Europe. Journal of Public Economics 96 (3), 279–294.

36

Dube, A., T. W. Lester, and M. Reich (2010). Minimum wage e¤ects across state borders:
Estimates using contiguous counties. The Rview of Economics and Statistics 92 (4),
945–964.
Feldstein, M. (2009). Rethinking the Role of Fiscal Policy. American Economic Review 99 (2), 556–59.
Gruber, J. (1997). The Consumption Smoothing Bene…ts of Unemployment Insurance.
The American Economic Review, 192–205.
Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2013). Unemployment bene…ts
and unemployment in the great recession: the role of macro e¤ects. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2015). The Impact of Unemployment Bene…t Extensions on Employment: The 2014 Employment Miracle? Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Holmes, T. J. (1998). The e¤ect of state policies on the location of manufacturing: Evidence from state borders. Journal of Political Economy 106 (4), 667–705.
Hombert, J., A. Schoar, D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2014). Can Unemployment Insurance Spur Entrepreneurial Activity? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Hsu, J. W., D. A. Matsa, and B. T. Melzer (2014). Positive externalities of social insurance:
Unemployment insurance and consumer credit. Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Johnston, A. and A. Mas (2015). Potential Unemployment Insurance Duration and Labor
Supply: The Individual and Market-Level Response to a Bene…t Cut.
Katz, L. F. and B. D. Meyer (1990). Unemployment Insurance, Recall Expectations, and
Unemployment Outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 (4), 973–1002.

37

Kekre, R. (2015). Unemployment Insurance in Macroeconomic Stabilization. available at
http://scholar.harvard.edu/…les/rkekre/…les/jmpr kekrev 120915:pdf :
Kroft, K. and M. J. Notowidigdo (2011). Should unemployment insurance vary with the
unemployment rate? Theory and evidence. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Krueger, A. B. and B. D. Meyer (2002). Labor supply e¤ects of social insurance. Handbook
of public economics 4, 2327–2392.
Krueger, D., K. Mitman, and F. Perri (2015). Macroeconomics and Heterogeneity, Including Inequality.
Lalive, R. (2007). Unemployment bene…ts, unemployment duration, and postunemployment jobs: A regression discontinuity approach. The American economic
review, 108–112.
Lalive, R., C. Landais, and J. Zweimüller (2015). Market externalities of large unemployment insurance extension programs. The American Economic Review 105 (12),
3564–3596.
Levine, P. B. (1993). Spillover e¤ects between the insured and uninsured unemployed.
Industrial & labor relations review 47 (1), 73–86.
Luttmer, E. F. (2005). Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 963–1002.
Marinescu, I. (2014). The general equilibrium impacts of unemployment insurance: Evidence from a large online job board. University of Chicago. Unpublished.
McKay, A. and R. Reis (2013). The role of automatic stabilizers in the US business cycle.
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Meyer, B. D. (1990). Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells. Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society, 757–782.

38

Mian, A. and A. Su… (2014). What Explains the 2007–2009 Drop in Employment? Econometrica 82 (6), 2197–2223.
Mo¢ tt, R. (1985). Unemployment insurance and the distribution of unemployment spells.
Journal of Econometrics 28 (1), 85–101.
Monte, F., S. Redding, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2015). Commuting, Migration and Local
Employment Elasticities. Princeton mimeo.
Mueller, A. I., J. Rothstein, and T. M. von Wachter (2013). Unemployment insurance
and disability insurance in the Great Recession. Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2014). Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence
from US Regions. The American Economic Review 104 (3), 753–792.
Nekoei, A. and A. Weber (2014). Does Extending Unemployment Bene…ts Improve Job
Quality? Technical report.
Notowidigdo, M. J. (2011). The incidence of local labor demand shocks. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ramey, V. A. (2011a). Can government purchases stimulate the economy? Journal of
Economic Literature 49 (3), 673–685.
Ramey, V. A. (2011b). Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s all in the Timing*.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 1–50.
Ramey, V. A. and M. D. Shapiro (1998). Costly capital reallocation and the e¤ects of
government spending. In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 48, pp. 145–194. Elsevier.
Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2014). Transfer Payments and the Macroeconomy: The
E¤ects of Social Security Bene…t Increases, 1952–1991.

39

Rothstein, J. (2011). Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2011 (2), 143–213.
Serrato, J. C. S. and P. Wingender (2010a). Estimating local …scal multipliers. University
of California at Berkeley, mimeo.
Serrato, J. C. S. and P. Wingender (2010b). Estimating local …scal multipliers. University
of California at Berkeley, mimeo.
Shoag, D. et al. (2010). The impact of government spending shocks: Evidence on the
multiplier from state pension plan returns. unpublished paper, Harvard University.
Shoag, D. et al. (2015). The impact of government spending shocks: Evidence on the
multiplier from state pension plan returns.
Solon, G. (1985). Work incentive e¤ects of taxing unemployment bene…ts. Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society, 295–306.
Tolbert, C. M. and M. Sizer (1996). US commuting zones and labor market areas: A 1990
update.
Valletta, R. G. (2014). Recent extensions of US unemployment bene…ts: search responses
in alternative labor market states. IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3 (1), 1.
Van Ours, J. C. and M. Vodopivec (2008). Does reducing unemployment insurance generosity reduce job match quality? Journal of Public Economics 92 (3), 684–695.

40

-.1

-.05

-.15 -.1 -.05

0

0

.05

Emp. Tradable Growth

.05

Emp. Non-Tradable Growth

-.1

-.05

0

.05

-.1

-.05

0

.05

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

Car Sale Growth

-.1

-.05

0

.05

Bottom 25th UI Generosity

Top 25th UI Generosity

Figure 1 Spline Estimation
This graph depicts the effect of the UI generosity in attenuating the Bartik shocks using a spline
estimation methodology for each dependent variable and comparing counties in the top and bottom
quartile of UI generosity. The knots for the spline regression are at the 33th percentile of Bartik
shock. The figure also reports the 95% confidence intervals. The blue and the red areas show the
effects for the bottom and the top quartile in UI generosity (measured by the income replacement
ratio), respectively.

Table 1
Summary Statistics
The table reports the summary statistics for the main variables. Panel A focus on the variables computed in 2000, while Panel B examines the variables over the period 19992013 (car sales data is for 2001-2011). The data on earnings growth and industrial composition is collected from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, while employment growth
by industry for each county is computed using yearly data provided by the County Business Patterns (CBP). Data on average wages is provided by the BEA. R. L. Polk &
Company records all new car sales in the United States and provides our measure of car sales. Democratic share unavailable at the county-level in Alaska. Alternative Bartik
schock are the shocks to the sectors other than construction and non-tradable sectors.

Panel A. Static Variables in 2000
(1)
N
Max Weekly Benefit
Number of Weeks
Replacement Rate
Replacement Rate x Take-Up Rate
Log of Median Income
Share of Employees in Construction Sector
Share of Employees in Manufacturing Sector
Share of Employees in Services Sector
Share of Employees in Government Sector
Share of Self-Employed workers
Share of High School graduates
Share of College Graduates
Tax Difference
Right to Work Laws
Other government transfers
Democratic Share
Population

3,098
3,098
3,098
3,098
3,088
3,098
3,098
3,098
3,098
3,098
3,098
3,098
3,098
3,098
3,098
3,079
3,098

(2)
Mean

(3)
St. Dev

297.4
62.72
26.17
0.816
0.364
0.0391
0.132
0.0395
10.66
0.239
0.0581
0.0209
0.116
0.0677
0.548
0.0911
0.140
0.0610
0.177
0.0671
80.31
7.405
24.36
9.473
6.406
1.319
0.383
0.486
3,385
547.7
0.488
0.130
1.047e+06 1.875e+06

(4)
p1

(5)
p10

(6)
p50

191.1
26
0.301
0.0723
10.12
0
0
0.280
0.0626
0.0721
59.70
8.400
4.734
0
2,483
0.215
8,752

230.3
26
0.307
0.0930
10.36
0.0373
0.0430
0.419
0.0826
0.112
69.90
12.61
5.299
0
2,768
0.330
35,759

283.9
26
0.367
0.123
10.65
0.0558
0.105
0.565
0.125
0.165
81.80
24.50
6.052
0
3,218
0.474
407,847

-0.0688
-0.0623
-0.0865
-0.104
-0.246
-0.0701
-0.330
-0.0485
-0.0584
-0.413

-0.0291
-0.0296
-0.0365
-0.0444
-0.111
-0.00315
-0.194
-0.00215
-0.0171
-0.280

0.00814
0.00844
0.00833
0.00708
-0.0190
0.0404
-0.0161
0.0283
0.00656
0.00973

(7)
p90

(8)
p99

406.8
440.1
26
30
0.414
0.440
0.186
0.229
11.01
11.26
0.0841
0.118
0.206
0.341
0.652
0.702
0.212
0.371
0.263
0.420
88.80
92.80
38.20
51.90
8.324
9.783
1
1
4,082
4,756
0.647
0.806
2.467e+06 9.538e+06

Panel B. Dynamic Variables
Bartik Shock (1998 as base year)
Alternative Bartik Shock
Employment Growth
Employment in Non-Tradable Sector Growth
Employment in Tradable Sector Growth
Income Growth
Car Sales Growth
Average Wages Growth
Labor Force Growth
Unemployment Growth

46,470
46,470
46,470
46,470
46,470
46,470
34,032
46,470
46,470
46,470

0.00238
0.00317
0.00519
0.00560
-0.0174
0.0394
-0.0234
0.0295
0.00718
0.175

0.0233
0.0220
0.0335
0.0440
0.102
0.0391
0.123
0.0329
0.0246
0.528

0.0257
0.0250
0.0408
0.0500
0.0623
0.0812
0.118
0.0602
0.0325
0.902

0.0333
0.0350
0.0824
0.125
0.289
0.135
0.287
0.125
0.0807
2.009

Table 2
UI Generosity and County Characteristics
The table reports the correlations between our three measures of UI generosity and several regional characteristics measured in 2000. Each column is a separate weighted least squares regression. The data on industrial composition, other transfers and on average
wages are collected from the Bureau of Economic Analysis while fraction of high school and college graduates and the median income are from census. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Replacement Ratio

Observations
R-squared
Replacement Rate × TakeUp

Observations
R-squared

Max Weekly Benefit /Average
Weekly Wage
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Fraction
Constr.

Fraction
Manuf.

Fraction
Service

Fraction Gov.

Min Wage

-0.0256
-0.0415

0.215*
-0.115

0.0267
-0.19

-0.139*
-0.0819

-0.0739
(0.812)

-0.143
-2.464

3,098
0.002

3,098
0.015

3,098
0

3,098
0.008

3,098
0.000

-0.108***
(0.0307)

0.348***
(0.109)

0.151
(0.152)

-0.216***
(0.0584)

3,098
0.042

3,098
0.041

3,098
0.004

0.0291***
(0.00771)

0.0465
(0.0287)

3,098
0.033

3,098
0.008

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

Fraction Self
Employed

Fraction High
School
Graduates

Fraction
College
Graduates

Max UI Tax
rate - Min UI
Tax rate (as of
2002)

Median
Income

Dem. Share

Other
Transfers

-0.432
-0.772

-0.129*
-0.0688

26.74*
-13.87

-4.465
-13.86

12.08***
-4.106

-0.229
-0.522

0.213
-0.33

4,795***
(1,291)

3,098
0

3,098
0.004

3,098
0.006

3,098
0.02

3,098
0

3,098
0.128

3,088
0.001

3,079
0.004

3,098
0.117

1.388
(0.877)

-7.153***
(1.711)

0.729
(0.513)

-0.192***
(0.0664)

40.46***
(13.17)

11.02
(15.07)

13.30***
(4.404)

0.784
(0.495)

0.712**
(0.278)

6,419***
(1,688)

3,098
0.020

3,098
0.092

3,098
0.338

3,098
0.013

3,098
0.013

3,098
0.047

3,098
0.002

3,098
0.159

3,088
0.017

3,079
0.047

3,098
0.214

-0.251***
(0.0374)

0.0742***
(0.0261)

-0.118
(0.178)

0.0499
(0.507)

-1.445***
(0.129)

0.268***
(0.0679)

-5.047
(5.354)

-34.83***
(3.655)

2.045*
(1.143)

-0.727***
(0.0863)

-0.286***
(0.0640)

889.0**
(405.3)

3,098
0.127

3,098
0.025

3,098
0.007

3,098
0.000

3,098
0.531

3,098
0.267

3,098
0.008

3,098
0.226

3,098
0.040

3,088
0.155

3,079
0.081

3,098
0.044

Log Average
Right To Work
Wages

Table 3
Employment Growth
The table reports coefficient estimates of weighted least square regressions relating the employment growth to the unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik shock using as weights the population in 2000. The full sample includes the
period 1999-2013. In Columns 1-3, the dependent variable is the employment growth. In Columns 4-9 we distinguish between employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sectors. Columns 1, 4 and 7 show the effects without any
controls, while in Columns 2, 5 and 8 we include county and year fixed effects. In Columns 3, 6 and 9 we control for the interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction,
manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and college
degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

Employment Growth

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

-0.08**
(0.03)
0.94***
(0.03)

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

-0.06**
(0.03)
1.25***
(0.07)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

-0.13**
(0.06)
0.72***
(0.05)

46,470
0.07
3,098

(7)

46,050
0.08
3,070

(8)

-0.12***
(0.04)
0.51***
(0.11)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

-0.02
(0.04)
1.27***
(0.04)

0.02
(0.04)
1.79***
(0.20)

-0.01
(0.03)
1.82***
(0.22)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
46,470
0.01
3,098

46,050
0.02
3,070

(9)

Employment in Tradable Sector

-0.13**
(0.06)
0.45***
(0.10)

Yes
46,470
0.43
3,098

(6)

(5)

Employment in Non-Tradable Sector

-0.07**
(0.03)
1.23***
(0.08)

Bartik Shock × Controls

(4)

46,050
0.01
3,070

Yes
46,470
0.08
3,098

46,050
0.01
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

Table 4
Car Sales
The table reports coefficient estimates of weighted least square regressions relating car sales to the unemployment
insurance generosity and Bartik shock using as weights the population in 2000. The number of cars sold in each county
is provided by Polk, and the full sample includes the period 2001-2011. In all columns the dependent variable is the car
sales. Column 1 shows the effects without any control, while in Column 2 we include county and year fixed effects. In
Columns 3 we control for the interaction between the Bartik shock and all the controls in Table 2, such as the fraction
of employees in construction, manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military, state and local government),
self-employed and services industries as well as the democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school
and college degrees. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%,
**=5%, *=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

Car Sales

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Full Sample

Full Sample

Full Sample

-0.31***
(0.08)
1.97***
(0.11)

-0.32***
(0.07)
1.70***
(0.27)

-0.27***
(0.07)
1.69***
(0.24)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Bartik Shock × Controls
Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Yes
34,032
0.15
3,097

34,032
0.02
3,097

33,755
0.03
3,070

Table 5
Earnings Growth
The table reports coefficient estimates of weighted least square regressions relating earnings growth to the
unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik shock using as weights the population in 2000. The full sample includes
the period 1999-2013. In all columns the dependent variable is the earnings growth. Column 1 shows the effects
without any control, while in Column 2 we include county and year fixed effects. In Columns 3 we control for the
interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction,
manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services
industries as well as the log of median income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and
college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%,
*=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

Earnings Growth

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Full Sample

Full Sample

Full Sample

-0.09***
(0.03)
1.03***
(0.04)

-0.08**
(0.03)
1.24***
(0.08)

-0.07***
(0.02)
1.23***
(0.07)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Bartik Shock × Controls
Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Yes
46,470
0.38
3,098

46,470
0.06
3,098

46,050
0.08
3,070

Table 6
Robustness I: Different Measures of UI Generosity
The table reports coefficient estimates of weighted least square regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance
generosity and Bartik shock using as weights the population in 2000. The full sample includes the period 1999-2013. In Panel A, instead, we employ the
replacement rate times the take-up rate as measured from CPS. In Column 1 the dependent variable is employment growth, while in Column 2 and 3 it
is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector respectively. In Column 4 we investigate the effect of UI and Bartik shock on the car
sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings growth. We control for the interaction between the Bartik
shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military, state
and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with
high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Panel A - Replacement Rate x Take-Up

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Observations
R-squared
Number of fips

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment Growth

Employment in NonTradable Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.05*
(0.03)
1.26***
(0.07)

-0.10*
(0.05)
0.53***
(0.11)

0.02
(0.03)
1.84***
(0.21)

-0.21***
(0.08)
1.73***
(0.24)

-0.05**
(0.03)
1.25***
(0.07)

46,050
0.08
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

33,755
0.03
3,070

46,050
0.08
3,070

(2)
Employment in NonTradable Sector

(3)
Employment in
Tradable Sector

(4)

(5)

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.07**
(0.03)
1.25***
(0.08)

-0.12**
(0.06)
0.50***
(0.11)

0.00
(0.04)
1.83***
(0.22)

-0.40***
(0.10)
1.62***
(0.24)

-0.13***
(0.03)
1.19***
(0.07)

46,050
0.08
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

33,755
0.03
3,070

46,050
0.08
3,070

Panel B -UI Generosity = Max Weekly Benefit /Average Weekly Wage
(1)
Employment Growth
Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Table 7
Robustness II: State Level Evidence
The table reports coefficient estimates of weighted least square regressions relating economic activity measured at the state level to the unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik
shock using as weights the population in 2000. Panel A shows the results for the Replacement Rate while Panel B consider the unconditional measure of take-up times the Replacement
Rate. In Columns 1-3 the dependent variable is employment growth, and employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector. Columns 4-6 distinguish between total consumption
growth, durable goods and car sales. Car sales is the dollar amount spend on cars as provided by the BEA. Column 7 reports the results for income growth. The data is provided by BEA,
and the full sample includes the period 1999-2013. In all columns we control for state and year fixed effects and the interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include
the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log
of median income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels
(***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Panel A - Replacement Rate
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Employment
Growth

Employment in
Non-Tradable
Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Total Consumption
Growth

Durable Goods Growth

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.04
(0.03)
1.16***
(0.20)

-0.11***
(0.04)
0.20
(0.26)

-0.04
(0.03)
2.55***
(0.41)

-0.03*
(0.02)
0.70***
(0.15)

-0.07*
(0.04)
2.14***
(0.26)

-0.12**
(0.05)
2.29***
(0.42)

-0.05**
(0.02)
1.27***
(0.25)

State Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R-squared
Number of States

765
0.16
51

765
0.09
51

765
0.10
51

765
0.19
51

765
0.21
51

765
0.25
51

765
0.14
51

(1)
Employment
Growth

(2)
Employment in
Non-Tradable

(3)
Employment in
Tradable Sector

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Total Consumption
Growth

Durable Goods Growth

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.07*
(0.04)
1.11***
(0.20)

-0.08*
(0.05)
0.20
(0.26)

-0.07**
(0.04)
2.49***
(0.41)

-0.03**
(0.02)
0.69***
(0.15)

-0.03
(0.04)
2.17***
(0.25)

-0.01
(0.07)
2.39***
(0.40)

-0.08***
(0.02)
1.22***
(0.25)

State Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R-squared
Number of States

765
0.16
51

765
0.08
51

765
0.10
51

765
0.19
51

765
0.21
51

765
0.24
51

765
0.14
51

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Panel B - Replacement Rate x Take-Up

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Table 8
Robustness III: Commuting Zone
The table reports coefficient estimates of regressions relating the main dependent variables at the commuting zone level to the unemployment
insurance generosity and Bartik shock to the tradable sector. The full sample includes the period 1999-2013. Panel A shows the results for the
Replacement Rate while Panel B consider the unconditional measure of Replacement Rate. In Column 1 the dependent variable is employment
growth, while in Column 2 and 3 it is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector respectively. In Column 4 we investigate the
effect of UI and Bartik shock on the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings growth. We
control for the interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing,
government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median
income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ level. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Panel A - Replacement Rate
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment Growth

Employment in NonTradable Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.06***
(0.02)
0.92***
(0.08)

-0.15***
(0.03)
0.60***
(0.11)

-0.02
(0.03)
1.10***
(0.22)

-0.24***
(0.05)
2.03***
(0.32)

-0.04**
(0.02)
0.91***
(0.11)

CZ Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

10,390
0.07
693

10,395
0.07
693

10,361
0.01
693

7,623
0.04
693

10,395
0.06
693

(3)
Employment in
Tradable Sector

(4)

(5)

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties
Panel B - Replacement Rate x Take-Up

(1)

(2)
Employment in NonEmployment Growth
Tradable Sector

-0.04***
(0.02)
0.92***
(0.09)

-0.15***
(0.03)
0.59***
(0.11)

-0.02
(0.03)
1.09***
(0.22)

-0.22***
(0.07)
1.99***
(0.33)

-0.07***
(0.02)
0.89***
(0.11)

CZ Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

10,390
0.07
693

10,395
0.06
693

10,361
0.01
693

7,623
0.04
693

10,395
0.06
693

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Table 9
Robustness IV: State-Level Policies
The table reports coefficient estimates of regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance generosity and
Bartik shock controlling for other state policies. We control for the presence of right-to-work laws and the minimum wage in the state and
their interaction with the Bartik shock. We also control for the interaction between the Bartik schock and the log of other government
transfers. The full sample includes the period 1999-2013. In Column 1 the dependent variable is employment growth, while in Column 2 and
3 it is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector respectively. In Column 4 we investigate the effect of UI and Bartik
shock on the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings growth. We control for the
interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing,
government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median
income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment
Growth

Employment in
Non-Tradable
Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.05**
(0.03)
0.03
(0.03)
0.06***
(0.02)
-0.04*
(0.02)

-0.10***
(0.03)
0.05
(0.06)
0.11***
(0.03)
-0.04
(0.04)

-0.00
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.03)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)

-0.19***
(0.07)
0.17**
(0.08)
0.11
(0.08)
-0.29***
(0.06)

-0.05*
(0.03)
0.05
(0.03)
0.00
(0.02)
-0.07**
(0.03)

1.22***
(0.08)

0.46***
(0.11)

1.82***
(0.22)

1.49***
(0.23)

1.18***
(0.08)

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

46,050
0.09
3,070

46,050
0.02
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

33,755
0.04
3,070

46,050
0.09
3,070

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock × Right-to-Work
Bartik Shock × Minimum Wage
Bartik Shock × Other Transfers

Bartik Shock

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Table 10
Robustness V: Sorting of Firms into States
The table reports coefficient estimates of regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik shock
controlling for UI tax rate. We control for the difference between the max and min UI tax rate and its interaction with the Bartik shock as well as the
Log of taxable wage base and the Bartik shock. The full sample includes the period 1999-2013. In Column 1 the dependent variable is employment
growth, while in Column 2 and 3 it is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector respectively. In Column 4 we investigate the
effect of UI and Bartik shock on the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings growth. We
control for the interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing,
government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median
income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment
Growth

Employment in
Non-Tradable
Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.06**
(0.03)
-0.05*
(0.03)
0.03
(0.02)

-0.10**
(0.05)
-0.11**
(0.04)
0.05
(0.04)

-0.03
(0.04)
0.02
(0.03)
0.05
(0.03)

-0.27***
(0.07)
-0.17**
(0.08)
0.16***
(0.06)

-0.05**
(0.02)
-0.07***
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)

1.24***
(0.07)

0.49***
(0.10)

1.83***
(0.21)

1.65***
(0.23)

1.22***
(0.08)

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

46,050
0.09
3,070

46,050
0.02
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

33,755
0.04
3,070

46,050
0.08
3,070

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock × (Tax Max – Tax Min)
Bartik Shock × Log(Taxable Wage Base)

Bartik Shock

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Table 11
Robustness VI: Alternative Bartik shocks
The table reports coefficient estimates of regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik shock
to the sectors other than construction and non-tradable sectors. The full sample includes the period 1999-2013. In Column 1 the dependent variable is
employment growth, while in Column 2 and 3 it is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector respectively. In Column 4 we
investigate the effect of UI and Bartik shock on the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings
growth. We control for the interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction,
manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of
median income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment Growth

Employment in NonTradable Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.07**

-0.12***

-0.02

-0.27***

-0.08***

(0.03)

(0.05)

(0.04)

(0.07)

(0.02)

0.89***

0.32***

1.53***

1.23***

0.89***

(0.05)

(0.10)

(0.19)

(0.22)

(0.06)

County Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

46,050

46,050

46,050

33,755

46,050

R-squared

0.07

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.07

Number of Counties

3,070

3,070

3,070

3,070

3,070

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Observations

Table 12
Heterogeneous Effects I: Asymmetric Effects
The table reports coefficient estimates of regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik shock. The
full sample includes the period 1999-2013. "Below Median Bartik Shock" identifies the bottom half in the magnitude of the Bartik shock after we take out
the average for each county, while "Above Median Bartik Shock" identifies the top half. In Column 1 the dependent variable is employment growth, while in
Column 2 and 3 it is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector respectively. In Column 4 we investigate the effect of UI and Bartik
shock on the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings growth. In all specifications we control for
county and year fixed effects as well as the interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in
construction, manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the
log of median income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment Growth

Employment in NonTradable Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.06*
(0.04)

-0.16***
(0.05)

-0.01
(0.04)

-0.27***
(0.09)

-0.07***
(0.02)

-0.08***
(0.03)
1.24***
(0.14)
1.27***
(0.09)

-0.01
(0.07)
0.64***
(0.15)
0.43***
(0.13)

0.01
(0.11)
2.17***
(0.24)
1.59***
(0.27)

-0.19
(0.13)
2.32***
(0.31)
1.22***
(0.47)

-0.07
(0.06)
1.01***
(0.18)
1.42***
(0.10)

Below Median Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Above Median Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

46,050
0.08
3,070

46,050
0.02
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

33,755
0.04
3,070

46,050
0.10
3,070

Below Median Bartik Shock × UI
Generosity
Above Median Bartik Shock × UI
Generosity
Below Median Bartik Shock
Above Median Bartik Shock

Table 13
Heterogeneity II : Unemployment Rate
The table reports coefficient estimates of regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik shock. We control for the
lagged county unemployment rate as well as its interactions with the Bartik shock and the UI generosity. The full sample includes the period 1999-2013. In Column 1 the
dependent variable is employment growth, while in Column 2 and 3 it is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector respectively. In Column 4 we
investigate the effect of UI and Bartik shock on the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings growth. Standard errors
are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity × Lagged Unemployment Rate
Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock × Lagged Unemployment Rate
UI Generosity × Lagged Unemployment Rate
Bartik Shock
Lagged Unemployment Rate

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment
Growth

Employment in
Non-Tradable
Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.02*
(0.02)
-0.07**
(0.03)
0.00
(0.02)
0.00
(0.00)
1.11***
(0.08)
-0.01***
(0.00)

-0.05*
(0.03)
-0.13***
(0.05)
0.02
(0.03)
0.00**
(0.00)
0.38***
(0.08)
-0.01***
(0.00)

0.02
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
0.03
(0.04)
0.00
(0.00)
1.67***
(0.18)
-0.01***
(0.00)

-0.13
(0.09)
-0.33***
(0.08)
0.14
(0.09)
-0.00**
(0.00)
1.58***
(0.25)
0.01***
(0.01)

-0.03*
(0.02)
-0.09***
(0.03)
-0.09***
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.00)
1.11***
(0.08)
-0.01***
(0.00)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

46,456
0.08
3,098

46,456
0.02
3,098

46,456
0.01
3,098

34,018
0.03
3,097

46,456
0.07
3,098

For Online Publication
Appendix

Figure 1.A UI Generosity: Replacement Ratio
This graph shows the unemployment insurance generosity in 2000, with darker states having more
generous UI benefits. To measure the UI generosity we employ the Annual Social and Economic
Supplement (ASEC) to the Current Population Survey (CPS). We thus calculate an empirical
"income replacement ratio" as the ratio of average weekly benefits to average weekly wages. To keep
the sample size for each state reasonable, we examine a five-year average over 1996-2000, which
gives us the replacement ratio for those who actually receive benefits.

Figure 1.B Persistence of UI Generosity
This graph shows the correlation between the average replacement rate in the periods 2000-2005
and 1990-1995 for all counties weighted by population. Larger dots represent states with larger
populations.

Figure 2.A Correlation between Max-Min UI Tax and Marginal Tax Cost
Figure plots the correlation between the difference between the maximum and the minimum UI tax
rate and the industry weighted average marginal tax cost provided by Card and Levine (2000).

Figure 2.B UI Generosity and Max-Min UI Tax
Figure plots the correlation between the difference between the maximum and the minimum UI tax
rate and the UI generosity in 2000.

Supplementary Appendix

Figure SA.1 UI Generosity: Replacement Rate X Take-Up Rate
This graph shows the replacement rate times the take-up rate measure of unemployment insurance
generosity, with darker regions having more generous UI benefits.

Figure SA.2 Persistence of UI Generosity
This graph shows the correlation between the average replacement rate in the periods 2000-2005
and 1990-1995 for all counties weighted by population.

Figure SA.3 UI Generosity: Max Benefit/Average Wage
This graph shows the ratio of the maximum unemployment insurance weekly benefit and the
average weekly wage as measured in 2000 for all counties, with darker regions having more generous
UI benefits.

Figure SA.4 Persistence of UI Generosity
This graph shows the correlation between the unemployment insurance generosity in 2000 and in
2010 for all the counties weighted by population.

Table A.1
Summary Statistics
The table reports the summary statistics for the main variables for commuting zones. Panel A focus on the variables computed in 2000, while Panel B
examines the variables over the period 1999-2013. The data on earnings growth and industrial composition is collected from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, while employment growth by industry for each county is computed using yearly data provided by the County Business Patterns (CBP). Data on
average wages is provided by the BEA. R. L. Polk & Company records all new car sales in the United States and provides our measure of car sales.
Democratic share unavailable at the county-level in Alaska. Alternative Bartik schock are the shocks to the sectors other than construction and non-tradable
sectors.

Panel A. Static Variables in 2000
(1)
N
Max Weekly Benefit
Number of Weeks
Replacement Rate
Replacement Rate x Take-Up Rate
Max Weekly Benefit/Average Weekly Wage
Share of Employees in Construction Sector
Share of Employees in Manufacturing Sector
Share of Employees in Services Sector
Share of Employees in Government Sector
Log of Median Income
Share of Self-Employed workers
Share of High School graduates
Share of College Graduates
Democratic Share
Population

709
709
709
709
709
709
709
709
709
707
709
709
709
693
709

(2)
Mean

(3)
St. Dev

297.4
63.15
26.17
0.760
0.365
0.0380
0.132
0.0391
0.408
0.110
0.0559
0.0125
0.115
0.0543
0.554
0.0694
0.140
0.0459
10.68
0.219
0.169
0.0385
79.80
6.082
23.38
7.299
0.485
0.101
3.139e+06 4.180e+06

(4)
p1

(5)
p10

(6)
p50

(7)
p90

(8)
p99

190.0
26.00
0.301
0.0723
0.216
0.0246
0.0217
0.363
0.0874
10.15
0.113
62.33
10.28
0.246
38,860

226.2
287.4
408.0
431.0
26.00
26
26.00
30.00
0.307
0.367
0.414
0.440
0.0942
0.125
0.186
0.229
0.271
0.397
0.560
0.696
0.0410
0.0550
0.0709
0.0980
0.0570
0.112
0.185
0.272
0.457
0.567
0.633
0.671
0.0998
0.123
0.205
0.311
10.39
10.70
10.97
11.10
0.133
0.159
0.211
0.305
72.13
80.60
86.29
90.33
14.05
23.21
34.24
43.74
0.357
0.482
0.602
0.702
166,079 1.573e+06 8.705e+06 1.645e+07

-0.0724
-0.0647
-0.0790
-0.415
-0.204
-0.0649
-0.306
-0.0338
-0.406
-0.0375

-0.0460
-0.0334
-0.0345
-0.0561
-0.101
-0.00168
-0.191
0.00241
-0.278
-0.0117

Panel B. Dynamic Variables

Bartik Shock (1998 as base year)
Alternative Bartik Shock
Employment Growth
Employment in Non-Tradable Sector Growth
Employment in Tradable Sector Growth
Income Growth
Car Sales Growth
Average Wages Growth
Unemployment Growth
Labor Force Growth

10,635
10,635
10,623
10,635
10,596
10,635
7,790
10,635
10,605
10,635

-0.00247
0.00146
0.00457
-0.0167
-0.0214
0.0390
-0.0241
0.0294
0.169
0.00715

0.0261
0.0224
0.0301
0.101
0.0711
0.0371
0.113
0.0255
0.522
0.0173

0.00602
0.00675
0.00801
0.00874
-0.0198
0.0404
-0.0157
0.0290
0.00816
0.00720

0.0250
0.0241
0.0363
0.0433
0.0459
0.0793
0.106
0.0548
0.858
0.0250

0.0326
0.0338
0.0696
0.0821
0.172
0.127
0.242
0.0975
1.992
0.0541

Table A.2
Summary Statistics
The table reports the summary statistics for the main variables collected at the state level. Panel A focus on the variables computed in 2000, while Panel
B examines the variables over the period 1999-2013. The data on earnings growth and industrial composition is collected from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, while employment growth by industry for each county is computed using yearly data provided by the County Business Patterns (CBP). Data on
average wages is provided by the BEA. R. L. Polk & Company records all new car sales in the United States and provides our measure of car sales.
Democratic share unavailable at the county-level in Alaska. Alternative Bartik schock are the shocks to the sectors other than construction and nontradable sectors.

Panel A. Static Variables in 2000
(1)
N
Max Weekly Benefit
Number of Weeks
Replacement Rate
Replacement Rate x Take-Up Rate
Max Weekly Benefit/Average Weekly Wage
Share of Employees in Construction Sector
Share of Employees in Manufacturing Sector
Share of Employees in Services Sector
Share of Employees in Government Sector
Log of Median Income
Share of Self-Employed workers
Share of High School graduates
Share of College Graduates
Democratic Share
Population

51
51
51
51
51
51
51
51
51
51
51
51
51
51
51

(2)
Mean

(3)
St. Dev

(4)
p1

(5)
p10

(6)
p50

(7)
p90

(8)
p99

297.3
64.86
190
230
284
408
441
26.17
0.824
26
26
26
26
30
0.364
0.0395
0.301
0.307
0.367
0.414
0.440
0.132
0.0399
0.0723
0.0930
0.123
0.186
0.229
0.447
0.0962
0.293
0.293
0.444
0.593
0.636
0.0568
0.00842
0.0434
0.0451
0.0531
0.0675
0.0762
0.115
0.0368
0.0378
0.0608
0.106
0.164
0.191
0.559
0.0438
0.458
0.499
0.550
0.618
0.636
0.138
0.0221
0.111
0.121
0.133
0.167
0.210
10.65
0.128
10.30
10.49
10.65
10.78
10.91
0.168
0.0212
0.139
0.147
0.165
0.190
0.222
80.37
3.797
72.86
75.65
80.61
86.02
87.95
24.39
3.927
16.66
19.41
23.53
29.78
33.19
48.27
7.381
27.60
38
48.50
56.50
60.20
1.231e+07 9.923e+06 642,023 2.848e+06 8.431e+06 3.399e+07 3.399e+07

Panel B. Dynamic Variables

Bartik Shock (1998 as base year)
Alternative Bartik Shock
Employment Growth
Employment in Non-Tradable Sector Growth
Employment in Tradable Sector Growth
Income Growth
Total Consumption Growth
Durable Consumption Growth
Car Sale Growth

(1)
N

(2)
Mean

(3)
St. Dev

(4)
p1

(5)
p10

(6)
p50

(7)
p90

(8)
p99

765
765
765
765
765
765
765
765
765

0.00382
0.00493
0.00633
0.00454
-0.0239
0.0394
0.0450
0.0322
0.0199

0.0232
0.0215
0.0254
0.0261
0.0437
0.0314
0.0240
0.0493
0.0693

-0.0640
-0.0574
-0.0685
-0.0701
-0.145
-0.0586
-0.0253
-0.105
-0.187

-0.0279
-0.0295
-0.0289
-0.0265
-0.0872
0.00605
0.0239
-0.0491
-0.0778

0.0104
0.0117
0.0111
0.00765
-0.0178
0.0398
0.0457
0.0418
0.0346

0.0267
0.0251
0.0345
0.0349
0.0238
0.0752
0.0733
0.0825
0.0896

0.0332
0.0336
0.0562
0.0617
0.0629
0.118
0.0924
0.129
0.146

Table A.3
Lags of Main Variables
The table reports coefficient estimates of regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik shock. The full
sample includes the period 1998-2013. The measure of UI generosity is the Replacement Rate. In Column 1 the dependent variable is employment growth, while
in Column 2 and 3 it is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector, respectively. In Column 4 we investigate the effect of UI and Bartik
shock on the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings growth. We also include the lagged Bartik
shock, as well as the lagged dependent variable and the lagged interaction term. We also control for the interaction between the Bartik shock (as well as the
lagged bartik shock) and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military,
state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with highschool and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Lagged (Bartik Shock × UI Generosity)
Lagged (Bartik Shock)
Lagged Employment Growth

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment Growth

Employment in NonTradable Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.06**
(0.03)
1.13***
(0.08)

-0.10**
(0.05)
0.46***
(0.12)

0.01
(0.04)
1.86***
(0.24)

-0.28***
(0.07)
2.14***
(0.27)

-0.07***
(0.02)
0.99***
(0.08)

-0.03*
(0.01)
0.38***
(0.09)
-0.07***
(0.02)

-0.05*
(0.03)
0.45***
(0.10)

-0.04
(0.03)
0.36***
(0.11)

0.13
(0.08)
0.18
(0.36)

-0.00
(0.02)
0.42**
(0.19)

Lagged Employment in Non-Tradable
Sector

-0.21***
(0.02)

Lagged Employment in Tradable Sector

-0.17***
(0.01)

Lagged Car Sales

-0.08*
(0.04)

Lagged Earnings Growth

-0.03
(0.04)

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls
Lagged Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

42,980
0.09
3,070

42,980
0.07
3,070

42,980
0.04
3,070

30,681
0.05
3,070

42,980
0.09
3,070

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Table A.4
Alternative Measures of UI Generosity
The table reports coefficient estimates of weighted least square regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance generosity
and Bartik shock. The full sample includes the period 1999-2013. Panel A employs the log of the maximum UI weekly benefit as proxy for the UI generosity.
Panel B uses an alternative measure provided by the BLS defined as the weekly benefit amount divided by the average wage of UI recipients. In Columns 1
the dependent variable is employment growth, in Columns 2 it is employment growth in the non-tradable sector, while in Columns 3 we investigate the effect
of UI and Bartik shock on the employment in the tradable sectors. In Columns 4 we analyze the effect of UI on car sales growth as provided by Polk, while
in Columns 5 the dependent variable is earnings growth. In all columns we control for county and year fixed effects as well as by the interaction between the
Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military, state
and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with highschool and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Panel A - UI Generosity = Log(Max Weekly Benefits)
(1)

(2)
Employment in NonEmployment Growth
Tradable Sector
Bartik Shock × Log(Max Weekly Benefits)

(3)
Employment in
Tradable Sector

(4)

(5)

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.05
(0.03)
1.25***
(0.08)

-0.09*
(0.05)
0.50***
(0.11)

0.00
(0.03)
1.83***
(0.22)

-0.23**
(0.10)
1.66***
(0.25)

-0.06*
(0.03)
1.22***
(0.08)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R-squared

46,050
0.08

46,050
0.01

46,050
0.01

33,755
0.03

46,050
0.08

Number of counties

3,070

3,070

3,070

3,070

3,070

Bartik Shock

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Bartik Shock × Controls

Table A.5
Excluding the Financial Crisis
The table reports coefficient estimates of regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik shock. The full sample includes
the period 1999-2007. In Column 1 the dependent variable is employment growth, while in Column 2 and 3 it is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector
respectively. In Column 4 we investigate the effect of UI and Bartik shock on the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the
earnings growth. We control for the interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing,
government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median income,democratic share and the
fraction of individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment Growth

Employment in NonTradable Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.07**
(0.03)
1.31***
(0.12)

-0.11**
(0.05)
0.46***
(0.15)

-0.06
(0.07)
1.92***
(0.28)

-0.29**
(0.13)
0.99**
(0.47)

-0.02
(0.04)
1.16***
(0.11)

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

27,630
0.08
3,070

27,630
0.01
3,070

27,630
0.01
3,070

21,480
0.01
3,069

27,630
0.09
3,070

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Table A.6
State-Specific Trends
The table reports coefficient estimates of regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance generosity and Bartik
shock controlling for state-specific trends. The full sample includes the period 1999-2013. In Column 1 the dependent variable is employment
growth, while in Column 2 and 3 it is the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector respectively. In Column 4 we investigate the
effect of UI and Bartik shock on the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings growth.
We control for the interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction,
manufacturing, government (which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log
of median income,democratic share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)
Employment
Growth
Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
State Linear and Quadratic Trends
Bartik Shock × Controls
Observations
R-squared
Number of fips

(2)
Employment in
Non-Tradable
Sector

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.06**
(0.03)
1.19***
(0.07)

-0.12***
(0.04)
0.46***
(0.11)

-0.03
(0.04)
1.76***
(0.20)

-0.30***
(0.07)
1.60***
(0.28)

-0.07***
(0.02)
1.08***
(0.07)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

46,050
0.07
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

46,050
0.01
3,070

33,755
0.03
3,070

46,050
0.07
3,070

Table A.7
State Level Evidence (No Year FE)
The table reports coefficient estimates of weighted least square regressions relating economic activity measured at the state level to the unemployment insurance generosity, as
measured by the Replacement Rate, and Bartik shock using as weights the population in 2000. In Columns 1-3 the dependent variable is employment growth, and employment
growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector. Columns 4-6 distinguish between total consumption growth, durable goods and car sales. Car sales is the dollar amount spend on
cars as provided by the BEA. Column 7 reports the results for income growth. The data is provided by BEA, and the full sample includes the period 1999-2013. In all columns we
control for state fixed effects and the interaction between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing, government
(which includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median income,democratic share and the fraction of
individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)
Employment
Growth
Bartik Shock × UI Generosity

(2)
Employment in
Non-Tradable
Sector

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Total Consumption
Growth

Durable Goods
Growth

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

-0.05
(0.04)
0.95***
(0.03)

-0.10***
(0.04)
0.72***
(0.03)

-0.06*
(0.03)
1.24***
(0.03)

-0.03*
(0.02)
0.75***
(0.01)

-0.08**
(0.04)
1.16***
(0.03)

-0.13**
(0.06)
0.76***
(0.05)

-0.06**
(0.03)
1.04***
(0.02)

State Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Observations
R-squared
Number of States

765
0.80
51

765
0.47
51

765
0.46
51

765
0.57
51

765
0.33
51

765
0.10
51

765
0.64
51

Bartik Shock

Table A.8
Unweighted Regressions
The table reports coefficient estimates of unweighted regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance
generosity measured by the replacement rate and Bartik shock. In Panel A the full sample includes the period 1999-2013 and restrict attention
to counties whose population is higher than 75 thousand. Panel B reports the results for unweighted regressions at the commuting zones level
for CZ with a population higher than 150 thousand. In Column 1 the dependent variable is employment growth, while in Column 2 and 3 it is
the employment growth in the non-tradable and tradable sector respectively. In Column 4 we investigate the effect of UI and Bartik shock on
the car sales growth measure as provided by Polk. In Column 5 the dependent variable is the earnings growth. We control for the interaction
between the Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing, government (which
includes federal, military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median income,democratic
share and the fraction of individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote
significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

(1)
Employment
Growth

Geographical Level= Counties
(2)
(3)
(4)
Employment in
Employment in
Non-Tradable
Car Sales
Tradable Sector
Sector

(5)
Earnings Growth

-0.03
(0.03)
1.26***
(0.07)

-0.07*
(0.04)
0.52***
(0.09)

0.01
(0.05)
1.90***
(0.28)

-0.25***
(0.07)
1.82***
(0.24)

-0.05**
(0.02)
1.23***
(0.08)

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

10,095
0.08
673

10,095
0.01
673

10,095
0.02
673

7,403
0.04
673

10,095
0.10
673

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Geographical Level= Commuting Zones

-0.01
(0.01)
0.86***
(0.06)

-0.06***
(0.02)
0.58***
(0.07)

-0.00
(0.03)
1.17***
(0.20)

-0.18***
(0.06)
1.79***
(0.24)

-0.03**
(0.01)
0.96***
(0.06)

CZ Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

4,530
0.08
302

4,530
0.04
302

4,530
0.02
302

3,322
0.03
302

4,530
0.08
302

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity
Bartik Shock

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

Table A.9
Clustered at the County Level
The table reports coefficient estimates of weighted least square regressions relating the main dependent variables to the unemployment insurance
generosity and Bartik shock using as weights the population in 2000. The full sample includes the period 1999-2013. In Columns 1 the dependent
variable is employment growth, in Columns 2 it is employment growth in the non-tradable sector, while in Columns 3 we investigate the effect of UI
and Bartik shock on the employment in the tradable sectors. In Columns 4 we analyze the effect of UI on car sales growth as provided by Polk, while
in Columns 5 the dependent variable is earnings growth. In all columns we control for county and year fixed effects as well as the interaction of the
Bartik shock and the controls. Controls include the fraction of employees in construction, manufacturing, government (which includes federal,
military, state and local government), self-employed and services industries as well as the log of median income,democratic share and the fraction of
individuals with high-school and college degree. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%,
*=10%).

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Employment
Growth

Employment in
Non-Tradable
Sector

Employment in
Tradable Sector

Car Sales

Earnings Growth

Bartik Shock × UI Generosity

-0.06***

-0.12***

-0.01

-0.27***

-0.07***

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.03)

(0.05)

(0.02)

Bartik Shock

1.25***

0.51***

1.82***

1.69***

1.23***

(0.06)

(0.07)

(0.14)

(0.20)

(0.06)

County Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Bartik Shock × Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

46,050

46,050

46,050

33,755

46,050

0.08

0.02

0.01

0.03

0.08

3,070

3,070

3,070

3,070

3,070

Observations
R-squared
Number of Counties

1

Technical Appendix

1.1

Construction of the Bartik Shocks

Our construction of the Bartik shock using County Business Pattern (CBP) data proceeds
in …ve steps. A brief-description of each step is below. We calculate the shocks separately
at the state, Commuting Zone (CZ) and county levels. Note: we have only tested the code
up to NAICS 4-digit aggregation.
1.1.1

Step 1: Create bridges for each NAICS change

There are minor changes in NAICS codes in 2002 and 2007. This step creates an employmentweighted bridge for each NAICS cell. We download bridges from the Census.

1

The SIC-

NAICS mapping will always be problematic, but the NAICS changes are relatively minor
and the weighted mappings seem to work well.
There was also a change in NAICS codes in 2012, but the Census Core Statistics bridge
will not be released until June 2016.2
1.1.2

Step3. Combine bridges

This step combines all the weighted bridges constructed above: NAICS1997 to NAICS 2002,
and NAICS2002 to NAICS2007.
1.1.3

Step 4. Load and clean CBP data

This step loads and cleans the raw County Business Patterns (CBP) data.3
Many smaller counties and industries have employment data that are suppressed by the
Census Bureau for privacy reasons. In these cases, we use the number of establishments
multiplied by the midpoint of the number of employees in each size class.
1

http://fact…nder.census.gov/ (IDs: EC0700CBDG1, EC0700CBDG2, EC0200CBDG1, EC0200CBDG2).
See here for an update: http://www.census.gov/econ/census/help/sector/core_business_statistics_series.html
3
Raw CBP data are downloaded from: http://www.census.gov/econ/cbp/download/
2

1

If the selected level of geography is a Commuting Zone (CZ), this step also recodes county
FIPS codes to their 2000 FIPS membership, for matching with the county-CZ bridge downloaded from http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/commuting-zones-and-labor-market-areas.aspx
We replace any missing Geography X Industry X Year cell with a 0.
1.1.4

Step5 - Construct Bartik Shock

This step constructs the Bartik shocks for each of the two datasets with di¤erent balance
assumptions. The Bartik shock is de…ned as:

bi;t =

X

i;k;

[(

i;k;t

i;k;t 1 )=

i;k;t 1 ]

k

Where:

i;k;

is the employment share of industry k in geography i,

employment share of industry k excluding geography i.

i;k;t

is the national

is the base year, described in more

detail below.
First, we construct employment growth rates by industry, leaving out employment in the
geography (the term in square brackets above).
Second, we construct the industry weights using base year as 1998. We have also tried
di¤erent base years going back to 1989 and the result is mainly unchanged. We also construct
separate weights when we exclude non-tradable industries and construction.
Finally, we multiply the growth rates by the weights and sum over all industries in a
given geography and year. We also do this separately for the non-tradable industries.

1.2

Construction of Replacement Ratio and Take-Up Rate

We calculate replacement rates for unemployment insurance and other public bene…ts using
the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) to the Current Population Survey
(also known as the March CPS). We download the relevant variables from the Minnesota

2

Population Center’s Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS-CPS).4 The March
CPS asks households about income from unemployment insurance and labor earnings over
the previous year, as well as weeks worked and weeks unemployed over the previous year.
For the sample of households who report at least one week of unemployment, we use these
variables to calculate an unemployment insurance e¤ective “take-up” rate and an e¤ective
“replacement ratio.”
We de…ne the take-up rate as reporting positive UI bene…ts last year. An individual
who reported positive weeks of unemployment and who reported no UI bene…ts last year is
classi…ed as not taking up UI. Reasons for not taking up UI include ineligibility for bene…ts,
administrative costs (such as applying and submitting work logs), among other reasons.
The replacement ratio is de…ned as follows:
replacement ratio = ($ UI Bene…ts last year / Weeks unemployed last year)
/ ($ Labor Income last year / Weeks Worked last year )
The numerator is the average weekly bene…t amount, and the denominator is the average
weekly wage. Again, the replacement rate is de…ned only for people who reported at least 1
week of unemployment.
We make a few sample restrictions: We restrict to people in the labor force (working or
unemployed) for all weeks in the year. So that the weekly wage is well estimated, we restrict
the sample to people who worked at least 6 months out of the year.
We pool samples from survey years 1997-2001 (which actually refer to calendar years
1996-2000 since the survey is retrospective) to get reasonable sample sizes at the state level
and calculate the mean replacement ratio and takeup rate by state.
4

Miriam King, Steven Ruggles, J. Trent Alexander, Sarah Flood, Katie Genadek, Matthew B. Schroeder,
Brandon Trampe, and Rebecca Vick. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey:
Version 3.0. [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and
distributor], 2010.

3

1.3

De…nition of Tradable Industries, Non-tradable Industries and
Construction Sector

We follow Mian and Su… (2015) de…nition of tradable and non-tradable sectors. Here we
should emphasize that there will be man y industries that are not classied neither as a
tradable industry nor as a non-tradable.
Tradable industries are de…ned as any industry with the NAICs code equal to: 1132 1141
2111 2121 2122 2123 3111 3112 3113 3114 3115 3116 3117 3118 3119 3121 3122 3131 3132
3133 3335 3149 3151 3152 3159 3161 3162 3169 3221 3222 3231 3241 3251 3252 3253 3254
3255 3256 3259 3261 3262 3271 3272 3279 3311 3313 3314 3315 3322 3324 3325 3326 3327
3329 3331 3332 3333 3334 3335 3336 3339 3341 3342 3343 3344 3345 3346 3351 3352 3353
3359 3361 3362 3363 3364 3365 3366 3369 3372 3391 3399 5112.
These mainly include agriculture, mining, manufacturing and software publishers.
Non-tradable industries are any industry with the NAICS code equal to: 4451 4452 4453
4461 4471 4481 4482 4483 4511 4512 4521 4529 4531 4532 4533 4539 7221 7222 7223 7224
4411 4412 4413 4421 4422 4431.
These mainly includes retail trade and restaurants.
Finally construction is de…ned as any industry with NAICS code equalt to: 1133 2361
2362 2371 2372 2373 2381 2382 2383 2389 3211 3212 3219 3273 3323 3371 4233 4441 4442
5311 5312 5313 5413.

4

