                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        HOW QUANTITATIVE EASING WORKS:
                      EVIDENCE ON THE REFINANCING CHANNEL

                                      Marco Di Maggio
                                        Amir Kermani
                                      Christopher Palmer

                                      Working Paper 22638
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22638


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016


A previous version of this paper was circulated under the title, “Unconventional Monetary Policy
and the Allocation of Credit.” For helpful comments and discussions, we thank our discussants,
Florian Heider, Anil Kashyap, Deborah Lucas, Philipp Schnabl, and Felipe Severino; Adam
Ashcraft, Charles Calomiris, Andreas Fuster, Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Michael Johannes, David Romer, David Scharfstein, Jeremy Stein, Johannes
Stroebel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, and Paul Willen; workshop
participants at Berkeley and Columbia; and seminar participants at NBER Monetary Economics,
the Econometric Society 2016 Meetings, the EEA 2016 meetings, Federal Reserve Board, HEC
Paris, Northwestern-Kellogg, NYU-Stern, NY Fed/NYU Stern Conference on Financial
Intermediation, the Paul Woolley Conference at LSE, Penn State, San Francisco Federal Reserve,
Stanford, Stanford GSB, St. Louis Fed Monetary Policy and the Distribution of Income and
Wealth Conference, University of Minnesota-Carlson, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, and USC-Price. We also thank Sam Hughes, Sanket Korgaonkar, Christopher Lako,
and Jason Lee for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani, and Christopher Palmer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Quantitative Easing Works: Evidence on the Refinancing Channel
Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani, and Christopher Palmer
NBER Working Paper No. 22638
September 2016, Revised September 2016
JEL No. E21,E58,E65,G01,G18,G21,R28

                                         ABSTRACT

Despite massive large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) by central banks around the world since the
global financial crisis, there is a lack of empirical evidence on whether and how these programs
affect the real economy. Using rich borrower-linked mortgage-market data, we document that
there is a “flypaper effect” of LSAPs, where the transmission of unconventional monetary policy
to interest rates and (more importantly) origination volumes depends crucially on the assets
purchased and degree of segmentation in the market. For example, QE1, which involved
significant purchases of GSE-guaranteed mortgages, increased GSE-eligible mortgage
originations significantly more than the origination of GSE-ineligible mortgages. In contrast,
QE2’s focus on purchasing Treasuries did not have such differential effects. We find that the
Fed’s purchase of MBS (rather than exclusively Treasuries) during QE1 resulted in an additional
$600 billion of refinancing, substantially reducing interest payments for refinancing households,
leading to a boom in equity extraction, and increasing consumption by an additional $76 billion.
This de facto allocation of credit across mortgage market segments, combined with sharp
bunching around GSE eligibility cutoffs, establishes an important complementarity between
monetary policy and macroprudential housing policy. Our counterfactual simulations estimate
that relaxing GSE eligibility requirements would have significantly increased refinancing activity
in response to QE1, including a 20% increase in equity extraction by households. Overall, our
results imply that central banks could most effectively provide unconventional monetary stimulus
by supporting the origination of debt that would not be originated otherwise.

Marco Di Maggio                                 Christopher Palmer
Harvard Business School                         Haas School of Business
Baker Library 265                               University of California, Berkeley
Soldiers Field                                  545 Student Services Building #1900
Boston, MA 02163                                Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                        cjpalmer@berkeley.edu
mdimaggio@hbs.edu

Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
kermani@berkeley.edu
1       Introduction

In recent years, many central banks have undertaken unconventional monetary policy to stimulate

their economies, mainly through long-duration large-scale asset purchase programs (LSAPs). A

common feature of these programs is their significant size; the Federal Reserve, for example, has

increased the size of its balance sheet more than fivefold ($3.6 trillion) since 2008 (see Figure 1).

However, LSAPs have varied significantly in the type of assets purchased by central banks, e.g.,

from Treasuries and Agency debt in the U.S. to ETFs and corporate bonds in Japan. Despite

the newfound popularity of LSAPs worldwide, their eﬀectiveness and the channels through which

they aﬀect the real economy have been at the center of a vigorous policy and academic debate.

We contribute to this debate by investigating the channels through which LSAPs impact the real

economy and, in particular, household debt issuance.1

    There is no clear consensus on whether LSAPs do benefit an economy or on potential transmis-

sion mechanisms. Non-standard open-market operations are inconsequential in a frictionless world,

as shown by Wallace (1981) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). Moving away from a friction-

less world, the literature on unconventional monetary policy has suggested multiple explanations

for why LSAPs may have real eﬀects. We highlight three of these pathways—see Krishnamurthy

and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) for a comprehensive treatment of such channels along with empirical

evidence from asset yields on the relative importance of each. First, under the portfolio-balancing

channel, the central bank aﬀects the return of diﬀerent assets by aﬀecting their relative supply.2

Second, the segmentation channel posits that LSAPs are eﬀective when capital-constrained inter-

mediaries in the secondary market are unable to arbitrage in the short run across diﬀerent market

segments (e.g., Vayanos and Vila, 2009, He and Krishnamurthy, 2013 and Greenwood et al., 2015).3

Third, the capital-constraints channel highlights how LSAPs can oﬀset the decline in private lend-

    1
      As discussed below, the “what you buy matters” point was first made by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen
(2011) using asset prices and credit spreads.
    2
      LSAPs could have real eﬀects by taking safe assets out of the market and therefore inducing cautious investors
to take more risk. For related arguments, see Gurley and Shaw (1960), Tobin and Brainard (1963), Tobin (1969),
and Brunner et al. (1973).
    3
      We refer to this channel as the duration-segmentation channel if the inhibiting segmentation is along asset
duration. The key assumption in these models is that most investors in the asset market specialize in trading a specific
asset class–or have strong preferences for a specific asset class–while there are few capital-constrained intermediaries
who arbitrage between diﬀerent markets. Thus, by directly purchasing specific assets, the Fed increases the price of
that asset class more than others in the short run. The more constrained the arbitrageurs are, the longer it will take
other asset class prices to be aﬀected by the LSAPs.


                                                           2
ing from disruptions in financial intermediation (see Gertler and Karadi, 2011 and Curdia and

Woodford, 2011).4

    Under the portfolio-balancing and duration-segmentation channels, only the duration (or riski-

ness) of assets purchased drives their eﬀectiveness because investors will reallocate their resources to

other similar assets not purchased by the central bank. However, if investors specialize in trading a

specific asset class, or if the financial intermediation sector is constrained, there will be only limited

spillovers of central-bank purchases to other asset classes, and the eﬀectiveness and allocative eﬀects

of LSAPs will depend on not only the duration but also the specific type of assets purchased. In

other words, to the extent that portfolio rebalancing or duration-segmentation is driving the eﬀec-

tiveness of LSAPs, we should observe spillovers from central-bank purchases to other assets with

similar duration. An absence of such spillovers would support the view that LSAPs stimulate real

activity through the capital constraints channel/narrow-segmentation channel. This paper provides

new empirical evidence for this narrow segmentation channel.

    Identifying the eﬀects of aggregate policies is particularly challenging given that such policies

intentionally respond to current and anticipated aggregate shocks. For traction, most of the litera-

ture has used event studies of short-run asset-price changes immediately surrounding central bank

policy announcements. We supplement such before/after comparisons with an identification strat-

egy that exploits the segmentation of the U.S. mortgage market and the legal restriction that the

Fed can only purchase mortgages guaranteed by the Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs).

The outstanding balance on GSE-guaranteed mortgages must be less than so-called conforming

loan limits and must have loan-to-value ratios at or below 80 percent.5 This allows us to estimate

the eﬀects of quantitative easing by contrasting how each LSAP campaign aﬀected refinancing ac-

tivities in the conforming and non-conforming segments. Specifically, finding spillovers between

these two segments supports the portfolio-rebalancing channel or duration-segmentation channels

of unconventional monetary policy, while rejecting spillovers would be more consistent with the

   4
      In contrast to the segmentation channel, the capital constraint channel highlights the role of loan originators,
rather than investors in the secondary market, being constrained. It posits that disruptions in private lending might
be alleviated by the Fed’s financing of loans to the most aﬀected sectors, i.e. Fed supporting mortgage originations
in response to the housing market crash.
    5
      An important exception to the 80% LTV cutoﬀ was made possible by the Home Aﬀordable Refinancing Program
(HARP), a policy we show had visible eﬀects on the eﬀectiveness of Fed MBS purchases. Additionally, mortgages
with (often expensive) private mortgage insurance (PMI) are exempt from the 80% LTV requirement, although the
PMI industry was virtually nonexistent in 2009.


                                                          3
capital-constraints or narrow segmentation channels.

   We start our analysis by considering the changes in mortgage interest rates. Consistent with

existing work, we find that interest rates decreased by more than 100 basis points on average in

response to the beginning of QE1. However, we show that interest rates on jumbo loans decreased

significantly less, increasing the jumbo-conforming spread by 40-50 basis points. By contrast, QE2,

the Maturity Extension Program (MEP or “Operation Twist”) enacted in September 2011, and

QE3 led to overall mortgage rate reductions of 20-40 basis points without detectable diﬀerential

eﬀects across conforming and non-conforming segments. We also investigate the eﬀects of the Fed’s

decision to taper its MBS purchases starting in June 2013, finding that rates increased in response

by about 25 basis points more for the conforming segment than the non-conforming segment.

   We then turn to examining the main question of the paper, how unconventional monetary policy

aﬀected the volume of new mortgages issued. We find that financial institutions more than tripled

their monthly origination of mortgages that were eligible for purchase by the Fed around the an-

nouncement of QE1, while the origination of loans above the conforming loan limits increased only

modestly. Next, we verify that this heterogeneity in the mortgage market response to QE1 was a

function of the type of debt the central bank purchased, by contrasting the eﬀect of various QE

episodes. As shown in Figure 3 and discussed in more detail in Section 3, QE1 and QE3 involved

MBS and Treasury purchases, while QE2 purchases consisted exclusively of Treasuries. We show

that MBS purchases had a relatively immediate and economically significant eﬀect on refinancing

activity. QE1 in particular, which occurred at a time when the banking sector was much less healthy

than in QE3, had a much stronger impact on the origination of mortgages that were eligible to be

bundled into the type of MBS that the Fed was purchasing, with more modest eﬀects on other types

of mortgages. We estimate that QE1 increased refinance-mortgage origination by over $600 billion,

substantially reducing interest payments for refinancing households and resulting in larger average

annual savings than the one-time stimulus checks. Our back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest

that these savings and the corresponding boom in equity extraction increased mortgagors’ consump-

tion by $76 billion. Importantly, we find that the QE1-induced reduction in interest rates can only

explain about 25–45% of the observed increase in the refinancing volume, meaning that most of the

increase in the origination of refinance loans was directly attributable to the Fed purchasing MBS

rather than an indirect eﬀect of lowering long-maturity yields market-wide.

                                                4
    Our focus on quantities has several advantages over studies that rely on high-frequency event

studies of asset prices. Asset prices respond immediately to central bank announcements, making it

unlikely that other shocks hit market prices in narrow windows around QE announcements. How-

ever, market price reactions in the immediate short run might be very diﬀerent from the programs’

eﬀects in the longer run.6 Second, event-study papers investigate secondary-market yields.7 To

the extent that the pass-through of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) yields to primary-market

mortgage interest rates is imperfect during this period (as documented in Fuster et al., 2013 and

Scharfstein and Sunderam, 2013), these studies may overstate the real eﬀect of LSAPs. More im-

portantly, interest rates are observed conditional on origination, meaning that inferring the eﬀects

of unconventional monetary policy by merely looking at interest rate changes will be an overstate-

ment by assuming perfect availability of credit.8 This motivates our focus on the detection of “real

eﬀects,” specifically the eﬀects of credit easing on the primary mortgage market induced by LSAPs

as distinct from eﬀects on financial variables like asset prices and interest rates.

    To identify the causal impacts of LSAPs, we account for time-varying credit demand and supply

shocks that might otherwise confound our results. First, our loan-level dataset combines agency

and non-agency mortgages, allowing us, for example, to compare observationally similar loans above

and below the conforming loan limit that are plausibly exposed to the same shocks to funding

and fundamentals. Event studies support this parallel trends assumption, particularly with our

specifications’ tight windows around policy dates. Further steps to address demand shocks include

focusing on refinance mortgages, which are mainly driven by changes in interest rates as opposed

to changes in the demand for housing (purchase mortgages), and controlling for regional shocks

to fundamentals (income, house prices, expectations, etc.) by controlling for county ⇥ month

eﬀects. Several additional measures suggest that our results are not driven by segment-specific

credit supply shocks. We focus our analysis on the post-2008 period to avoid making inferences

oﬀ of the asset-backed securities market disruptions that diﬀerentially aﬀected the jumbo-lending

market as it transitioned away from being heavily reliant on private securitization (Chernenko,

   6
      This can be either because of partial segmentation of diﬀerent asset classes as in Greenwood et al. (2015) or
because investors’ understanding of the eﬀectiveness of LSAPs changes over time.
    7
      A notable exception is Hancock and Passmore (2011), who look for eﬀects on primary-market mortgage rates.
    8
      The preponderance of fixed-rate mortgages in the United States means that most households need to qualify
for a new refinance mortgage to benefit from monetary stimulus, excluding underwater fixed-rate borrowers (and
fixed-rate borrowers who cannot qualify for new refinance mortgages) from the direct benefits of QE.


                                                        5
Hanson, and Sunderam, 2014). We also show that our results are robust to the inclusion of time-

series controls proxying for segment-specific shocks to funding availability (BBB-AAA credit spreads,

GSE guarantee fee changes, and premia on bank credit default swaps).

   Finally, we complement this mortgage-level evidence with borrower-level evidence using a novel

dataset linking mortgages to borrowers and their credit bureau information to track borrowers before

and after they take out a new mortgage to study how households responded to the diﬀerential

improvement of the GSE-eligible segment of the mortgage market. Theoretically, refinancing can

aﬀect consumption through three diﬀerent channels. First, savings from lower monthly payments

result in immediately higher disposable income (Di Maggio et al., 2014 and Keys et al., 2014).

Second, the present value of lower interest payments functions as a positive (albeit illiquid) wealth

shock for borrowers even absent any change in monthly payments. While both these channels

support increased consumption by refinancers, a third channel might amplify or mitigate the strength

of such a response in aggregate. When borrowers have insuﬃcient equity to refinance, they may

cash-in refinance by bringing cash to closing to take out a smaller loan than their previous one,

decreasing their stock of liquid wealth but also decreasing the present value of their mortgage

liability. Conversely, borrowers with suﬃcient equity may choose to cash-out refinance, with the

opposite implication for cash-on-hand and possibly with a diﬀerent impact on consumption (Kaplan

and Violante, 2014 and Greenwald, 2016).

   This eﬀect is indeed sizable; over 35% of jumbo borrowers who refinanced from 2008–2013

took out a GSE-eligible loan, on average paying down their original mortgages by $73,000.9 A

similar fraction of borrowers who refinance loans with current LTVs over 80 percent engage in

cash-in refinancing, on average paying down $9,000 of mortgage principal. Importantly, we also

find that the Home Aﬀordable Refinancing Program (HARP) alleviated this deleveraging behavior

significantly by allowing eligible high-LTV borrowers refinancing opportunities, highlighting the

complementarity between unconventional monetary policy and other interventions in the mortgage

market. However, our counterfactual exercise finds that a simple countercyclical macroprudential

policy lever raising the GSE LTV eligibility cutoﬀ from 80% to 90% would have resulted in a 16%

increase in refinanced loans and a 20% increase in equity cashed out, further supporting aggregate


   9
       Note that this cashing-in is not driven by splitting the mortgages into a GSE-eligible first lien and a second lien.


                                                             6
demand.10

     Quantitative Easing works through a refinancing channel by improving credit availability and

lowering interest rates for aﬀected households. Aggregate demand increases from refinancing house-

holds consuming much of their cashed-out equity and monthly mortgage payment savings. The

targeted nature of the Fed’s MBS purchase program coupled with its lack of spillovers during QE1

means that Fed purchases de facto allocated credit within the mortgage market towards GSE-eligible

borrowers. An immediate implication of this lack of reallocation is that the borrowers who benefit-

ted the most from monetary stimulus during the recession had relatively high levels of home equity

or cash-on-hand and disproportionately lived in the least hard-hit areas.

     The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant academic literature on monetary

policy transmission. Section 3 provides further background on the Federal Reserve’s Quantitative

Easing program as well as institutional details about the credit markets we study in this paper.

Sections 4 and 5 detail the data sources used in our analysis and our research design, respectively.

Section 6 presents our results on debt origination, household behavior, along with several alternative

specifications and robustness checks to address threats to validity. Section 7 uses our empirical

model to simulate the amount of refinancing that would have occurred under a counterfactual

macroprudential policy of countercyclical LTV caps. Finally, Section 8 summarizes and concludes

with a discussion of policy implications.



2        Related Literature

The main contribution of this paper is to provide evidence that the Fed de facto allocated credit

through LSAPs and to show that these programs had limited spillovers to other assets. It con-

tributes to the empirical literature on LSAPs which generally finds that targeted asset purchases

and/or direct extensions of credit to private borrowers by the Fed and other central banks have

aﬀected equilibrium rates of return, including Ashcraft et al. (2011), Baba et al. (2006), Gagnon et

al. (2010), Hancock and Passmore (2011), Sarkar and Shrader (2010), Stroebel and Taylor (2012)



    10
     This increase would have been more than HARP achieved its first year. As discussed below, HARP’s eﬀectiveness
was limited relative to increasing the LTV cap because HARP did not allow borrowers to cash-out. We find that
cash-out refinances can play a large role in supporting aggregate demand.


                                                        7
and Swanson (2015).11 The key studies we build on are Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen

(2011, 2013), who, among other things, illustrate that QE1 MBS purchases aﬀected MBS yields

more than QE2 Treasury purchases. In addition to providing corroborating evidence on the eﬀects

of QE on asset returns as highlighted by these papers, we complement this literature by docu-

menting how LSAPs shaped the refinancing activities in the aftermath of the crisis, finding that

the previously documented yield curve changes explain some of the change in debt issuance but

ultimately underpredict the eﬀectiveness (and heterogenous eﬀects of) QE.

    Our results also inform the growing theoretical literature studying the eﬀects of unconventional

monetary policy. Until the financial crisis, the benchmark theory for many macroeconomists has

always been that non-standard open market operations in private assets are irrelevant as shown first

by Wallace (1981), and extended to models with nominal frictions, money in the utility function

and zero nominal interest rate by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). The idea in these papers is

that once the nominal interest rate reaches its lower bound, liquidity has no further role in this class

of economies, or in most other standard models with various types of frictions, such as Rotemberg

and Woodford (1997) or Christiano et al. (2005).

    In the aftermath of the crisis, other studies have highlighted the mechanisms through which

unconventional monetary policy can have a significant impact. For instance, Curdia and Woodford

(2011) provide a model with heterogeneous agents and imperfections in private financial intermedi-

ation to demonstrate that quantitative easing will aﬀect the economy provided either 1) the increase

in reserves increases central-bank lending to the private sector or 2) the policy changes expecta-

tions about how future interest-rate policy will be conducted, both of which seem to be satisfied by

QE1. Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2015) show that monetary policy can work against the adverse

feedback loops that precipitate crises by aﬀecting the prices of assets held by constrained agents

and redistributing wealth. Drechsler et al. (2014) point out the role played by large-scale asset

purchases, equity injections, and asset guarantees in supporting risky asset prices. Del Negro et

al. (2011) investigate the eﬀects of interventions in which the government provides liquidity in ex-

change for illiquid private paper once the nominal interest rate reaches the zero bound. Similarly,

Gertler and Karadi (2011) show in the context of a DSGE model of unconventional monetary pol-
  11
    See also Chodorow-Reich (2014) and Di Maggio and Kacperczyk (2015), who study the impact of unconventional
monetary policy on diﬀerent sectors of the financial markets, such as pension funds, insurance companies, and money
market funds.


                                                        8
icy that during a crisis, the balance sheet constraints on private intermediaries tighten, raising the

net benefits from central bank intermediation. These benefits may be substantial when the zero

lower bound constraint binds. Greenwood et al. (2015) demonstrate that understanding market

segmentation is important in designing and evaluating LSAPs.

    Our paper is also related to a broader strand of the literature that investigates the channels

through which monetary policy impacts banks’ lending decisions. In a seminal paper, Kashyap and

Stein (2000) provide evidence of the bank lending channel of the transmission of (conventional)

monetary policy. More recently, Jimenez et al. (2014) show that a lower overnight interest rate

induces less capitalized banks to lend to riskier firms, while Jimenez et al. (2012) show that for dis-

tressed banks, tighter monetary policy and worse economic conditions substantially reduce lending.

Agarwal et al. (2015b) estimate banks’ marginal propensity to lend out of a decrease in their cost of

funds to show that banks were reluctant to lend to riskier borrowers in the aftermath of the crisis.

Maddaloni and Peydro (2011) find that low short-term interest rates for an extended period eventu-

ally soften lending standards for household and corporate loans.12 Finally, Chakraborty, Goldstein

and MacKinlay (2016) and Rodnyansky and Darmouni (2016) look explicitly at the eﬀect of QE

on bank lending, with the former showing that the banks that are more active in the MBS market

increased their mortgage origination market share following the LSAPs, and the latter finding that

MBS purchases have important implications for which banks are able to increase credit supply in

response to QE3. We add to these studies by uncovering the impact of unconventional monetary

policy on individual household refinancing decisions, highlighting the heterogenous allocation of

unconventional monetary stimulus.13

    Finally, we also contribute to the literature investigating the redistributional consequences of

monetary policy, e.g., Doepke and Schneider (2006), Fuster and Willen (2010), Coibion et al. (2012),

Sterk and Tenreyro (2014). Particularly related to our study is Beraja et al. (2015), who use the

same borrower-linked refinance data we do to show that the heterogeneous regional eﬀects of QE1

covary with regional economic conditions and amplify existing regional disparities.



  12
     See also Bernanke and Blinder (1988), Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992), Landier et al. (2013), Stein (2012)
and Williamson (2012).
  13
     For the international channel of unconventional monetary policy transmission, see Bauer and Neely (2014) and
Caballero et al. (2015).


                                                       9
3        Background

In this section, we provide a brief summary of the Federal Reserve’s Quantitative Easing program

and discuss how its MBS purchases were conducted on the secondary mortgage market. For ref-

erence, Figure 2 provides a timeline of the various Fed LSAP programs.14 QE1 lasted from late

November 2008 until March 2010, and QE2 was first announced in mid-August 2010 and ran from

November 2010 to June 2011. We consider QE2 to have begun in September 2010 when the Fed

signaled that it was considering a second round of monetary stimulus.15 In September 2011, the Fed

began a program known as the Maturity Extension Program (MEP) or Operation Twist. Under the

MEP, the Federal Reserve reduced the supply of longer-term Treasury securities in the market by

selling and redeeming about $600 billion in shorter-term Treasury securities and using the proceeds

to buy longer-term Treasuries.16 QE3 was announced in September 2012 and we treat the beginning

of the Fed’s tapering its MBS purchases as June 2013, following Bernanke’s tapering announcement

on May 22, 2013.

     In late November 2008, the Fed announced its mortgage-buying program with the intent to

purchase about $500 billion in mortgage-backed securities, consisting of mortgages guaranteed by

Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and to a lesser extent, Ginnie Mae. In March 2009, the Fed announced

an expansion to this program, subsequently purchasing an additional $750 billion in mortgage-

backed securities with 50-70% of agency originations each month ending up on the Fed’s balance

sheet (Appendix Figure 1). The first quantitative easing program ended in the first quarter of

2010, with a total of $1.25 trillion in purchases of mortgage-backed securities and $175 billion of

agency debt purchases.17 Figure 3 depicts the gross amount of MBS purchased and sold by the Fed

since beginning LSAPs. During QE1, the Fed purchased both MBS and Treasuries with a greater

emphasis on MBS purchases. QE2, on the other hand, was exclusively focused on Treasuries, and

QE3 was roughly equally weighted between Treasuries and MBS. The Maturity Extension Program
    14
       As detailed in Appendix Table 1, where possible, we have relied on the dates provided by Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2013).
    15
       Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2013) found that most of the market reaction to QE2 was when it was
first signaled in September 2010. Interest rates actually increased after the oﬃcial announcement in November 2010
as it failed to live up to market expectations.
    16
       See Foley-Fisher, Ramcharan, and Yu (2014) for a recent paper on the eﬀect of this program on firms’ financing
constraints.
    17
       Notably, the Fed was eﬀectively able to purchase $1.85 trillion (about 40% more than the usually reported $1.25
trillion amount of net purchases) by contemporaneously reselling a substantial fraction of these securities, perhaps
enhancing market liquidity without further expanding the Fed balance sheet.


                                                         10
led to roughly equally sized purchases and sales of Treasuries, as well as the reinvestment of prepaid

MBS principal into new Agency purchases. As Figure 3 shows, a greater fraction of each QE

campaign’s MBS purchases have occurred at the beginning of each program, with purchases slowly

declining over the course of each LSAP campaign.18 Figure 4 shows the relative magnitude of

GSE MBS net purchases compared with the total size of the GSE-guaranteed mortgage market.

During QE1, the volume of Fed purchases was similar in magnitude to the volume of new issuance

of GSE-guaranteed MBS. During QE3, Fed net GSE MBS purchases were roughly half of the GSE

market.

    To comply with the Federal Reserve Act, Fed MBS purchases had to consist of government-

guaranteed debt. Contrary to popular perception, Fed MBS purchases did not involve buying

legacy (and underperforming) MBS from banks. Instead, Fed MBS purchases were on the TBA

(To-be Announced) mortgage market.19 A key feature of the Agency MBS market is the existence

of this highly liquid forward market, through which more than 90% of Agency MBS trading volume

occurs and which consists predominantly of newly originated mortgages (Vickery and Wright, 2013),

with trading volumes on the order of $200 billion per day and around $100 billion delivered each

month.20 Appendix Figure 1 confirms this by plotting the percentage of GSE-guaranteed MBS

issued in each quarter that are ultimately owned by the Fed. Less than 10% of pre-2008 GSE

issuance is owned by the Fed (and less than 20% of 2008 issuance) in contrast to more than half of

GSE MBS created during QE1. See Appendix A for additional details on the TBA market.21

    The characteristics of the TBA market matter both for conceptually understanding the chan-

nels through which Fed MBS purchases aﬀect the economy and also for econometric identification.

The eligibility requirements for mortgages to be included in TBAs provide sharp cross-sectional

predictions on the eﬀect of MBS purchases on loan originations. Because TBA delivery must be ac-

complished with Agency-eligible mortgages that are usually recent originations, the strict eligibility

  18
       Note that the policy of the Fed to reinvest principal prepaid on its MBS holdings into new MBS purchases results
in non-zero MBS purchases even after QE3 oﬃcially ends.
    19
       A limited number of the TBA securities purchased by the Fed at the beginning of QE1 included MBS CUSIPs
that had been originated in early 2008 instead of roughly contemporaneous with Fed purchases. Still, these were
GSE-eligible mortgages originated in 2008 and not the types of legacy MBS that were troubling banks, having been
filled with mortgages originated under questionable underwriting standards that were deeply underwater by 2009.
    20
       Note that the scale of the Fed MBS purchases could only be executed on a market with the unrivaled size and
liquidity of the TBA market.
    21
       The de facto restriction of QE purchases to newly originated debt contrasts with the emphasis on legacy assets
of the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), signed into law on October 3, 2008.


                                                          11
rules for GSE guarantees allow us to compare origination volumes by loan size. Specifically, GSE

guarantees require loan sizes to be beneath published conforming loan limits (CLLs).22 Mortgages

with a loan size exceeding geographically and time-varying CLLs (known as jumbo mortgages) are

essentially ineligible for inclusion in GSE MBS. Many of our results below will test for a deviation

in mortgage origination volume for loans just below the CLL, which should be directly aﬀected by

Fed purchases because of their TBA eligibility, and loans just above the CLL, which should only be

indirectly aﬀected by Fed MBS purchases.



4    Data

Our workhorse data source is the Equifax’s Credit Risk Insight Servicing McDash (CRISM) dataset,

which covers roughly 65 percent of the mortgage market during our sample period (2008-2013), first

used to examine the eﬀects of QE by Beraja et al. (2015). One of the features of this dataset is that it

merges McDash Analytics mortgage-servicing records (from Lender Processing Services) with credit

bureau data (from Equifax). This provides us with information about the characteristics of each

mortgage at origination, such as the mortgage type, the size of the loan, the monthly payments, the

interest rate, the borrower’s FICO, as well as their behavior over time. We also observe borrowers’

other liabilities, such as their auto loans, HELOCs, and credit cards. Panels I and II of Table 1

report loan-level summary statistics on conforming and jumbo loans from the CRISM database.

Our sample includes more than seven million loans below the conforming loan limit and about

170,000 jumbo loans. On average, non-jumbo (jumbo) borrowers in our sample have a 750 (760)

FICO score and an LTV of 67% (65%). The average balance of conforming and jumbo loans in our

data are $211,000 and $960,000, respectively. Panel III reports summary statistics for time series

controls used in robustness checks, including guarantee fees from Fuster et al. (2013) and bond

yields from Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The

guarantee fees, BBB-AAA bond spreads, and bank CDS spreads average 34, 134, and 177 basis

points, respectively, over our sample period.

    The unique advantage of this data is that it enables us to link multiple loans by the same borrower

together, allowing us to gather more complete information about a borrower’s refinancing decision.
   22
      See Adelino et al. (2013) and DeFusco and Paciorek (2015) for studies of the consequences of the sharp change
in GSE eligibility at the conforming loan limit.


                                                        12
In addition to following individual mortgages over time,we can match borrowers to mortgages,

observe each borrower in the credit bureau data six months before any mortgage origination, and

track the borrower as they refinance into a new mortgage. Appendix Table 2 demonstrates the

usefulness of this linkage, reporting a refinancing transition matrix of mortgage product types for

each year from 2006–2013. This dimension of the dataset (linking refinance mortgages to prior

mortgages) allows us to study cash-in/cash-out refinancing much more accurately. For example, by

observing the outstanding amount of the old loan and the principal amount of the new loan, we can

measure the dollar amount of equity that is added to the borrower’s position during the refinancing

process.



5     Empirical Strategy

In this section we present our main empirical strategy to identify the eﬀects of LSAPs on both

interest rates and refinancing volumes.


5.1    Quantifying the Eﬀect of QE on Interest Rates

In the spirit of the empirical QE literature’s focus on debt yields, we begin by comparing the interest-

rate reaction to LSAPs for loans above and below the conforming loan limit. To form a comparable

jumbo/conforming interest-rate sample, we only consider loans that are 30-year fixed-rate first-lien

mortgages secured by owner-occupied single-family houses with an initial LTV of less than 80%

and without any prepayment penalty or balloon-payment or interest-only deferred amortization

features.23 We also drop FHA mortgages for this exercise, which require mortgage insurance and

have more flexible lending requirements than those for conventional loans.

    Changes in borrower composition over time limit the usefulness of simple time-series comparisons

of interest rates. Instead, we take into account that rates change in response to changing mortgage-

borrower characteristics. For example, some of the decrease in interest rates that we observe is due

to stricter credit standards at the end of our sample—later mortgages feature both higher average

FICO scores and lower LTVs.


  23
     Appendix Table 2 shows that a third of all refinance mortgages are transitions from one 30-year fixed-rate
mortgage to another.


                                                      13
   To facilitate graphical comparisons of composition-adjusted interest rates over time, we estimate

the following regression (separately) for loans above and below the conforming loan limit

                       rit = ↵t +   1 (F ICOi   720) +   2 (LT Vi   0.75) + "it ,

where rit is the interest rate of loan i at time t measured in basis points. We control for the

diﬀerence between the FICO score and loan-to-value ratio of loan i and benchmark FICO and LTV

ratios such that estimated time eﬀects ↵t capture “rate-sheet–adjusted” interest rates—interest rates

for a representative borrower with a FICO score of 720 and an LTV ratio of 75%.

   To quantify the diﬀerential reaction of jumbo and conforming interest rates to purchase program

events, we pool jumbo and non-jumbo mortgages together and estimate the following loan-level

specification around the beginning of each monetary policy event separately

            rict = Xi0 + ✓0 Jumbos + ✓1 P rogramt + ✓2 P rogramt · Jumbos + ⌘ct + "ict            (1)

where P rogram is an indicator for month t being after the institution of a specific monetary policy

program (e.g., QE1), Jumboi is an indicator variable for whether loan i was a jumbo mortgage,

and Xi is a vector of flexible loan-level controls consisting of 5-point LTV bins (we drop loans

with less than 25% LTV), 20-point FICO bins, and an indicator for missing FICO scores. We also

control for county ⇥ month fixed eﬀects ⌘ct to purge interest rates in both segments of static and

time-varying regional shocks to credit demand or supply, including diﬀerences in house price growth

and changes in expectations. We consider the three quantitative easing programs as well as the

Maturity Extension Program in September 2011 and the beginning of tapering in June 2013.

   The coeﬃcient ✓1 reports the number of basis points by which interest rates for non-jumbo

mortgages fell on average in the three (or six) months immediately following the beginning of each

QE campaign relative to the period immediately prior. The coeﬃcient ✓2 captures changes in the

jumbo-conforming spread in response to each QE campaign’s commencement, in other words by how

much more or less interest rates in the jumbo segment responded. We interpret ✓1 as causal only

with some degree of caution because it will combine the eﬀect of LSAPs with any contemporaneous

national shock to mortgage rates, even those eﬀects not caused by the monetary policy events in

question. The identifying assumption behind our causal interpretation of ✓2 is that, conditional

on borrower and loan characteristics and county-month fixed eﬀects, time-varying shocks do not


                                                 14
aﬀect the jumbo and conforming segments diﬀerently. In other words, our ability to identify the

eﬀect of unconventional monetary policy on mortgage-market segments relies on a parallel-trends

assumption, which, as we discuss below, seems to be satisfied, especially over the short time horizons

used to estimate equation (1). Finally, we cluster our standard errors at the month level to account

for the correlation between contemporaneous shocks across loans and geographies.


5.2   Quantifying the Eﬀect of QE on Mortgage Origination Volumes

As discussed in Section 1, inferring the impact of unconventional monetary policy from changes in

interest rates tends to overstate policy eﬀectiveness by assuming perfect availability of credit. In

particular, interest rates are observed conditional on origination, but as not all mortgages are eligible

for purchase by the Fed, the relative size and composition of each segment may change substantially.

Considering the volume of debt issuance in response to the LSAPs is an essential consideration in

estimating the response of households financial markets to new measures of monetary policy adopted

after the crisis. Furthermore, we can test for the presence of spillovers from the conforming segment

(directly aﬀected by the LSAPs) to the jumbo segment.

   To form a comparable jumbo/conforming sample for an analysis of quantities, we drop FHA

mortgages and consider first-lien refinance loans for single-family houses (note that this sample

restriction is more inclusive than the interest-rate sample restrictions needed to compare interest

rates on equal footing). We quantify these eﬀects on refinance origination volumes Qsct at the

county c ⇥ month t ⇥ mortgage-market segment s 2 {Jumbo, non-Jumbo} level by estimating

                                                                                 0
         log Qsct =   0 Jumbos   +   1 P rogramt   +   2 P rogramt   · Jumbos + Xsct + ↵ct + "sct .   (2)

For each policy event, we provide baseline results and subsequent robustness checks containing a

more restrictive specification in which we allow for county ⇥ month fixed eﬀects ↵ct and control for

measures of the local composition of each segment’s borrowers in each month Xsct (average FICO

scores and average LTV ratios for a county ⇥ month ⇥ segment). We also restrict attention to

counties where we observe an active jumbo market by restricting the sample to counties that have

at least one jumbo refinance origination each month. Again, we conservatively cluster our standard

errors at the month level.

   The coeﬃcient      1   tells us by how many log points conforming origination volumes increased


                                                       15
in the average county in the months following an LSAP event relative to the months immediately

preceding that event. We focus our attention on       2,   which is an estimate of whether jumbo origi-

nation volumes responded diﬀerently than conforming origination volumes. Again, the identifying

assumption required for    2   to be an unbiased estimate of diﬀerential allocation of LSAP credit

across mortgage market segments is that there were no other shocks, say ⇣st , occurring coincident

with QE events that aﬀected the jumbo market more (or less) than the conforming market. While

our interest in refinance origination volumes instead of purchase originations helps us abstract away

from local shocks to credit demand including beliefs about future house prices, county ⇥ month

fixed eﬀects ↵ct absorb any remaining local shocks to credit demand or supply. The requirement

for parallel trends across conforming and non-conforming segments motivates using tight three- and

six-month windows around each event, as well as our focus on the conforming loan limit since under-

writing standards in the conforming and prime jumbo market are similar. The graphical evidence

discussed below also supports this parallel-trends assumption, as do several subsequent robustness

checks, including specifications that control for macroeconomic factors Wt interacted with the jumbo

indicator to allow for several potential segment-specific shocks.


5.3   Estimating Changes in the Propensity to Refinance

A complementary way to examine the impact of QE uses the individual-level panel structure of our

data to test whether each QE campaign altered the likelihood that a given individual refinanced.

A given loan’s segment as used in equations (1) and (2) is actually an outcome that is potentially

aﬀected by QE itself. Individual-level hazard regressions solve this selection problem by looking at

results based on the original loan segment and characteristics. Moreover, because our sample each

month in a mortgage-termination regression only consists of loans that have not yet failed, a hazard

model is needed to correct for this dynamically selected sample. Analyzing how individual access to

refinancing changed during QE1 with respect to characteristics of the original mortgage is an input

into understanding the degree to which the quantity results are explained by the change in interest

rates or how credit might have been allocated in counterfactual scenarios with, for example, higher




                                                 16
GSE LTV caps. We estimate a hazard model of the form

                       it   = exp(Xit0 )   0 (t   t0 (i))
                                                                 X   F eb2008
                                                                       X
                    Xit0 = ✓L0 Witloan + ✓B
                                          0
                                            Wiborrower +                        k⌧   · QE1t ⇥ Sk,it                 (3)
                                                                 k ⌧ =Dec2008

where   it   is the instantaneous probability that loan i will refinance in calendar month t, conditional

on not yet having refinanced by month t. The baseline hazard function                     0 (·)   is a cubic function of

loan age (current month t minus loan i’s origination month t0 (i)) and nonparametrically captures

the standard life-cycle of mortgage prepayment, while covariates scale the baseline hazard depending

on their contribution to prepayment risk. The covariates in Xit consist of loan- and borrower-level

controls. Loan-level controls Witloan include current LTV (imputed using CoreLogic repeat-sales

home-price indices), original balance, and an indicator for whether the loan size is currently above

the conforming loan limit. Borrower-level controls Witborrower include FICO bins, DTI ratio, and an

indicator for whether the DTI is missing. The coeﬃcients of interest are                   k⌧ ,   which are coeﬃcients

for each of the three months following the beginning of QE1 on the QE1 indicator variable interacted

with two separate indicators for whether loan i is currently GSE ineligible (whether loan i’s current

LTV exceeds .9 and whether its loan size exceeds the CLL). We take for our sample all loans that

were outstanding as of September 2008, and use the continuous-time maximum-likelihood estimator

described in Palmer (2015). Estimated coeﬃcients report partial eﬀects on the log refinancing

hazard. We limit the sample to fixed-rate first-liens secured by owner-occupied single-family homes

originated before January 2008 and outstanding as of January 2008.



6    Results

We present three main sets of results. First, we examine the response of mortgage rates to the

LSAPs. We then turn to the changes in refinancing volume in the mortgage market. Finally,

we turn to the household-level analysis to shed further lights on how LSAPs aﬀected households’

refinancing decisions.




                                                            17
6.1     The Eﬀect of LSAPs on the Primary Mortgage Market

6.1.1    Interest Rate Results

In Figure 5, we plot the estimated interest rates for loans above and below the conforming loan

limit. There is a visible change in interest rates as QE1 begins, when mortgage interest rates declined

markedly, from 6.5% to about 5.5% and 5% for loans just above and just below the conforming loan

limit, respectively. While rates for the two types of loans follow each other quite closely, conforming-

loan rates declined almost 50% more than prime jumbo mortgage rates.24

    To quantify the average magnitude of these eﬀects over each monetary policy event, Table 2

reports the estimates for the interest-rate response to the announcements of the diﬀerent LSAPs

within a three-month window (panel I) and a six-month window (panel II) around the event, both

for jumbo and non-jumbo loans. We find that the most significant reaction is to the announcement

of QE1 with an interest-rate reduction of more than 100 basis points. Consistent with Figure 5,

jumbo-mortgage interest rates also decline after QE1, but the conforming rate falls by an additional

40 basis points. Rates declined by around 35 basis points in response to QE2, without any diﬀerential

eﬀect across segments, consistent with our interpretation that the reason QE1 had diﬀerential eﬀects

is because the Fed purchased MBS at a time of strong segmentation in the mortgage market.25 The

Maturity Extension Program resulted in a reduction of about 46 basis points, but we observe little,

if any, diﬀerential eﬀect for the conforming and non-conforming segments. QE3, instead, led to a

reduction of about 18 basis points in the three months after the beginning of the program. Finally,

the beginning of the Fed tapering led to an increase in interest rates concentrated in the conforming

loan segment.26 The results are qualitatively similar when we consider a longer window around the

announcement in panel II to build up a longer pre-period, with the estimated economic magnitude

of each event generally larger in the six-month window specifications.

  24
      For context, the increase in the jumbo-conforming spread from the announcement of QE1 is on par with the
spread increase observed in the second half of 2007, when the securitization market.
   25
      This comparatively lower reduction in overall interest rates might also be indicative that, while QE1 was a
significant surprise, the second quantitative easing program was largely anticipated by market participants.
   26
      One potential reason for the asymmetry of the QE3 and Tapering coeﬃcients is the asymmetric eﬀects of interest
rate decreases and increases to MBS investors. A reduction in interest rates increases the value of fixed-income
investments and relaxes investors’ capital constraints, supporting an overall lending expansion (provided markets
aren’t too segmented). An (expected) increase in interest rates, on the other hand, tightens intermediaries’ capital
constraints, reducing lending diﬀerentially to that segment whose interest rates are likely to rise significantly. For
example, mortgage REITs—an important buyer of GSE MBS—reduced their holdings of MBS by more than 30% in
the two months following the Tapering announcement.


                                                         18
    Our identification approach is particularly well-suited to control for demand shocks aﬀecting both

segments at the same time. For each event, even columns control for county-month fixed eﬀects

and loan characteristics, including flexibly specified loan-to-value ratios and FICO scores, to ensure

that the diﬀerential response of jumbo and conforming mortgages is not driven by time-varying

borrower composition. Geography ⇥ time fixed eﬀects absorb time-varying regional heterogeneity

to account for any local shocks, unrelated to monetary policy, to fundamentals or beliefs that aﬀect

credit demand or supply. Comparing even and odd columns, we find that our results on the jumbo-

conforming spread are not driven by changes in borrower composition or the local lending market.


6.1.2    Mortgage Origination Results

Figure 6 plots the origination amount of refinance mortgages recorded by LPS for mortgages with

loan sizes above and below the GSE conforming loan limit (CLL). The jumbo and non-jumbo

segments trend very similarly in origination counts (panel I) and total volume (panel II) prior

to the beginning of QE1, bolstering our identifying assumption of parallel trends. Right at the

commencement of QE1, the amount of below-CLL refinance origination increases by a factor of

three (counts) or four (dollar volume). The sudden increase and subsequent fading of below-CLL

refinance originations coincides quite closely with the dynamics of Fed MBS purchases, as shown

in Figure 7. By contrast, refinance origination above the conforming loan limit is fairly flat until a

modest increase in April 2009. In other words, while the increase in the conforming spread indicates

a diﬀerential response of rates depending on GSE eligibility, loan origination suggests an even deeper

relationship between the allocation of credit supply and QE1 MBS purchases.

    Table 3 reports results from estimating equation (2) for a three-month window (panel I) and

a six-month window (panel II).27 The dependent variable is the log of the total dollar amount

of monthly loan origination. Focusing on the conservative three-month window specification in

panel I, column 1 shows that overall mortgage refinancing activity increased by 100 log points

(170%) during QE1, with almost all of the eﬀect concentrated in the conforming loan segment. In

contrast, during both QE2 and the MEP, both conforming and jumbo originations increased by

  27
      As discussed in Section 5, our identifying assumption (supported graphically and by the robustness checks below)
of no mortgage segment-specific shocks allows us to interpret the coeﬃcient on the program ⇥ jumbo indicator as
reflective of the diﬀerential impact of each LSAP program on origination volumes. We acknowledge, however, that
contemporaneous aggregate shocks can confound our estimates of the main eﬀect of each LSAP event.


                                                         19
about 65% (50 log points), with no detectable diﬀerential eﬀect across loan segments. Column 8

shows that mortgage refinancing volumes responded very similarly across segments in the months

immediately following the beginning of QE3, increasing by 15-30%. Finally, refinancing activities

in the conforming segment fell around 30% in the aftermath of the Fed’s tapering announcement.

Note that the total eﬀect of tapering on jumbo originations in column 9 of Table 3 is close to zero,

suggesting that jumbo originations were relatively unaﬀected by the tapering. Results using a six-

month bandwidth around QE event dates are generally stronger, although each of the qualitative

patterns remains the same.

   In sum, Fed asset purchases were eﬀective at inducing new debt origination and cheaper monthly

payments for households. Purchasing mortgage-backed securities was particularly eﬀective during

QE1, when monetary stimulus was needed the most and LSAP spillovers to other market seg-

ments were limited. These results shed lights on the channels through which LSAPs might have

real eﬀects. In fact, the limited spillovers support the view that distressed markets are acutely

segmented, causing LSAPs to have eﬀects primarily in the segments in which purchases occurred.

Contrasting the segment-specific eﬀects of QE1 and QE3, the results of Table 3 are also consistent

with Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2013) and Gertler and Karadi (2011): since financial

intermediaries were in greater distress during the first program, we should expect much more re-

allocation of the Fed’s funds across segments during the third program. Finally, the small main

eﬀects that we estimate for QE2 and QE3 are consistent with results on yields in Krishnamurthy

and Vissing-Jørgensen (2013) suggesting that the size of those programs (and market expectations

about them) muted their overall eﬀects.


6.1.3   Robustness Checks

Our identification strategy takes advantage of the natural segmentation in the mortgage market and

eﬀectively employs a diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences approach in an event-study framework by comparing

the refinancing activities in the conforming (the treated group) and non-conforming (the control

group) segment in a narrow window around the policy events. This allows us to limit the role of

other common shocks aﬀecting both segments at the same time and control for changes in credit

demand. However, one potential limitation of this approach is the possibility that unobserved

aggregate credit supply shocks, occurring at about the same time of the policy announcements and

                                                20
diﬀerentially impacting the conforming and jumbo loan segments, might confound our results. For

example, because jumbo mortgage investors bear default risk that GSE mortgage investors do not,

lenders might face diﬀerent shocks to funding constraints in the two segments of the market.

   We propose three such factors (credit-spread shocks, guarantee fees, and average premia on

bank credit default swaps), demonstrate that they explain a significant amount of variation in

diﬀerential movements in the jumbo and conforming segments, and verify that our results are

robust to the inclusion of these three factors as time-series controls measuring aggregate shocks to

funding availability in these two segments. We measure credit spreads as the diﬀerence in yields

between BBB and AAA rated bonds. Second, the guarantee fee (“g-fee”) originators must pay to the

GSEs to insure a loan’s default risk has varied over time from just 20 basis points before the crisis

to the 50 basis points in 2015, naturally aﬀecting non-GSE and GSE-eligible loans diﬀerentially.

Third, we collect data on the credit-default swaps for all major financial institutions in the U.S. and

construct an index by value weighting the corresponding six-month contract premia. Intuitively, the

credit spread captures the price of risk, and the g-fee reflects the price to avoid default risk, both

of which might influence (and be correlated with) the relative market supply of jumbo-mortgage

credit, whereas the CDS index captures the overall financial health of the banking sector. When

g-fees increase, we expect the jumbo-conforming spread to decrease, and when credit spreads or

CDS premia rise, we expect the jumbo segment to be hit harder than the conforming segment.

These factors do play an important role in the mortgage market, together explaining 80% of the

variation in the jumbo-conforming spread (see Appendix Table 4).

   In order to have a stable and uncontaminated estimate of the contribution of these three factors

to interest rates and quantities, we adopt the following abnormal-returns event-study procedure

using data on bond-yield spreads from the St. Louis Fed, g-fees from Fuster et al. (2013), and CDS

spreads from Markit. First, for each QE event, we use the 2008–2013 sample period excepting the six

months surrounding the QE event in question to estimate the coeﬃcients on the spread, g-fee, and

CDS index in a linear regression with county ⇥ month fixed eﬀects and a jumbo indicator. These

coeﬃcients are reported in Appendix Table 4—we note the relative stability of the coeﬃcients across

sample periods, finding that these three factors alone explain a significant portion of the overall

variation in interest rates and quantities, as evidenced from the R2 statistics in Appendix Table
4. We then partial out these three factors, by subtracting the contribution of contemporaneous

                                                  21
credit spreads, g-fees, and CDS index from current interest rates and quantities to reestimate the

specifications in Tables 2 and 3 controlling for time-varying credit spreads, g-fees and CDS premia.

    Table 4 and Appendix Table 3 report these results for three- and six-month windows, respec-

tively. We find that the eﬀects highlighted in Tables 2 and 3 are still economically and statistically

significant, but as expected the magnitude of the diﬀerential behavior between jumbo and conform-

ing segments is reduced since the controls pick up some of the eﬀect we were attributing to QE. For

instance, the top panel shows that the jumbo mortgage rates experience a lower reduction as the

jumbo-conforming spread widens by 30 basis points in the post-QE1 period conditional on credit

spreads, g-fees, and CDS premia, in contrast to the 42 basis point widening reported in Table 2.

No economically significant diﬀerential eﬀect is found for QE2 , the MEP, or QE3.We also find that

the Fed tapering spread narrowing is robust to these added controls.

    The bottom panel of Table 4 reports the results for the refinance origination volume. The

economic magnitude of the coeﬃcients is reduced by at most 15 percent from Table 3, which

indicates that, while there may have been other factors aﬀecting intermediaries’ willingness to lend

in these two segments, the conclusions remain qualitatively and economically the same.

    A related concern is that these diﬀerences among loans below and above the conforming loan

limit could be an artifact of the January 2008 change in the limit itself. The relevant chronology is

not consistent of this particular explanation—this initial increase in conforming loan limits happened

much too early to explain the diﬀerential response of mortgage market segments to QE1, and the

eventual decrease in conforming loan limits (September 2011) did not coincide with any particular

LSAP window (see Appendix Figure 2 and 3). For completeness, the analysis in Appendix B

addresses this threat to validity, confirming that the diﬀerential origination pattern holds even in

those areas that did not see an increase in the conforming loan limit. Overall, the evidence in this

section is suggestive that our results are not driven by time-series variation in credit supply.28
    We also investigate whether our results are confounded by diﬀerences in the sensitivity of jumbo

and conforming mortgage rates to short and long interest rates. For example, it might be that

jumbo mortgages are more sensitive to the short end of the yield curve, which might make them less

  28
     Our findings are likely unrelated to TARP. The majority of lending to banks through TARP occurred in October
and November of 2008, which, if supportive of mortgage origination, would work against our finding a strong reaction
to the beginning of QE1. Likewise, improvement in bank health would likely encourage jumbo origination more than
conforming loans, as the latter rely more heavily on market liquidity.


                                                        22
responsive to policies that aim to decrease the long end of the yield curve. As reported in Appendix

Table 5, we find that this is not the case. We perform univariate regressions relating mortgage rates

to 5-year and 10-year Treasury rates in columns 1–4, and then we regress mortgage rates on both

Treasury rates in columns 5 and 6. The univariate regressions show a very similar sensitivity of

both types of mortgage rates to Treasury rates, as highlighted by the similar coeﬃcients in columns

1–4. If anything, columns 5 and 6 show that the conforming rates seem to be more sensitive to the

short end of the yield curve, ruling out this alternative explanation for our findings.

    Finally, one potential concern is that borrowers might endogenously choose to be on one side or

the other of the conforming loan limit, which might aﬀect our definition of treatment and control

groups. This is less of an issue in our specific case because in 2009 the average loan size in our

data was about $220,000, which is significantly below the limit, and suggests that the fraction of

borrowers around the limit is small relative to the size of the whole sample. However, to show

that the results are robust to this modification, we report in Appendix Figure 4 the refinancing

volume and counts as in Figure 6 in the text, but excluding all loans that are in the [90%, 140%]

interval around the conforming loan limit. We find that the results are quite similar in this restricted

sample.29


6.1.4    Aggregate Eﬀects: Refinance Volume and Consumption

In this section, we estimate the stimulative eﬀects of QE purchases by computing the aggregate

volume of loans that were refinanced in response to QE1 and estimating the resulting increase in

additional consumption using MPC estimates from the literature.

    While the regression specifications above imposed several sample restrictions to ensure that

composition was not driving our main findings, we now relax these restrictions to estimate the

aggregate eﬀects of these policies. In particular, for this exercise, we also consider non-first liens, non-

single family houses, FHA loans, and loans with LTV outside the [25%, 120%] interval. Furthermore,

to obtain average eﬀects across all months, we extend the time window to include six months before

  29
      A related compositional concern is that loose QE credit might have led to mortgage origination to riskier
borrowers. Appendix Figure 5 plots the percent of loans delinquent within one year (panel I) and within four years
(panel II) from refinancing for diﬀerent types of refinances: GSE, FHA, cash-out and non-GSE. While rising overall
property values and tighter credit are improving successive cohorts’ loan performance (consistent with Palmer, 2015),
this trend is smooth and unabated throughout throughout the QE1 campaign, suggesting that increasing refinancing
origination (including cash-out refinances) did not materially aﬀect credit quality.


                                                         23
QE1 through March 2010. These changes end up being conservative—our point estimates are

smaller on the more universal sample than used in the regression tables above. We re-estimate our

specification (2) on this new sample and turn oﬀ the coeﬃcient on the interaction term between

QE1 and the non-jumbo segment to estimate the volume of refinances that is due to QE1 ($291

billion).30 As our data cover about 48% of the refinance market (using HMDA data as a national

benchmark), our results suggest that QE1 was responsible for $607 billion increase in aggregate

refinance volume.

    This increase in refinances might lead to an increase in consumption through multiple channels.

First, many borrowers cash out equity while refinancing, providing cash on hand to support new

expenditures. Second, by refinancing their loans, borrowers are able to secure lower interest rates,

and increase their monthly disposable income. On average, the amount of equity cashed out is

about 11% of the total volume of refis. As commonly assumed in the MPC literature (see, e.g.,

Mian and Sufi, 2011), we assume the marginal propensity to consume out of cashed-out equity is 1

(the assumption being that borrowers cash-out equity to spend it). This translates into an increase

in borrowers’ consumption of about $67 billion. We also compute the increase in consumption

due to interest rate savings. Specifically, households refinancing in 2009 saved on average $250

per month or $3,000 per year due to the lower interest rates (see discussion of Appendix Figure 7

below). As found by Di Maggio et al. (2015), the average marginal propensity to consume out of

a decrease in monthly interest payments is about 0.75. This implies that the additional increase in

consumption due to the purchase of MBS rather than Treasuries is about $6 billion ($607 billion

divided by the average loan size of $220,000 ⇥ $3,000 ⇥ 0.7) due to interest rate savings. Moreover,

our results show that the purchase of MBS instead of Treasuries resulted in at least 40 bps lower

rates for those who refinanced to a conforming mortgage during QE1. This means that for the

inframarginal $1.2 trillion of GSE refinancing, borrowers realized $1.2 trillion ⇥ 40 bps = $4.8

billion of marginal savings on their annual interest payments, resulting in an additional $3.6 billion

of consumption.31 Putting these channels together, we estimate that the decision to purchase

MBS instead of exclusively Treasuries during QE1 increased aggregate consumption through the
   30
      In re-estimating equation (2), we replace the jumbo indicators with non-jumbo indicators to simulate that it was
this extra QE1 ⇥ non-Jumbo eﬀect that would be lost if the Fed had not purchased MBS.
   31
      There was $1.8 trillion of GSE refinancing during QE1, of which we estimate $607 billion was caused by QE1
MBS purchases (instead of an equivalent amount of Treasuries), meaning approximately $1.2 trillion of refinancing
would have happened irrespective of the assets purchased during QE1.


                                                         24
refinancing channel by approximately $76 billion.

    To provide further evidence that refinancing results in an increase in borrowers’ consumption,

we also plot event studies around the origination of a refinance mortgage in Appendix Figure 7.

Specifically, we examine the relationship between refinancing and durable goods purchases during

QE1, measured using borrower-level credit-bureau data on auto loans linked with data on mortgage

refinancing. We restrict our attention to those borrowers who refinanced their mortgage during

QE1 (December 2008 to March 2010) and leverage the panel structure of our data by following each

borrower 12 months before and after refinancing and estimate event studies of the form
                     X                                          4
                                                                X
        yit = ↵t +           ⌧ 1(t   refinance monthi = ⌧ ) +         kt 1(Balance   Quartilei = k) + "it
                     ⌧ 6=0                                      k=1

where yit is either the monthly interest payment or an indicator for whether borrower i in calendar-

month t purchased a (new or used) car (and financed at least some of that purchase to be observed by

Equifax) and Balance Quartilei is the quartile of the loan size of borrower i’s new refinance mortgage

(which allows for income-segment specific shocks and eliminates pre-trends). The parameters of

interest are the event study coeﬃcients            ⌧,   which range from ⌧ =      12 to ⌧ = 12 and turn on in

the months during which borrower i was ⌧ months away from refinancing. The omitted category

is borrowers in the same month their refinance mortgage was originated (⌧ = 0), meaning that                       2,

for example, is the estimated average change in y for borrowers that refinanced two months ago

compared with the level of y in the month they refinanced. Calendar-month fixed eﬀects ↵t capture

any time-varying aggregate shocks to outcomes.32 An important consideration in interpreting these

results is that the timing of interest-rate savings is not random, in contrast to the setting of Di

Maggio et al. (2015) and Keys et al. (2015), whose consumption response functions are identified

by exogenous interest rate changes that do not require refinancing. To the extent that the borrowers

refinance in response to (or in anticipation of) idiosyncratic shocks correlated with their demand for

auto loans, our estimates of         ⌧   are biased. The presence of ↵t , however, should account for common

shocks to credit demand.

    Appendix Figure 7 plots estimated ˆ⌧ for the eﬀect of refinancing on monthly mortgage interest

payments (panel I) and the probability of taking on a new auto loan (panel II, measured as an
  32
     We do not include individual-level fixed eﬀects in these regressions. As car purchases are relatively infrequent
and the sample period for each borrower is relatively short (24 months), borrower fixed eﬀects would absorb all
variation in car purchase behavior for the majority of individuals who do not purchase a car.


                                                           25
increase in outstanding auto-loan debt of more than $5,000). Immediately after refinancing, there

is a large and persistent decline in monthly mortgage interest payments, averaging $250/month

over the first year after refinancing. This interest savings appears in part to be spent on durable

consumption. The coeﬃcients plotted in panel II show an increase in the monthly probability of

purchasing a car (a fairly rare event at baseline) starting two months after refinancing and staying

statistically significant with no signs of intertemporal substitution/reversal over the following year.

   Overall, these results show that the composition of Fed asset purchases has a tremendous causal

eﬀect on both refinancing volume and aggregate consumption when markets are segmented.


6.1.5   Allocation of Credit Across Regions

Given that unconventional monetary stimulus from QE1 was not distributed evenly across the

mortgage market, what implications did this have for the geography of credit allocation? We

investigate this by analyzing where 2009 refinancing activity was concentrated (see Beraja et al.,

2015 for a full treatment of regional heterogeneity in the eﬀects of QE). To ensure full coverage

of the mortgage market, we use Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data, which reports the universe

of mortgage originations by institutions large enough to be regulated by the act. In Figure 8,

we plot the state-level percentage of outstanding mortgage balance refinanced in 2009 against two

lagged measures of state-level economic health: 2006-2008 home price appreciation (top panel) and

2006-2008 real GDP growth (bottom panel).

   Panel I shows that even though a clear objective of QE1 was to stimulate distressed housing

markets, there is a strong positive relationship between past home price appreciation and new re-

financing activity, suggesting that the QE1-induced increased availability of refinancing credit may

not have reached the areas that arguably needed it the most. In particular, note that the states most

aﬀected by the housing bust (the so-called “sand states” of California, Florida, Arizona and Nevada)

were the states with the lowest refinancing activity.33 Panel II of Figure 8 repeats this exercise, re-

lating refinancing activity to state-level growth in real GDP from 2006–2008. Again, there is a clear

positive relationship with contracting states benefiting less from QE1. Taken together, these figures

provide evidence that time-invariant mortgage market segmentation combined with contempora-
  33
    Note that while the correlation between purchase mortgage credit growth could also be driven by shocks to
fundamentals that simultaneously reduced demand for mortgage credit and lowered home prices, this is less of a
concern for the refinancing activity measure shown here.


                                                     26
neous banking sector stress to allocate credit to the regions with the most potential GSE-eligible

refinances, i.e., areas with smaller underwater borrower shares and with correspondingly stronger lo-

cal economies. While clearly less well identified than the across-segment results presented in Section

6.1.2, these across-region results highlight the important interplay between GSE mortgage-market

policy and the eﬀectiveness of monetary stimulus at reaching the local economies that would benefit

the most.


6.2     Household-level Analysis

6.2.1    Refinancing Propensity Hazard Regressions

In Table 5, we report results from estimating hazard models of refinancing, as described in Section

5.3. These models address potential sample-selection and segment-sorting biases and are the basis

for our counterfactual simulations in Section 7. Column 1 shows that each of the three months

following the announcement and beginning of Fed MBS purchases saw an increase of individual

refinancing likelihood. For example, the January 2009 coeﬃcient implies that individuals holding

observationally equivalent loans were 125% (81 log points) more likely to refinance in January

2009 than in the three months preceding December 2008. Column 2 shows that borrowers whose

outstanding mortgages were GSE ineligible were significantly less likely to prepay their mortgages.

Mortgages with current loan-to-value ratios exceeding 90% were 36% (45 log points) less likely to

prepay their mortgage in January 2009 than those borrowers with LTVs under 90%. Similarly, jumbo

borrowers—borrowers of mortgages whose size exceeded the local conforming loan limit—were 17%

(19 log points) less likely to prepay in January 2009 than borrowers with mortgages under the CLL.

Column 3 demonstrates that these findings are quite similar even when focusing on observationally

identical borrowers taking out mortgages with similar characteristics.

   These estimates can be used to show that the increase in the origination of conforming loans

cannot be entirely explained by the decline in interest rates. Specifically, we estimate the eﬀect of

the segment-specific coupon gap (the diﬀerence between the current mortgage rate and the one at

which the borrower could refinance, imputed using the segment-specific estimates of equation 1) on

the refinancing hazard out of sample. Then, we can use these estimated coupon-gap coeﬃcients and

the actual change in the interest rate to predict how many borrowers would have refinanced given



                                                 27
the actual reduction in market interest rates, augmenting the hazard model in equation (3) with

a coupon-gap covariate and constraining its coeﬃcient to be its out-of-sample estimate. Table 6

reports these results. Comparing the QE1 ⇥ Jumbo coeﬃcients in columns 1–3 that do not control

for the coupon gap with estimates in columns 4–6 that do, we find that the reduction in interest

rates can only explain about 25-45% of the observed increase in the refinancing volume for the

conforming segment. Contrasting columns 1 and 4, we conclude that QE1 aﬀected the mortgage

market above and beyond its eﬀects on the yield curve and the natural refinancing response to yield

curve changes. Similarly, columns 2 and 5 and columns 3 and 6 show that diﬀerential response of

the conforming segment to QE1 is much larger than could be explained by the additional 40 bp fall

in interest rates in the conforming segment.


6.2.2   The Intensive-Margin Response of Household Mortgage Debt

Having shown the diﬀerential increase in origination of conforming loans and likelihood of refinanc-

ing, we next exploit the granularity of our data to study the borrower’s refinancing decision in more

detail. This allows us to investigate segmentation and is an input to understanding the eﬀects of

the LSAPs on real economic activity.

   There are three types of refinancing: cash-in, in which borrowers use cash to lower their loan-

to-value ratio; cash-out, in which borrowers extract equity from their homes; and rate or term

refinancing in which the balance does not change. In principle, diﬀerent types of refinancing can

have diﬀerent eﬀects on consumption as they might work through three distinct channels. First,

lower monthly payments lead to higher disposable income, which might boost aggregate consumption

to the extent that borrowers’ marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of this additional income

exceeds lenders’ MPCs. Lowering interest payments is equivalent to a positive wealth shock for

borrowers, which should lead to an increase in consumption as long as borrowers are not liquidity

constrained. Finally, cash-in/cash-out decisions increase the borrower’s stock of liquid wealth, which

the literature has generally asserted is done to finance consumption or various forms of investment.

   We are interested in assessing the extent to which the heterogeneous decline in interest rates

and change in credit availability induced by QE MBS purchases influenced aggregate household

borrowing and savings. We measure cash-in refinancing by linking each new refinance loan to the

unpaid balance on the borrower’s prior loan. We allow for $3,000 closing costs to be rolled into the

                                                 28
new loan without being classified as cash-in refinancing.34 One key advantage of our panel data is

that it allows us to observe loan amounts before refinancing and to estimate the LTV prior to the

refinance. To account for the introduction of the Home Aﬀordable Refinance Program (HARP) by

the Federal Housing Finance Agency in March 2009, which aimed to help underwater homeowners

to refinance their mortgages, we will distinguish between the pre- and post-HARP period.

    Panel I of Figure 9 plots three kernel densities: the LTV distribution of all outstanding loans

with an LTV between 80% and 90%, the LTV distribution for loans with an LTV between 80%

and 90% that will be refinanced during the period, and the LTV distribution of the new refinance

mortgages for borrowers who started with an original loan with an 80–90% LTV. Comparing the

three curves, we find strong evidence that the diﬀerential availability and price of GSE eligible vs.

GSE ineligible mortgages resulted in significant deleveraging. Whereas the LTV distribution for

all outstanding mortgages in this LTV range is relatively uniform, those that are able to refinance

are much more likely to start near 80%, evidence of the frictions associated with non-GSE–eligible

refinancing during this time period. Comparing the original LTV distribution and subsequent LTV

distribution for refinancers, it is clear that the GSE cutoﬀs were very important during this time

period. Around 34% of households who prepay from a mortgage that is initially 80–90% LTV (and

thus ineligible for a GSE-guaranteed refinance) deleverage and take out an 80% LTV mortgage,

increasing their equity position via their liquid wealth.35 The eﬀect is economically meaningful:

conditional on deleveraging to 80% or below, borrowers cashed-in about $12,300; conditional on

deleveraging to 80%, borrowers cashed-in about $9,000. These results highlight the tightness of

credit for a mortgage market segment that was not directly stimulated by Fed MBS purchases.

    We can also measure the expansionary eﬀects of LSAPs by looking at cash-out refinancing. panel

II of Figure 9 shows a bunching rate of about 22% with the average borrower cashing out $4,000.

That is, about 22% of the refinances with a LTV between 70 and 80 percent before refinancing

decide to cash out from their mortgages by refinancing to a loan with an 80% LTV. This household

balance-sheet response to interest rate changes and its dependence on current home equity highlights

how accommodative monetary policy may at best not help distressed regions, with less equity to

  34
      See http://www.bankrate.com/finance/mortgages/closing-costs/closing-costs-by-state.aspx for data on average
closing costs by state.
   35
      For other studies of mortgage-market bunching, see Adelino et al. (2013), DeFusco and Paciorek (2015), and
Best et al. (2015).


                                                       29
extract, as much as areas with lower LTVs outstanding on average.

    Figure 10 performs a similar exercise for HARP-eligible loans. Panel I clearly shows that this

program alleviated deleveraging behavior significantly, with bunching declining from 34% to 11%,

while panel II shows that cash-out refinances were not significantly aﬀected. This result highlights

that GSE eligibility was a limiting factor in the eﬀectiveness of Fed MBS purchases and that there

is scope for GSE policies such as HARP to amplify the eﬀectiveness of MBS purchases by relaxing

eligibility requirements.

    To isolate a setting where credit conditions are similarly high (and thus contrast more comparable

market segments), we next return to the prime jumbo segment and perform similar analysis around

the conforming loan limit (CLL). Panel I of Figure 11 estimates bunching from the fraction of

borrowers with a mortgage size above the CLL that originate a new mortgage at or below the CLL.

Consistent with the results on bunching to the 80% LTV, we find that about 43% of households who

prepay a GSE-ineligible jumbo mortgage deleverage to the CLL (with 35% bunching around 99.5-

100.5%), with an average cash-in amount of about $31,000 (corresponding to $81,000 on average

for deleveraging mortgagors and $73,000 for mortgagors bunching around 100%). Panel II shows

significantly less bunching from the left of the CLL, with only about 10% of the borrowers bunching

at the CLL using the new mortgage to cash out an average of $2,000. These results suggest that

the LTV results above are not driven by unobserved heterogeneity in local economic conditions or

borrower creditworthiness.

    Overall, these findings highlight that the interactions between LSAPs and GSE policy have

profound amplifying or attenuating eﬀects on Fed LSAPs.



7    Counterfactual Simulation

Using our statistical model of the relationship between the LSAPs, debt origination, and equity

extraction, we can evaluate the eﬀectiveness of an oft-proposed macroprudential tool: countercyclical

leverage caps. Specifically, we analyze the complementarity between the maximum loan-to-value

ratio allowed by the GSEs (that is, the maximum allowable without credit enhancements such as

PMI) and the Fed’s LSAP eﬀorts by investigating what would have been the eﬀects of an increase

in the LTV cap from 80% to 90%. This exercise also serves to highlight the degree to which


                                                 30
seemingly unrelated policy (GSE) is a major factor in modulating the eﬀectiveness of LSAPs.

While low-downpayment loans are frequently maligned as an contributor to the housing crisis,

ideally leverage ratios would be tight during credit expansions and loose during contractions to

smooth macroeconomic shocks. Our bunching and hazard model results highlight the importance

of this LTV cap in determining the eﬀectiveness of MBS purchases.

   Adopting a countercyclical LTV might have several eﬀects. First, it might allow borrowers with

LTV higher than 80% that would not have been able to qualify for a new mortgage to refinance their

current mortgages. Second, it might enable borrowers with lower LTV to cash-out additional equity,

supporting their spending behavior during the downturn. This policy intervention is substantially

diﬀerent from HARP; whereas HARP relaxed the requirements to qualify for a refinance loans,

it prohibited borrowers from extracting any equity out of their homes (see Amromin and Kearns,

2014 and Agarwal et al. 2015a). Third, borrowers with LTV higher than 80% that were going to

liquidate accumulated wealth to cash-in refinance to do so without deleveraging as much.

   Table 7 reports the results of this exercise. For each of several LTV binds, we measure in our

data the number of loans, the fraction of borrowers that refinanced, and the average amount cashed-

out (or cashed-in) again, allowing for $3,000 in closing costs in columns 1–3. Then, we estimate a

hazard regression similar to that presented in Table 5 to simulate what would have happened if the

maximum allowable LTV were 90% instead of 80% (see also Appendix Tables 6 and 8). To do so,

we shift the coeﬃcients for the LTV bins between 70–100% LTV up by one bin, eﬀectively assuming

that with a maximum LTV of 90% instead of 80%, it would be as easy for an 85% current LTV

loan to refinance as it had been for a 75% loan to refinance in the factual world of an 80% LTV cap.

We do not shift the coeﬃcients for borrowers in the lowest (current LTV below 70%) and highest

(current LTV above 100%) bins, assuming that such a change in policy would be unlikely to have an

eﬀect on the very unconstrained or very constrained households’ propensity to refinance. Likewise,

we perform a similar exercise for the counterfactual amount of equity cashed out by estimating an

OLS regression of the actual amount cashed out on a similar set of controls (detailed in Appendix

Tables 7 and 9). In addition to shifting the LTV bin coeﬃcients in the counterfactual, we also

replace the amount of available equity to be cashed out (actual equity minus 20% of property

value) with actual equity minus 10% of the property value. Columns 4 and 5 of Table 7 report the

predicted fraction of borrowers who would be able to refinance and the predicted average cash out

                                                31
under the counterfactual policy. Columns 6 and 7 report the increase in the number of refinances

and the increase in aggregate equity cashed-out as the diﬀerence between the actual number and

the predicted ones.

   We find that the biggest increase in the number of refinances come from the 80% to 90% bin,

as these borrowers were not able to refinance before without deleveraging to get their current LTV

ratio under 80%. However, we also find that there is a significant increase in the aggregate amount

cashed out, a result that is mainly driven by the borrowers below 60% and in the 70% to 80%

LTV bins, as these borrowers are now able to extract equity in their houses and still be able to

refinance. Are such borrowers with substantial equity actually likely to be aﬀected by a change in

the maximum allowable LTV from 80% to 90%? Appendix Figure 6 shows that the 80% cutoﬀ is

quite relevant, even for those with very low LTVs that are refinancing. The eﬀects from the below

60% LTV bin are particularly important because, although only a small fraction of these borrowers

cash out, it is the group with the largest number of borrowers. We find in our data that about 5.6%

of borrowers in the below 60% LTV cash out by bunching at the 80% threshold, so it is plausible

that we would see an increase of a comparable magnitude for people refinancing to 90% LTV. Notice

that this an eﬀect that is not present with other policy interventions such as HARP. Can this policy

have large eﬀects? Yes. Accounting for the 48% coverage ratio of our data (that is, it seems to cover

48% of nationwide 2009 mortgage origination as measured by HMDA), our estimates show that this

simple policy would have increased the number of refinancing households by over 410,000. If we

multiply this number by the average mortgage size (i.e., $224,262), this policy would have resulted

in a $92 billion increase in refinance mortgage origination. Notably, this policy would have also

resulted in an almost 20% increase in equity cashed-out ($10 billion) with potentially important

eﬀects on aggregate demand. One way to benchmark the magnitude of these numbers is to contrast

them with estimated eﬀects in the literature of the eﬀect of the HARP program that explicitly

supported the refinancing of high LTV mortgages owned by the GSE. We find that the change in

the LTV requirement would have been more eﬀective in terms of refinances and aggregate volume

than HARP, partly because our policy experiment would have had a significant impact on cash-out

activities, and thus on the consumption expenditures, of these borrowers.

   Overall, an important implication of our findings is the complementarity between unconventional

monetary policy and housing policies which might play a key role in supporting aggregate demand

                                                 32
through their eﬀects on borrowers’ ability to cash out equity from their houses.



8    Conclusion

Prior to the fall of 2007, the Fed had largely held Treasury securities on its balance sheet. However,

in response to the financial crisis, the Fed started several new programs—liquidity facilities (under

which the Fed lent directly to certain sectors of the economy) and targeted purchases of trillions

of dollars of long-term Treasuries and GSE-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities. The impacts of

these unconventional monetary policies—whether and how they aﬀect the real economy—have been

the subject of ongoing debate.

    In this paper, we focus on demonstrating and quantifying the pass-through of unconventional

monetary policy to the real economy through the mortgage market. We show that Quantitative

Easing works through a refinancing channel by improving credit availability and lowering interest

rates for aﬀected households. Specifically, we show that QE1 increased refinance origination by

over $600 billion, which also led to a boom in equity extraction and substantially reduced interest

payments, and a resulting significant increase in consumption by $76 billion. Our analysis also

sheds light on the diﬀerent transmission channels through which QE has been posited to aﬀect

the real economy. Under the portfolio-rebalancing channel (where investors have a desired duration

mix), central-bank purchases of long-duration assets will have spillover eﬀects, easing credit to other

sectors of the economy as capital is reallocated across the economy. In contrast to this view, using

rich loan-level microdata, we find strong evidence of a “flypaper eﬀect” of unconventional monetary

policy during QE1, which passed through to borrowers who were able to refinance into mortgages

bundled into MBS purchased by the Fed but significantly less to borrowers who couldn’t qualify for

a GSE-eligible mortgage, consistent with a burgeoning theoretical and empirical literature on debt

yields in segmented markets and is supported by results showing how important GSE eligibility

cutoﬀs are for individual borrowers. This de facto allocation of credit highlights a main takeaway

from our analysis: the real eﬀects of unconventional monetary policy on the household sector depend

crucially on the composition of central-bank asset purchases.

    Finally, exploiting the ability of our data to link mortgages across borrowers, we document an

important complementarity between GSE policy and Fed purchases. Because banks during QE1


                                                  33
did not reallocate capital to non-conforming segments of the mortgage market, many households

initially ineligible for a conforming mortgage (current loan-to-value ratios exceeding 80% or loan

balances over the conforming loan limit) did not benefit from QE MBS purchases, to the extent

that those who did benefit often delevered by bringing cash to closing (“cash-in refinancing”) to

take advantage of low interest rates during the height of QE1 MBS purchases. Overall, tight GSE-

eligibility requirements and the lack of spillovers from LSAPs likely dampened the multiplier eﬀects

of lower interest rates and suggests that countercyclical macroprudential policy could enhance the

eﬀectiveness of MBS purchases. In particular, our counterfactual simulations show that relaxing

LTV caps during the crisis would have benefitted economically distressed areas proportionally more

by enabling more households to refinance and by reducing household deleveraging.

    There are several implications of these findings for designing eﬀective unconventional monetary

policy. First, given the limited spillover of Fed purchases, Federal Reserve Act provisions that

restrict Fed purchases to government-guaranteed debt have real consequences in allocating credit

to certain sectors (i.e., housing) and particular segments within those sectors (i.e., conforming

mortgages). Even operating within the legal constraints that govern Federal Reserve purchases, it

appears preferable for LSAPs to purchase MBS directly instead of Treasuries during times when

banks are reluctant to lend on their own. Related, central-bank interventions could be more eﬀective

by providing more direct funding to banks for lending to small business and households.36 Finally,

we demonstrate a strong interaction between GSE policy and the eﬀectiveness of MBS purchases.

Programs like HARP had a role in extending credit to the households who needed it most, as did

the significant expansion in the market share of low-downpayment FHA loans during the crisis.




  36
     While U.S. programs such as TALF and CPFF ostensibly encouraged lending to businesses and households, their
main focus was providing liquidity to (and preventing a further collapse of) securitization markets. The high cost of
credit under those programs limited their scope as market confidence returned (Ashcraft et al., 2012). For another
example of such a program, see also the Bank of England’s “Lending for Funding Scheme.”


                                                         34
References
 Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2013). Credit Supply and House Prices: Evidence from
    Mortgage Market Segmentation. NBER Working Paper No. 17832.
 Agarwal, S., G. Amromin, S. Chomsisengphet, T. Piskorski, A. Seru, and V. Yao (2015). Mort-
    gage refinancing, consumer spending, and competition: Evidence from the home aﬀordable
    refinancing program. NBER Working Paper No. 21512.
 Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, N. Mahoney, and J. Stroebel (2015). Do Banks Pass Through
    Credit Expansions? The Marginal Profitability of Consumer Lending During the Great Re-
    cession. NBER Working Paper No. 21567.
 Amromin, G. and C. Kearns (2014). Access to refinancing and mortgage interest rates: Harping
    on the importance of competition. FRB of Chicago Working Paper.
 Ashcraft, A., N. Garleanu, and L. H. Pedersen (2011). Two monetary tools: Interest rates and
    haircuts. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 25, 143–180.
 Ashcraft, A., A. Malz, and Z. Pozsar (2012). The federal reserve’s term asset-backed securities
    loan facility. The New York Fed Economic Policy Review 18 (3), 29–66.
 Baba, N., M. Nakashima, Y. Shigemi, and K. Ueda (2006). The Bank of Japan’s Monetary Policy
    and Bank Risk Premiums in the Money Market. International Journal of Central Banking.
 Bauer, M. D. and C. J. Neely (2014). International channels of the fed’s unconventional monetary
    policy. Journal of International Money and Finance 44, 24 – 46.
 Beraja, M., A. Fuster, E. Hurst, and J. Vavra (2015). Regional heterogeneity and monetary policy.
    Staﬀ Report, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
 Bernanke, B. S. and A. S. Blinder (1988). Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand. American
    Economic Review 78 (2), 435–39.
 Best, M. C., J. Cloyne, E. Ilzetzki, and H. J. Kleven (2015). Interest Rates, Debt and Intertem-
    poral Allocation: Evidence From Notched Mortgage Contracts in the UK. Bank of England
    Working Paper.
 Brunner, K., M. Fratianni, J. L. Jordan, A. H. Meltzer, and M. J. Neumann (1973). Fiscal and
    Monetary Policies in Moderate Inflation: Case Studies of Three Countries. Journal of Money,
    Credit and Banking, 313–353.
 Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2015). The I theory of money. Working Paper.
 Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2015). Global imbalances and currency wars at
    the zlb. NBER Working Paper No. 21670.
 Calomiris, C. W. and U. Khan (2015). An assessment of tarp assistance to financial institutions.
    The Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (2), 53–80.



                                               35
Chakraborty, I., I. Goldstein, and A. MacKinlay (2016). Monetary stimulus and bank lending.
   Working Paper.
Chernenko, S., S. G. Hanson, and A. Sunderam (2014). The rise and fall of demand for securiti-
   zations. NBER Working Paper No. 20777.
Chodorow-Reich, G. (2014). Eﬀects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Financial Institutions.
   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 155.
Christiano, L. J. and M. Eichenbaum (1992). Liquidity Eﬀects and the Monetary Transmission
   Mechanism. American Economic Review , 346–353.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005). Nominal rigidities and the dynamic
   eﬀects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of Political Economy 113 (1), 1–45.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, L. Kueng, and J. Silvia (2012). Innocent bystanders? monetary
   policy and inequality in the U.S. NBER Working Paper No. 18170.
Curdia, V. and M. Woodford (2011). The Central Bank’s Balance Sheet as an Instrument of
   Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 58.1 (136), 54–79.
DeFusco, A. and A. Paciorek (2015). The interest rate elasticity of mortgage demand: Evidence
   from bunching at the conforming loan limit. FEDS Working Paper 2014-11.
Del Negro, M., G. B. Eggertsson, A. Ferrero, and N. Kiyotaki (2011). The great escape? A
   quantitative evaluation of the Fed’s liquidity facilities. FRB of New York Staﬀ Report 520.
Di Maggio, M. and M. Kacperczyk (2014). The Unintended Consequences of the Zero Lower
   Bound Policy. Columbia Business School Research Paper 14-25.
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and R. Ramcharan (2014). Monetary Policy Pass-Through: House-
   hold Consumption and Voluntary Deleveraging. Columbia Business School Research Paper
   14-24.
Doepke, M. and M. Schneider (2006). Inflation and the redistribution of nominal wealth. Journal
   of Political Economy 114 (6), 1069–1097.
Downing, C., D. Jaﬀee, and N. Wallace (2009). Is the market for mortgage-backed securities a
   market for lemons? Review of Financial Studies 22 (7), 2457–2494.
Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2014). The Deposits Channel of Monetary Policy. Un-
   published manuscript.
Eggertsson, G. and M. Woodford (2003). The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Mone-
   tary Policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34 (1), 139–235.
Foley-Fisher, N., R. Ramcharan, and E. G. Yu (2014). The Impact of Unconventional Mone-
   tary Policy on Firm Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Maturity Extension Program.
   Working Paper.
Fuster, A., L. Goodman, D. O. Lucca, L. Madar, L. Molloy, and P. Willen (2013). The rising gap
   between primary and secondary mortgage rates. Economic Policy Review 19 (2).

                                              36
Fuster, A. and P. Willen (2010). $1.25 trillion is still real money: Some facts about the eﬀects of
   the federal reserve’s mortgage market investments. FRB of Boston Public Policy Discussion
   Paper 10-4.
Gagnon, J., M. Raskin, J. Remache, and B. P. Sack (2010). Large-scale asset purchases by the
   Federal Reserve: did they work? FRB of New York Staﬀ Report 441.
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2011). A model of unconventional monetary policy. Journal of Mon-
   etary Economics 58 (1), 17–34.
Glaeser, E. L. and H. D. Kallal (1997). Thin markets, asymmetric information, and mortgage-
   backed securities. Journal of Financial Intermediation 6 (1), 64–86.
Greenwald, D. L. (2016). The mortgage credit channel of macroeconomic transmission. Working
   Paper.
Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, and G. Y. Liao (2015). Price Dynamics in Partially Segmented
   Markets. HBS Working Paper.
Gurley, J. and E. Shaw (1960). Money in a Theory of Finance. Technical report, The Brookings
   Institution.
Hancock, D. and W. Passmore (2011). Did the Federal Reserve’s MBS purchase program lower
   mortgage rates? Journal of Monetary Economics 58 (5), 498–514.
He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy (2013). Intermediary asset pricing. The American Economic Re-
   view 103 (2), 732–770.
Jimenez, G., S. Ongena, and J.-L. Peydro (2012). Credit supply and monetary policy: Identifying
   the bank balance-sheet channel with loan applications. American Economic Review 102 (5),
   2301–2326.
Jimenez, G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydro, and J. Saurina (2014). Hazardous Times for Monetary
   Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Eﬀects of Monetary
   Policy on Credit Risk-Taking? Econometrica 82 (2), 463–505.
Kaplan, G. and G. L. Violante (2014). A model of the consumption response to fiscal stimulus
   payments. Econometrica 82 (4), 1199–1239.
Kashyap, A. K. and J. C. Stein (2000). What do a million observations on banks say about the
   transmission of monetary policy? American Economic Review , 407–428.
Keys, B. J., T. Piskorski, A. Seru, and V. Yao (2014). Mortgage Rates, Household Balance Sheets,
   and the Real Economy. NBER Working Paper No. 20561.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2011). The Eﬀects of Quantitative Easing on In-
   terest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
   215.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2013). The ins and outs of LSAPs. In Economic
   Symposium Conference Proceedings. Jackson Hole, WY: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

                                               37
Landier, A., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2013). Banks’ Exposure to Interest Rate Risk and The
   Transmission of Monetary Policy. NBER Working Paper No. 18857.
Maddaloni, A. and J.-L. Peydró (2011). Bank risk-taking, securitization, supervision, and low
   interest rates: Evidence from the Euro-area and the US lending standards. Review of Financial
   Studies 24 (6), 2121–2165.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2011). House prices, home equity–based borrowing, and the us household
   leverage crisis. The American Economic Review 101 (5), 2132–2156.
Palmer, C. (2015). Why Did So Many Subprime Borrowers Default During the Crisis: Loose
   Credit or Plummeting Prices? Working Paper.
Rodnyansky, A. and O. Darmouni (2016). The Eﬀects of Quantitative Easing on Bank Lending
   Behavior. Working Paper.
Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford (1997). An optimization-based econometric framework for the
   evaluation of monetary policy. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 12, 297–361.
Sarkar, A. and J. Shrader (2010). Financial amplification mechanisms and the Federal Reserve’s
   supply of liquidity during the crisis. Economic Policy Review 16 (1), 55.
Scharfstein, D. S. and A. Sunderam (2013). Concentration in Mortgage Lending, Refinancing
   Activity and Mortgage Rates. NBER Working Paper No. 19156.
Stein, J. C. (2012). Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation. The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 127 (1), 57–95.
Sterk, V. and S. Tenreyro (2014). The Transmission of Monetary Policy Operations through
   Redistributions and Durable Purchases. Working Paper.
Stroebel, J. and J. B. Taylor (2012). Estimated Impact of the Federal Reserve’s Mortgage-Backed
   Securities Purchase Program. International Journal of Central Banking.
Swanson, E. T. (2015). Measuring the Eﬀects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on Asset Prices.
   NBER Working Paper No. 21816.
Tobin, J. (1969). A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory. Journal of money, credit
   and banking 1 (1), 15–29.
Tobin, J. and W. C. Brainard (1963). Financial intermediaries and the eﬀectiveness of monetary
   controls. American Economic Review 53 (2), 383–400.
Vanasco, V. M. (2014). Information Acquisition vs. Liquidity in Financial Markets. Working
   Paper.
Vayanos, D. and J.-L. Vila (2009). A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest
   Rates. NBER Working Paper No. 15487.
Vickery, J. I. and J. Wright (2013). TBA trading and liquidity in the agency MBS market.
   Economic Policy Review 19 (1), 1–18.


                                              38
Wallace, N. (1981). A Modigliani-Miller theorem for open-market operations. American Economic
   Review , 267–274.
Williamson, S. D. (2012). Liquidity, monetary policy, and the financial crisis: A new monetarist
   approach. American Economic Review 102 (6), 2570–2605.




                                             39
                                 Figure 1. Federal Reserve Balance Sheet: Assets
                $5.0
                $4.5
                $4.0
                $3.5
 Trillion USD




                $3.0
                $2.5
                $2.0
                $1.5
                $1.0
                $0.5
                $0.0
                   Jan-07   Jan-08    Jan-09   Jan-10   Jan-11   Jan-12    Jan-13   Jan-14   Jan-15
                               Treasuries                        Agency Securities & RMBS
                               Direct Loans                      Net Portfolio Holdings
                               Other

Notes: Graph shows the size and the composition of assets on the Fed Balance sheet from 2007-2015.
Source: Fed H4.1 weekly reports.




                                                        40
                                          Figure 2. Quantitative Easing Timeline
Jun-08             Jun-09                   Jun-10             Jun-11                Jun-12                  Jun-13                 Jun-14

                        QE1                              QE2                                                 QE3
         Dec-08                        Apr-10   Sep-10         Jul-11                   Sep-12                                          Nov-14




           Mar-09: QE1 expanded                                  Oct-11: Maturity             Dec-12:             June-13:
           to purchase an additional                             Extension Program            MEP ends.           QE3 tapered
           $750 billion of MBS.                                  (MEP) begins.                QE3 expands.        over 10 months.




                                                                        41
                                                          Figure 3. Federal Reserve Asset Purchases & Sales (Gross)


                                           300
    Monthly Transaction Volume (Billion USD)

                                                          QE1              QE2            MEP            QE3
   -100        0       100       200




                                                 Jan-09      Jan-10      Jan-11     Jan-12      Jan-13     Jan-14     Jan-15

                                                                   Treasury Purchases                Agency Purchases
                                                                   Treasury Sales                    Agency Sales


Notes: Figure plots monthly gross transaction amounts for the purchase and sale of mortgage-backed
securities (in red) and Treasuries (in blue) by the Fed during the each quantitative easing operation. MEP
shading represents the period of the Matury Extension Program, also known as Operation Twist, that
involved the swapping of short- and long-term Treasuries. Source: NY Fed Open Market Operations Data.




                                                                                     42
                                                 Figure 4. Fed GSE MBS Net Purchases vs. Monthly GSE Issuance


                                           200
                                                                QE1                QE2       MEP                QE3
  Monthly Transaction Volume (Billion USD)
         50         100  0     150




                                        Jan-08         Jan-09      Jan-10     Jan-11      Jan-12     Jan-13       Jan-14

                                                          Fed GSE MBS Net Purchases                GSE Issuance


Notes: Figure plots the transaction amounts for the purchase of mortgage-backed securities by the Fed and
the issuance of GSE securities during the three quantitative easing operations. Source: NY Fed Open
Market Operations Data, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac.




                                                                              43
                        Figure 5. Interest Rates for Conforming and Jumbo Refinance Loans


            .07
            .065
            .06




                                         QE1                 QE2        MEP               QE3
        Interest Rate
   .045 .05 .055
            .04
            .035




                  Jan-08        Jan-09      Jan-10      Jan-11      Jan-12        Jan-13         Jan-14

                                                 Below CLL            Above CLL


Notes: Figure plots the estimated monthly interest rates for refinance loans above and below the confoming
loan limit with a loan-to-value ratio of 75% and a FICO score of 760 and 30 year fixed rate mortgage. The
estimates are based on all non-FHA first-lien refinance loans in LPS with LTV less or equal to 80% and
adjusted for the LTV and credit score of the borrower. See Section 5.1 for more details.




                                                       44
                                                             Figure 6. Refinance Origination Volume
                                                                     Panel I. Number of Originations




                                                                                                                                  5,000
                         180,000
                                                              QE1                      QE2         MEP                 QE3




                                                                                                                                                    4,000
  Non-Jumbo Originations




                                                                                                                                  Jumbo Originations
           120,000




                                                                                                                                   2,000   3,000
 60,000




                                                                                                                                  1,000
                       0




                                                                                                                                  0
                                     Jan-08         Jan-09          Jan-10           Jan-11    Jan-12        Jan-13          Jan-14

                                                             Below CLL (Left Axis)            Above CLL (Right Axis)


                                                                       Panel II. Origination Volume
                                               50




                                                                                                                                   5
    Non-Jumbo Origination Amount (Billion USD)




                                                              QE1                      QE2          MEP                QE3




                                                                                                                                   Jumbo Origination Amount (Billion USD)
                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                    4
                           30




                                                                                                                                                        3
                  20




                                                                                                                                                2
          10




                                                                                                                                       1
                            0




                                                                                                                                   0




                                          Jan-08    Jan-09          Jan-10           Jan-11    Jan-12        Jan-13          Jan-14

                                                             Below CLL (Left Axis)            Above CLL (Right Axis)


Notes: Figure plots the number of originations (top panel) and the origination volume (bottom
panel) of refinance mortgages below the conforming loan limit and above the conforming loan limit
as recorded by LPS. FHA loans are excluded from the data.




                                                                                        45
                                  Figure 7. Fed Gross MBS Purchases vs. Conforming Origination Volume

                 125




                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                 Origination Volume (Billion USD)
                            100




                                                                                                                                              35
   Fed Purchases (Billion USD)




                                                                                                                                     30
                   75




                                                                                                                               25
          50




                                                                                                                       20
  25




                                                                                                                15
                 0




                                  Jan-09                   Jul-09                Jan-10                  Jul-10

                                           Net Fed Agency Securities Purchases    Conforming Refinance Origination



Notes: Figure plots the monthly origination amount of refinance mortgages below the conforming loan
limit (right axis) recorded by LPS against the net monthly amount of Fed purchases of Agency securities
observed in NY Fed Open Market Operations data (left axis).




                                                                         46
                                             Figure 8. State-level Refinancing Activity vs. Lagged HPI and GDP Growth
                                                                               Panel I. Refinancing Activity and House-Price Growth

                                                                                                                                     WI
       2009 Aggregate Refinancing / Oustanding Balance

                                                                                                                                                       UT
                                                 .3



                                                                                                   VT
                                                                                                                                     AK                     ND   WYMT
                                                                                                                              CO NE           SD
                                      .25




                                                                                                                MA            MO
                                                                                                               DC WA
                                                                                                                    DE                    NC
                                                                                                                                   SC       OK
                                                                                                                              ID      KY AR
                                                                                                               ORVA
                                                                                                                HI                     TN
                                                                                                                  IL               IN    PA
                                                                                                           NJ                          AL NM                                 MS
                                                                                          RI            MD   NH CT
                            .2




                                                                                                        MN                           TX
                                                                                                                    OH
                                                                                                                  GA
                 .15




                                                              CA          AZ

                                                                                         MI

                                                         NV
        .1




                                                              FL

                                                              -.3                   -.2             -.1            0             .1                                     .2
                                                                                      Home Price Index Percentage Change 2006-2008


                                                                               Panel II. Refinancing Activity and Real GDP Growth

                                                                                          WI
 2009 Aggregte Refinancing / Oustanding Balance




                                                                                                                       UT
                                           .3




                                                                                               VT
                                                                                                                     MT       AK                            ND     WY
                                                                                                                    CO                            SD
                                                                                                        IA MO NE
                                .25




                                                                                                               MA        KS
                                                                                                                                     WA DC
                                                                    DE                          NC
                                                                                                  SC AR                       OK
                                                                                        KYME           ID
                                                                                           TN   VA IN                                        OR
                                                                                     IL             PAHI
                                                                               LA           AL NMNJ     MS
                                                                RI                    NH         CT WVMD
                      .2




                                                                                              MN                            TX
                                                                                    OH
                                                                                              GA
           .15




                                                                                                   AZ     CA

                                                              MI
                                                                                              NY
                                                                                     NV
  .1




                                                                          FL

                                                                   -.05                        0                 .05               .1                             .15
                                                                                               State-level Real GDP Growth 2006-2008


Notes: Figures plot the state-level percentage of 2009 outstanding mortgage balances that were
refinanced in 2009 against state-level 2006-2008 Zillow Home Price Index percentage changes (Panel
I) and 2006-2008 state-level real GDP growth (Panel II) from the BEA, along with the corresponding
bivariate regression line. The robust t-stats are 4.7 for panel I and 4.2 for panel II.



                                                                                                                       47
                       Figure 9. Loan-to-Value Ratio Bunching Pre-HARP
                          Panel I. Distribution of LTV for Original LTVs 80-90%

                           Average Cash-In: $2k, Bunching Rate: 34%, Bunching Average Cash-In: $9k




            60
            40
  Density

            20
            0




                 .7      .75                .8             .85                  .9                .95        1
                                                   Loan-to-Value Ratio

                                LTV Before Refinancing                               LTV After Refinancing
                                LTV on Outstanding Loans (Dec. 2008)



                         Panel II. Distribution of LTV for Original LTVs 70-80%

                          Average Cash-Out: $4k, Bunching Rate: 22%, Bunching Average Cash-Out: $9k
            30
            20
  Density

            10
            0




                 .65               .7                       .75                           .8                 .85
                                                    Loan-to-Value Ratio

                                LTV Before Refinancing                               LTV After Refinancing
                                LTV on Outstanding Loans (Dec. 2008)



Notes: Figures report the distribution of borrower LTV ratios for various groups during QE1 but before
the start of the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP) (Dec. 2008-May 2009). Panel I includes
loans for which we observe the predecessor loan with imputed LTV 80-90%. Panel II includes loans with
predecessor loan imputed LTV between 70-80%. Dotted lines plot the LTV distribution of all outstanding
loans in the indicated LTV range (i.e. not conditional on refinancing). Dashed lines represent the imputed
LTV distribution for mortgages that will be refinanced during the time period. To account for rolling
closing costs into the balance of the new loan, we add average refinancing costs ($3,000) to the loan
balance before the refinance. The solid blue lines report the distribution of actual LTV ratios for originated
refinance mortgages. The bunching rate is the number of refinance mortgages with an LTV ratio between
79.5% and 80.5% at origination divided by the total number of loans with an imputed LTV ratio exceeding
(below) 80% that refinance. Reported average cash-in (cash-out) is the average amount borrowers
refinancing an above (below) 80%-LTV ratio mortgage provide at the closing of their new refinance
mortgage. See text for average cash-in amounts conditional on deleveraging.


                                                          48
                      Figure 10. Loan-to-Value Ratio Bunching Post-HARP
                           Average Cash-In: $-1k, Bunching Rate: 11%, Bunching Average Cash-In: $9k




            20
            15
  Density

            10
            5
            0




                 .7       .75               .8              .85                 .9                .95        1
                                                    Loan-to-Value Ratio

                                LTV Before Refinancing                               LTV After Refinancing
                                LTV on Outstanding Loans (Dec. 2008)



Notes: Figures report the distribution of LTV ratios for HARP eligible loans during QE1 and after the
introduction of HARP (June 2009 - Mar. 2010) for loans for which we observe a predecessor loan with an
imputed LTV of 80-90%. Dotted lines plot the LTV distribution of all outstanding loans in the indicated
LTV range (i.e. not conditional on refinancing). Dashed lines represent the LTV distribution for mortgages
that will be refinanced during the time period. To account for rolling closing costs into the balance of the
new loan, we add average refinancing costs ($3,000) to balances before refinancing. The solid blue lines
report the distribution of actual LTV ratios for originated refinance mortgages. The bunching rate is the
number of refinance mortgages with an LTV ratio between 79.5% and 80.5% at origination divided by the
total number of loans with an imputed LTV ratio exceeding (below) 80% that refinance. Reported average
cash-in (cash-out) is the average amount borrowers refinancing an above (below) 80%-LTV ratio mortgage
provide at the closing of their new refinance mortgage.




                                                         49
                               Figure 11. Conforming Loan Limit Bunching
                   Panel I. Distribution of Loan Size/CLL for Original Balances 100-140% of CLL

                                      Average Cash-In: $31k, Bunching Rate: 35%, Bunching Average Cash-In: $73k




                   30
                   20
         Density

                   10
                   0




                        .8       .9              1            1.1         1.2         1.3                         1.4         1.5
                                               Ratio of Loan Amount to Conforming Loan Limit

                                  Balance/CLL After Refinance                                 Balance/CLL Before Refinance
                                  Balance/CLL (Outstanding as of Dec. 2008)



                   Panel II. Distribution of Loan Size/CLL for Original Balances 80-100% of CLL

                                  Average Cash-Out: $2k, Bunching Rate: 9%, Bunching Average Cash-Out: $17k
                   8
                   6
         Density

                   4
                   2
                   0




                        .7                    .8                     .9                    1                                 1.1
                                               Ratio of Loan Amount to Conforming Loan Limit

                                  Balance/CLL After Refinance                                Balance/CLL Before Refinance
                                  Balance/CLL (Outstanding as of Dec. 2008)



Notes: Figures plot distribution of loan sizes relative to the local conforming loan limit (CLL). Dashed
lines plot the distribution of normalized predecessor loan sizes (measured three months before refinancing)
for refinancing borrowers. Solid lines shows the distribution of normalized loan sizes for that group's new
refinance mortgages. Dotted lines plot the LTV distribution of all outstanding mortgages in the given LTV
range. Bunching rate is the number of refinance mortgages with relative CLL between 99.5% and 100.5%
at origination divided by count of loans with a relative CLL ratio exceeding (below) 100% that refinance.
Panel I includes loans for which we observe the predecessor loan with outstanding principal between 100
and 140% of the local CLL and loan whose outstanding balance (adjusted for expected refinancing costs) is
between 80 and 100% of the CLL. Panel II includes loans for which we observe the predecessor loan with
outstanding principal between 80 and 100% of the local CLL and loan whose outstanding balance
(adjusted for expected refinancing costs) is between 70 and 110% of the CLL.



                                                                   50
                                                             Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                                                                         Percentile
                            Count           Mean         Std. Dev.           1st            10th           50th             90th           99th

                                                                 Panel I. Below-Conforming Loan Limit Loans
     LTV                   7,308,119        66.69           18.09            27.40          40.70         69.24            88.18          109.20
     FICO                  7,308,076       751.90            51              594            681           766              804             819
     Interest Rate         6,374,466         4.56            0.96             2.75           3.38          4.50            5.75             7.13
     Balance               7,308,119       211,335         117,725          44,000         83,000        185,000          388,000         590,000

                                                                           Panel II. Jumbo Loans
     LTV                    172,212         64.73           14.70           28.50          43.22            67.23           80.00          95.80
     FICO                   150,730        761.30           36.02           660            709              770              800            814
     Interest Rate          172,182         4.10             1.14            1.88           2.75             3.88            5.63           7.25
     Balance                172,212        959,771         693,231         440,000        536,000          813,000        1,475,000      3,265,000

                                                                          Panel III. Spreads and Yields
51




     Guarantee fees             72            34.05            11.03          23.80           25.70           28.92           56.07          61.20
     Aaa Yields                 72            4.74             0.74            3.40            3.73            4.95           5.57            6.28
     Baa Yields                 72             6.08             1.13           4.51            4.85            5.97            8.06           9.21
     Baa-Aaa Spread             72            1.34             0.62            0.75            0.84            1.18           2.52            3.38
     CDS Spread                 72           177.29           231.84          13.48           37.07           89.91          166.61         1145.85
     Notes: Panel I & Panel II report loan-level summary statistics on conforming and jumbo loans from Equifax's CRISM database which merges
     McDash Analytics mortgage servicing records from Lender Processing Services with Equifax credit bureau data. Panel III reports summary statistics
     for time series controls used in robustness checks, including guarantee fees from Fuster et al. (2013), bond yields from Federal Reserve Economic
     Data (FRED) at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and CDS index from Markit.
                                           Table 2. Effect of QE Campaign Beginning on Interest Rates
                             (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)       (10)
     Program                         QE1                       QE2                      MEP                        QE3                   Tapering
                                                                 Panel I. 3-month Window Around Program Start
     Program Indicator   -117.053***                -36.552**                  -45.994***               -17.863**                   26.201
                           (13.862)                  (10.833)                     (7.296)                (5.913)                   (14.138)
     Program x Jumbo      53.069***    41.809***       -2.496        -1.800      6.559***     4.715       -0.417       -1.022      -22.445*     -24.829**
                            (7.099)     (7.485)       (6.394)       (5.964)       (1.206)    (2.375)     (1.465)      (1.739)       (8.825)      (8.216)
     Jumbo Indicator       21.778**    33.178***    46.188***      46.545***    17.795***   23.204***   23.307***    28.176***       -3.682       3.049
                            (6.231)     (5.516)       (5.547)       (5.034)       (1.182)    (2.019)     (1.250)      (1.258)       (3.436)      (2.726)
     Controls                             Yes                          Yes                     Yes                       Yes                       Yes
     County-Month FEs                     Yes                          Yes                     Yes                       Yes                       Yes
     Observations          331,895      331,895      292,290        292,290     180,055      180,055     201,060      201,060       262,493      262,493
     R-squared              0.488        0.669        0.217           0.457      0.276        0.462       0.076         0.336        0.099        0.383


                                                                 Panel II. 6-month Window Around Program Start
     Program Indicator   -139.649***                -46.907***                 -63.073***               -31.645***                 52.698***
52




                           (9.402)                    (8.795)                    (6.791)                  (5.887)                   (15.017)
     Program x Jumbo      62.298***        52.780***   -0.775           -1.324  12.604***        10.058*** -5.038          -4.799 -35.385***     -35.631***
                           (6.778)          (5.841)   (5.740)          (5.309)   (2.269)           (2.407)(3.545)         (2.944)    (8.226)       (6.683)
 Jumbo Indicator            8.473          20.154*** 40.559***       41.886***  14.304***        19.849***
                                                                                                         23.263***       27.578***    5.030       11.194**
                           (5.985)          (4.724)   (4.988)          (3.962)   (1.808)           (2.100)(1.366)         (0.801)    (4.417)       (3.989)
 Controls                                     Yes                         Yes                        Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 County-Month FEs                             Yes                         Yes                        Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Observations                789,945        789,945     568,776       568,776       351,042       351,042      438,201    438,201    470,820       470,820
 R-squared                    0.616          0.745       0.295           0.493       0.411          0.576       0.179       0.428     0.272         0.567
 Notes: The table reports regression coefficients relating loan-level mortgage interest rates (in basis points) to indicated unconventional monetary policy
 programs. QE, MEP ("Maturity Extension Program"), and Tapering Indicators are dummy variables equal to one after the introduction of each program
 (see Appendix Table 1). The sample includes single-family, first lien, 30-year term, fixed rate, non-interest only, non-balloon, and non-FHA refinance
 mortgages with no prepayment penalties and less than or equal to 80% LTV. Controls include binned original LTV and binned credit score. Jumbo Indicator
 is a dummy equal to one for jumbo loans. Program x Jumbo is the interaction between the program dummies and Jumbo Indicator. The event window
 includes the three (panel I) or six (panel II) months before/after the beginning month of each program period (e.g. QE1 sample in panel I is Sep2008-
 Feb2009). All specifications control for 5-point LTV bins, 20-point FICO bins, and an indicator for missing FICO. Even columns control for county by month
 fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the month level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
                                    Table 3. Effect of QE Campaign Beginning on Refinance Origination Volumes
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)       (10)
     Program                            QE1                       QE2                       MEP                        QE3                   Tapering
                                                                    Panel I. 3-month Window Around Program Start
     Program Indicator          1.019**                  0.487**                   0.547***                   0.141                     -0.346*
                                (0.291)                  (0.152)                    (0.079)                  (0.086)                    (0.148)
     Program x Jumbo           -0.824**     -0.791*       0.153         0.170        -0.058      -0.008       0.041         0.029       0.414**       0.372
                                (0.236)     (0.319)      (0.118)       (0.141)      (0.099)     (0.109)      (0.034)       (0.063)      (0.151)      (0.196)
     Jumbo Indicator          -2.141***    -2.128***    -2.294***     -2.240***   -1.739***    -1.689***    -1.473***     -1.482***    -1.388***    -1.491***
                                (0.099)     (0.092)      (0.077)       (0.076)      (0.043)     (0.071)      (0.006)       (0.015)      (0.019)      (0.028)
     Controls                                 Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
     County-Month FEs                         Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
     Observations                492          492          492           492         492           492          492          492          492          492
     R-squared                  0.637        0.925        0.586         0.946       0.463         0.941        0.338        0.919        0.279        0.916


                                                                    Panel II. 6-month Window Around Program Start
     Program Indicator         1.153***                  0.456**                   0.528***                  0.315***                  -0.745***
53




                                (0.203)                  (0.166)                    (0.092)                   (0.082)                    (0.186)
     Program x Jumbo          -1.011***      -0.969***    0.283*          0.322      -0.012          0.034     -0.026           -0.043  0.570***      0.547***
                                (0.148)       (0.209)    (0.142)         (0.189)    (0.079)         (0.113)   (0.036)          (0.066)   (0.093)       (0.147)
     Jumbo Indicator          -1.921***      -1.932***  -2.164***       -2.161*** -1.694***       -1.683*** -1.445***        -1.454*** -1.449***     -1.477***
                                (0.106)       (0.138)    (0.069)         (0.082)    (0.044)         (0.057)   (0.022)          (0.032)   (0.032)       (0.051)
     Controls                                   Yes                        Yes                        Yes                         Yes                    Yes
     County-Month FEs                           Yes                        Yes                        Yes                         Yes                    Yes
     Observations                  984          984           984          984           984          984          984            984          984       984
     R-squared                    0.617        0.935         0.548        0.938         0.446        0.937        0.357          0.922        0.284     0.921
     Notes: Table reports regression coefficients relating county x month x mortgage segment log refinancing volumes to unconventional monetary
     policy programs. The left-hand side variable is the log dollar volume of refinanced mortgages at the county-month level as reported in the CRISM data. QE,
     MEP ("Maturity Extension Program"), and Tapering Indicators are dummy variables equal to one after the introduction of each program (see Appendix
     Table 1). Jumbo Indicator is a dummy equal to one for jumbo loans. Program x Jumbo is the interaction between the program dummies and Jumbo
     Indicator. Controls consist of average FICO and average LTV of all mortgages originated in that county-month segment. The sample includes single-family,
     first lien, non-FHA refinance mortgages between 25 and 120% original LTV. Counties are included in the sample if they have a positive number of jumbo
     originations in every sample month. The event window includes the three months (panel I) or six months (panel II) before/after each QE period (e.g. QE1
     sample in panel I is Sep2008-Feb2009). Standard errors are clustered at the month level; asterisks denote conventional significance levels.
       Table 4. Robustness to Controlling for G-Fees, Credit Spreads and Banks CDS
                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)
Program               QE1            QE2             MEP            QE3         Tapering

                                                        Panel I. Interest Rates
Program x Jumbo            28.119**           -0.570            -4.706              4.568          -22.925**
                           (7.684)            (5.197)           (3.321)            (2.410)          (7.434)
Jumbo Indicator           -34.106***          9.232             -4.266            13.154***        10.353***
                           (2.500)            (4.593)           (2.334)            (0.732)          (1.707)


Controls                     Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
County-Month FEs             Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations               331,895           292,290            180,055            201,060          262,493
R-squared                   0.668             0.450              0.462              0.327            0.381

                                               Panel II. Refinance Origination Volumes
Program x Jumbo            -0.881**           0.128              0.162             -0.071            0.311
                           (0.339)            (0.140)           (0.147)            (0.087)          (0.180)
Jumbo Indicator           -2.641***         -2.525***          -2.322***          -2.165***        -3.140***
                           (0.079)            (0.090)           (0.091)            (0.024)          (0.020)


County-Month FEs             Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                 492               492                492               492               492
R-squared                     0.941              0.954             0.955             0.943             0.964
Notes: Panel I reports regression coefficients relating interest rates to the quantitative easing programs and to
the other monetary policy programs. The sample includes single-family, first lien, 30-year term, fixed rate, non-
interest only, non-balloon, and non-FHA refinance mortgages with no prepayment penalties and less than or
equal to 80% LTV. Controls include binned original LTV and binned credit score. In all columns, we first
subtract the contribution of the interaction of the Jumbo Indicator with a measure of Credit Spread (i.e. BBB to
AAA spread from St. Louis Fed), with guarantee fees from Fuster et al. (2013), with banks' CDS, and county x
month fixed effects as described in section 6.1.3. Panel II reports regression coefficients relating refinancing
volume to the quantitative easing programs and to the other monetary policy programs. The left hand side
variable is defined as the log of the dollar volume of refinanced mortgages as reported in the CRISM data. The
sample includes single-family, first lien, non-FHA refinance mortgages. Counties are included in the quantity
sample if they have greater than one jumbo origination in every month. We again subtract the contribution of
the interaction of the jumbo indicator with credit spread and with guarantee fees as described in section 6.1.3.
QE, MEP ("Maturity Extension Program"), and Tapering Indicators are dummy variables equal to one after the
introduction of each program. MEP begins in Sept. 2011. Tapering begins in June 2013. Jumbo Indicator is
a dummy equal to one for jumbo loans. QE x Jumbo is the interaction between the program dummies and
Jumbo Indicator. The event window includes the three months prior to and after the beginning month of each
QE period. For example, QE1 begins in December 2008, and the event window lasts from September 2008
through March 2009. Standard errors are clustered at the month level, and are reported in parentheses. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                        54
   Table 5. Hazard Model Estimates of QE1 Effect on Refinancing
                                        (1)       (2)      (3)
December 2008 Indicator                         0.151***    0.114**      0.108*
                                                (0.033)      (0.057)     (0.063)
January 2009 Indicator                          0.812***    0.954***    0.950***
                                                (0.027)      (0.046)     (0.051)
February 2009 Indicator                         1.245***    1.367***    1.372***
                                                (0.025)      (0.043)     (0.047)
Current LTV > .9 x December 2008                             -0.064       -0.063
                                                             (0.086)     (0.099)
Current LTV > .9 x January 2009                            -0.447***    -0.379***
                                                             (0.072)     (0.081)
Current LTV > .9 x February 2009                           -0.429***    -0.376***
                                                             (0.065)     (0.073)
December 2008 x Jumbo                                         0.120       0.017
                                                             (0.086)     (0.097)
January 2009 x Jumbo                                        -0.190**    -0.212**
                                                             (0.076)     (0.083)
February 2009 x Jumbo                                      -0.203***    -0.227***
                                                             (0.069)     (0.075)


Loan Controls                                     Yes          Yes         Yes
Borrower Controls                                                          Yes
Observations                                     1,691,380 1,691,380 1,407,066
Notes: Table reports maximum-likelihood estimates of the prepayment hazard
model described in Section 5.3. All specifications include a cubic function of loan
age as a non-parametric baseline hazard. Loan-level controls include current LTV,
loan size at origination, indicators for current LTV between 80 and 90%, current
LTV over 90%, and current balance over the conforming loan limit. Borrower
controls include DTI, a missing DTI indicator, and FICO bins. Jumbo is an
indicator for loan amount at least $60,000 above the CLL to account for cash-in
refinancing. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance
levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                        55
           Table 6. Hazard Model Estimates of QE1 Effect on Refinancing
                           Controlling for Coupon Gap
                                 (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
QE1 Indicator                 0.673***    0.725***    0.728***   0.501***    0.543***    0.493***
                               (0.018)     (0.020)     (0.020)    (0.018)     (0.020)     (0.020)

Current LTV > .9 x QE1                   -0.250*** -0.268***                 -0.255*** -0.274***
                                          (0.059)   (0.059)                   (0.059)   (0.059)

QE1 Indicator x Jumbo                    -0.189*** -0.194***                 -0.123***   -0.108**
                                          (0.047)   (0.047)                   (0.047)     (0.047)

Out-of-Sample Coupon Gap                                         0.002***    0.002***    0.002***
                                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)

Loan Controls                      yes        yes         yes         yes        yes        yes
Borrower Controls                                         yes                               yes
Observations                    2,053,902 2,053,902 2,053,902 2,053,902 2,053,902 2,053,902
Notes: Table reports maximum-likelihood estimates of the prepayment hazard model described in
Section 6.2.1. All specifications include a cubic function of loan age as a non-parametric baseline
hazard. Loan-level controls include current LTV, loan size at origination, indicators for current
LTV between 80 and 90%, current LTV over 90%, and current balance over the conforming loan
limit. Borrower controls include DTI, a missing DTI indicator, and FICO bins. Jumbo is an
indicator for loan amount at least $60,000 above the CLL to account for cash-in refinancing.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Columns (4)-(6) offset using a coupon gap estimate
calculated using the same model specifications on the time period May 2010 through Dec. 2012.




                                                56
                                  Table 7. Higher LTV Cap Simulation during QE1 (Dec. 2008—May 2009)
                                                               Without LTV             Counterfactual Higher
                                                                   Change                    LTV Cap                   Counterfactual Increase
                                                                       Actual                     Predicted                        Increase in
                                           Number of        Baseline Average                       Average           Increase in   Aggregate
                                           Mortgages        Percent Cash-Out           Predicted Cash-Out            Number of Equity Cashed-
             Current LTV Bin                in Bin          Prepaid     (In)            Prepaid      (In)            Refinances       Out

     Current LTV <= 60%                     10,974,369        7.9%       $39,176          7.9%        $40,371             0         $1,029,490,968
     60% < Current LTV <= 70%                3,740,057        7.3%       $17,752          7.3%        $18,614             0          $236,462,571
     70% < Current LTV <= 80%                4,337,909        6.7%        $9,316          7.7%        $14,580           40,222      $2,125,432,102
     80% < Current LTV <= 90%                3,795,757        4.3%        $2,700          6.9%         $7,982          101,469      $1,663,184,733
     90% < Current LTV <= 100%               2,869,281        2.4%        $2,170          4.4%          $501            56,148       ($86,882,422)
     100% < Current LTV <= 110%              1,713,517        1.2%        ($3,796)        1.2%        ($3,338)            0           $9,328,061
     110% < Current LTV <= 120%               585,146         0.5%       ($89,126)        0.5%        ($88,387)           0           $1,955,022
57




     120% < Current LTV                       740,546         0.4%      ($144,764)        0.4%       ($144,184)           0           $1,515,536

     Totals                            28,756,582             5.9%       $13,470          6.5%        $15,420          197,839      $4,980,486,570
     Total Adjusting for Data Coverage 59,909,546             5.6%       $15,459          6.5%        $15,420          412,165      $10,376,013,687
     Note: Baseline percent of loans prepaying over Dec. 2008—May 2009 are predicted values from Column 3 of Appendix Table 6. The number of
     mortgages includes all single family, first-lien mortgage as of December 2008 in LPS. Counterfactual Predicted Prepaid percent is from Column 5 of
     Appendix Table 6, and Predicted Average Cash-Out is from Column 3 of Appendix Table 7.
Appendix

A      Additional TBA Market Details

On the day a TBA contract is traded, the buyer and seller fix the basic characteristics of the

MBS to be delivered, with a 0.01% allowed variance in the par value at delivery. Sellers in the

TBA market are primarily mortgage originators seeking to lock in interest rates to hedge short-run

interest-rate risk. Buyers in this market include MBS sponsors who are assembling Collateralized

Mortgage Obligations for new securitizations. Generally, only six parameters of the mortgages to be

delivered are specified: agency (Fannie, Freddie, or Ginnie), weighted-average maturity, weighted-

average coupon (in 50 basis-point increments), price, par amount, and settlement date. For example,

a TBA contract might be simply specified FN3060, meaning that it represents a Fannie Mae-

guaranteed MBS whose weighted average maturity and coupon are 30 years and 6.0%, respectively.

A separate (much smaller) market exists called the Stipulated (STIP) market where CMOs with

detailed information disclosures are traded. For this reason, when there is information to disclose

about a MBS that enhances its value (e.g., predictors of lower early-termination risk), the STIP

market is a more favorable trading platform.37 Two days prior to the TBA settlement date, the

seller informs the buyer of the specific pools to be delivered and the trade is settled on an Agency-

determined settlement date. To deliver these pools, the seller has either acquired or originated

Agency-eligible mortgages and paid the necessary upfront fees (known as g-fees) to have them

assembled into an Agency-guaranteed pool.

    For a variety of reasons, the vast majority of mortgages comprising TBAs are recent originations.

Payment history information about seasoned mortgages can make them more valuable to trade on

the STIP market (in the case of good news) or ineligible for TBA inclusion (in the case of missed

payments, etc.). Adverse selection arising from the superior information set of the seller as to the

termination risk of the mortgages to be delivered is mitigated by “cheapest-to-deliver” expectations

and pricing by buyers and sellers (see Downing et al., 2009). This TBA contract standardization

eﬀectively commoditizes the MBS traded in TBAs, which, together with the government guarantee,

  37
     In the Agency market, due to the default guarantees provided by Fannie, Freddie, and Ginnie, the value of
MBS will primarily vary with the degree of termination risk borne by the investor since to the holder of a Agency-
guaranteed mortgage, the cash flows from default and prepayment look identical. This risk may be a function of
other features of the MBS not stipulated on the TBA forward contract, such as FICO, DTI, geographic location, etc.


                                                       58
provides the TBA market with a degree of liquidity unmatched by any other secondary mortgage

market.38



B        Robustness to Increasing Conforming Loan Limits

     In this appendix, we investigate the concern that the stronger response of GSE-eligible origi-

nations relative to jumbo originations around QE event dates simply reflects the establishment of

high-cost area designations. The conforming loan limit increased from about $400,000 to about

$700,000 for certain high-cost areas over time (see panel I of Appendix Figure 2). As mapped in

panel II of Appendix Figure 2, areas with the high-cost designation are mainly counties on the

coasts with higher land values. Although this increase occurred nearly a year before the beginning

of QE1, expanding the size of the conforming market by increasing the CLL in certain areas should

tilt originations from the jumbo segment to the GSE-eligible segment. To address this concern, we

construct an estimation sample to non-high-cost counties whose conforming loan limits last changed

in 2006, and even then only incrementally. Appendix Figure 3 shows that even when we restrict

attention to these areas, we observe a significant and diﬀerential increase in the origination of con-

forming loans around QE1. As before, origination volumes in the jumbo and conforming segments

track each other closely except during the QE1 period, justifying our parallel trends assumption.




    38
     While each mortgage is a highly diﬀerentiated product, all mortgages in a given TBA contract are essentially
behind a veil of ignorance and can thus be traded as a commodity. For market participants, the risk management and
valuation exercises are simplified as they need consider only the risks associated with the main characteristics of the
MBS. See Vickery and Wright (2013), who quantify the magnitude of the liquidity benefits of the TBA market, and
Glaeser and Kallal (1997) and Vanasco (2014) for theoretical treatments of this benefit. This fungibility, however,
is temporary. Upon settlement and delivery, the buyer observes the complete set of characteristics of each loan pool
and the market value of delivered mortgage-backed securities will incorporate this information.


                                                          59
Appendix Figure 1. Share of GSE Origination Owned by Federal Reserve, by Issuance Quarter
                   .6
                   .5
  % Owned By Fed
                   .4
                   .3
                   .2
                   .1




                                                        QE1          QE2        MEP        QE3
                   0




                        2006q1   2007q1   2008q1   2009q1   2010q1    2011q1   2012q1   2013q1   2014q1
                                                     Quarter of Issuance

Notes: Figure plots the percentage of GSE MBS volume issued in each quarter that was ultimately owned by the
Federal Reserve. Shaded regions indicate QE programs. Source: New York Federal Researve Open Market
Operations data.




                                                              60
                          Appendix Figure 2. Conforming Loan Limits
                Panel I. National and Maximum High-Cost Area Conforming Loan Limits

 $800,000


 $700,000


 $600,000


 $500,000


 $400,000


 $300,000


 $200,000


 $100,000


       $0




                               National CLL              County-Varying Max CLL

                        Panel II. The Geography of High-Cost County Designation




Notes: Panel I plots the national conforming loan limit over time and its maximal increase among certain
high-cost counties in early 2008. Some of these temporary high-cost exemptions expired on October 1,
2011. Panel II plots all counties in the contiguous state. Darkly shaded areas indicate counties designated
as high cost, defined as counties with conforming loan limits greater than $417,000.



                                                    61
            Appendix Figure 3. Refinance Origination Count in Low-Cost Areas




Notes: Figure plots the count of refinance mortgage originations in low-cost areas recorded by LPS for
loans below and above the GSE conforming loan limit (CLL). See notes for Figure 6.




                                                 62
                                                 Appendix Figure 4. Refinance Volume around CLL
                                                                 Panel I. Number of Originations




                                                                                                                                 5000
                         180000                            QE1                      QE2           MEP               QE3




                                                                                                                                                    4000
 Non-Jumbo Originations




                                                                                                                                 Jumbo Originations
           120000




                                                                                                                                   2000     3000
 60000




                                                                                                                                 1000
                         0




                                                                                                                                 0
                                        Jan-08   Jan-09          Jan-10           Jan-11    Jan-12        Jan-13          Jan-14

                                                          Below CLL (Left Axis)            Above CLL (Right Axis)


                                                                   Panel II. Origination Volume
                                            50




                                                                                                                               5
 Non-Jumbo Origination Amount (Billion USD)




                                                           QE1                      QE2         MEP                 QE3




                                                                                                                               Jumbo Origination Amount (Billion USD)
                                  40




                                                                                                                                                                4
                        30




                                                                                                                                                     3
               20




                                                                                                                                            2
       10




                                                                                                                                   1
                         0




                                                                                                                               0




                                       Jan-08    Jan-09          Jan-10           Jan-11    Jan-12        Jan-13          Jan-14

                                                          Below CLL (Left Axis)            Above CLL (Right Axis)


Notes: Figure plots the number of originations (top panel) and the origination volume (bottom
panel) of refinance mortgages below the conforming loan limit and above the conforming loan limit
as recorded by LPS. All the loans in the [90%, 140%] interval have been dropped. FHA loans are
excluded from the data. See notes for Figure 6.




                                                                                    63
                                                        Appendix Figure 5. Default Rates
                                                             Panel I. Delinquent within 1 year
                                    .075
  Percent Delinquent within 12 Months
                        .05




                                                                                               QE1             QE2
          .025        0




                                  Jan-04   Jan-05   Jan-06      Jan-07     Jan-08     Jan-09       Jan-10   Jan-11   Jan-12

                                                             GSE Refi                      Non-GSE Refi
                                                             All FHA Refi                  Cash-Out FHA Refi
                                                             All Cash-Out Refi


                                                             Panel II. Delinquent within 4 years
  Percent Delinquent within 4 Years
                    .2    .25    .3




                                                                                               QE1             QE2
  .05   .1    .15     0




                                  Jan-04   Jan-05   Jan-06      Jan-07     Jan-08     Jan-09       Jan-10   Jan-11   Jan-12

                                                             GSE Refi                      Non-GSE Refi
                                                             All FHA Refi                  Cash-Out FHA Refi
                                                             All Cash-Out Refi


Notes: Figure plots the percent of loans delinquent within 1 year (top panel) and within four years (bottom
panel) from refinancing for different types of refinances: GSE, FHA, cash-iout and non-GSE as recorded by
LPS.




                                                                             64
                          Appendix Figure 6. Loan-to-Value Ratio Bunching Pre-HARP
                                        for Original Loans Below 70%
                                    Panel I. Distribution of LTV for Original LTVs 0-60%
                                          Average Cash-Out: $37k, Bunching Rate: 4%, Bunching Average Cash-Out: $93k



                          6
                          4
              Density

                          2
                          0




                               0     .1         .2       .3        .4       .5        .6              .7        .8         .9   1
                                                                    Loan-to-Value Ratio

                                                        LTV Before Refinancing               LTV After Refinancing



                                    Panel II. Distribution of LTV for Original LTVs 60-70%
                                          Average Cash-Out: $13k, Bunching Rate: 11%, Bunching Average Cash-Out: $40k
                          15
                          10
                Density

                          5
                          0




                               .4          .5                 .6            .7                   .8                   .9        1
                                                                    Loan-to-Value Ratio

                                                        LTV Before Refinancing                LTV After Refinancing



Notes: Figures report the distribution of borrower LTV ratios during QE1 but before the start of the Home
Affordable Refinance Program (HARP) (Dec. 2008 to May 2009). Panel I includes loans for which we observe
the predecessor loan with imputed LTV 0-60%. Panel II includes loans for which we observe the predecessor
loan with imputed LTV below 60-70%. Dashed lines represent the imputed LTV distribution for mortgages
that will be refinanced during the time period. To account for rolling closing costs into the balance of the new
loan, we add average refinancing costs ($3,000) to the loan balance before the refinance. The solid blue lines
report the distribution of actual LTV ratios for originated refinance mortgages. The bunching rate is the
number of refinance mortgages with an LTV ratio between 79.5% and 80.5% at origination divided by the
total number of loans in the givenoriginal LTV range that refinance. Bunching average cash-out is the
average amount borrowers refinancing provide at the closing of their new refinance mortgage.




                                                                           65
                  Appendix Figure 7. Durable Goods Consumption Event Studies
                         Panel I. Effect of Refinancing on Mortgage Interest Payments




                               Panel II. Effect of Refinancing on Car Purchases




Notes: Figure plots event study coefficients on monthly mortgage interest payments (panel I) and on the
likelihood of purchasing a car (panel II, measured as increasing outstanding auto-related debt by more than
$5,000) of time until (or since) refinancing. The sample is restricted to borrowers who refinanced during the QE1
period. See Section 6.1.4 for more details.




                                                       66
 Appendix Table 1. Fed Unconventional Monetary Policy Announcement Dates and
                            Dates Used in Analysis

       Episode         Announcement Date              Event               Event Date

       QE1.1                25-Nov-08              QE 1 Start              Dec-2008
       QE1.2                 1-Dec-08
       QE1.3                16-Dec-08
       QE1.4                28-Jan-09
       QE1.5                18-Mar-09
       QE1.6                23-Sep-09              QE 1 End                Apr-2010
       QE2.1                10-Aug-10              QE 2 Start              Sep-2010
       QE2.2                21-Sep-10              QE 2 End                Jul-2011
       FG.1                  9-Aug-11              MEP Start               Sep-2011
       FG.2                 25-Jan-12
       QE3.1                13-Sep-12              QE 3 Start              Sep-2012
       QE3.2                22-May-13
       QE3.3                19-Jun-13               Tapering               Jun-2013
       QE3.4                 10-Jul-13
       QE3.5                18-Sep-13               QE 3 End               Oct-2014
Note: Table reports the timing of Federal Reserve Quantitative Easing announcements from
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2013) as
well as the dates used in the paper for each LSAP program.




                                            67
                                   Appendix Table 2. Mortgage Product Refinancing Transition Matrix
                                                                           Refinance Mortgage
                                     30-Yr FRM    <30-Yr FRM      ARM             FHA           IO       Other      Total
                                                               Panel I. Total 2006–2013
                    30-Year FRM          33.47%       14.08%           2.32%         3.25%       1.03%      0.21%     54.36%
Original Mortgage




                    <30-Year FRM          4.60%       12.20%           0.49%         0.76%       0.26%      0.04%     18.35%
                    ARM                   5.27%        0.92%           2.03%         0.72%       1.75%      0.19%     10.89%
                    FHA                   1.40%        0.76%           0.16%         7.58%       0.07%      0.03%      9.99%
                    IO                    2.90%        0.27%           0.64%         0.38%       1.66%      0.07%      5.93%
                    Other                 0.25%        0.09%           0.03%         0.07%       0.02%      0.02%      0.49%
                    Total                47.89%       28.33%           5.67%        12.77%       4.79%      0.55%    100.00%

                                                                    Panel II. 2006
                    30-Year FRM          20.20%        3.66%          4.45%          0.63%       4.14%      0.66%     33.75%
Original Mortgage




                    <30-Year FRM          6.52%        5.95%          1.03%          0.16%       1.05%      0.10%     14.80%
                    ARM                  13.45%        1.59%          8.14%          0.49%       8.06%      0.88%     32.61%
                    FHA                   3.04%        0.83%          1.01%          1.76%       0.46%      0.12%      7.23%
                    IO                    3.32%        0.30%          2.46%          0.07%       4.63%      0.27%     11.04%
                    Other                 0.22%        0.22%          0.07%          0.01%       0.04%      0.02%      0.58%
                    Total                46.75%       12.56%         17.15%          3.12%      18.37%      2.05%    100.00%

                                                                   Panel III. 2007
                    30-Year FRM          24.62%        3.82%         1.29%           1.38%       3.73%      0.90%     35.73%
Original Mortgage




                    <30-Year FRM          7.21%        6.24%         0.27%           0.29%       0.85%      0.11%     14.98%
                    ARM                  16.71%        1.94%         3.02%           1.49%       7.22%      0.91%     31.28%
                    FHA                   2.49%        0.73%         0.18%           1.89%       0.22%      0.11%      5.62%
                    IO                    4.73%        0.30%         0.88%           0.30%       4.88%      0.34%     11.43%
                    Other                 0.47%        0.15%         0.06%           0.06%       0.12%      0.10%      0.95%
                    Total                56.22%       13.18%         5.70%           5.41%      17.02%      2.47%    100.00%

                                                                   Panel IV. 2008
                    30-Year FRM          28.70%        7.91%         0.78%         7.46%         1.01%      0.20%     46.06%
Original Mortgage




                    <30-Year FRM          6.13%        9.29%         0.22%         1.57%         0.25%      0.04%     17.49%
                    ARM                   9.48%        1.87%         1.24%         3.21%         1.59%      0.08%     17.45%
                    FHA                   1.21%        0.75%         0.05%         5.68%         0.02%      0.02%      7.73%
                    IO                    5.03%        0.44%         0.42%         1.24%         2.72%      0.05%      9.91%
                    Other                 0.69%        0.19%         0.03%         0.35%         0.06%      0.03%      1.35%
                    Total                51.24%       20.45%         2.74%        19.50%         5.65%      0.42%    100.00%

                                                                   Panel V. 2009
                    30-Year FRM          39.53%        9.26%         0.95%          6.44%        0.16%      0.05%     56.38%
Original Mortgage




                    <30-Year FRM          5.60%        8.91%         0.17%          1.38%        0.05%      0.02%     16.14%
                    ARM                   3.59%        0.67%         0.48%          0.71%        0.13%      0.02%      5.61%
                    FHA                   0.62%        0.38%         0.01%        15.09%         0.00%      0.00%     16.10%
                    IO                    3.63%        0.26%         0.23%          0.68%        0.62%      0.01%      5.43%
                    Other                 0.19%        0.04%         0.00%          0.11%        0.00%      0.00%      0.35%
                    Total                53.17%       19.51%         1.85%        24.41%         0.96%      0.11%    100.00%
                                                           (continued on next page)

                                                                       68
                             Appendix Table 2 (cont.). Mortgage Product Refinancing Transition Matrix
                                                                 Refinance Mortgage
                                   30-Yr FRM    <30-Yr FRM   ARM        FHA             IO           Other          Total

                                                             Panel VI. 2010
                    30-Year FRM        35.07%       17.71%     3.06%         4.48%        0.21%          0.07%        60.60%
Original Mortgage




                    <30-Year FRM        3.73%       14.53%     0.59%         1.10%        0.06%          0.03%        20.04%
                    ARM                 1.69%        0.58%     1.16%         0.30%        0.10%          0.02%         3.84%
                    FHA                 0.69%        0.57%     0.04%         9.28%        0.00%          0.00%        10.58%
                    IO                  2.63%        0.29%     0.55%         0.44%        0.74%          0.01%         4.68%
                    Other               0.16%        0.04%     0.01%         0.05%        0.00%          0.00%         0.27%
                    Total              43.98%       33.72%     5.40%        15.65%        1.12%          0.14%       100.00%

                                                             Panel VII. 2011
                    30-Year FRM        33.29%       20.38%     4.88%         2.72%        0.29%          0.10%        61.66%
Original Mortgage




                    <30-Year FRM        3.46%       17.97%     0.98%         0.79%        0.10%          0.04%        23.33%
                    ARM                 1.13%        0.49%     1.69%         0.17%        0.11%          0.02%         3.61%
                    FHA                 0.90%        0.89%     0.10%         5.42%        0.00%          0.01%         7.32%
                    IO                  1.86%        0.26%     0.76%         0.19%        0.77%          0.02%         3.85%
                    Other               0.13%        0.05%     0.01%         0.02%        0.00%          0.00%         0.23%
                    Total              40.78%       40.04%     8.43%         9.30%        1.27%          0.18%       100.00%

                                                             Panel VIII. 2012
                    30-Year FRM        40.77%       21.81%      2.76%         0.83%       0.24%          0.02%        66.43%
Original Mortgage




                    <30-Year FRM        2.55%       16.49%      0.59%         0.30%       0.08%          0.00%        20.02%
                    ARM                 0.93%        0.38%      1.26%         0.04%       0.08%          0.00%         2.69%
                    FHA                 1.11%        0.85%      0.06%         6.28%       0.00%          0.00%         8.31%
                    IO                  1.29%        0.18%      0.27%         0.03%       0.53%          0.00%         2.30%
                    Other               0.15%        0.06%      0.03%         0.01%       0.00%          0.00%         0.25%
                    Total              46.81%       39.77%      4.98%         7.49%       0.93%          0.03%       100.00%

                                                           Panel IV. 2013
     30-Year FRM              36.26%           24.16%         1.47%         0.56%          0.17%         0.00%         62.62%
Original Mortgage




     <30-Year FRM              2.57%           16.76%         0.31%         0.19%          0.06%         0.00%         19.88%
     ARM                       1.24%            0.54%         1.48%         0.05%          0.10%         0.00%          3.42%
     FHA                       1.97%            1.24%         0.10%         8.14%          0.01%         0.00%         11.46%
     IO                        1.32%            0.20%         0.26%         0.03%          0.53%         0.00%          2.34%
     Other                     0.18%            0.07%         0.03%         0.01%          0.00%         0.00%          0.29%
     Total                    43.53%           42.98%         3.65%         8.97%          0.86%         0.00%        100.00%
Notes: Table reports the percent of first-lien mortgages refinancing from a given original mortgage type (row) in a given year
(panel) into the given refinance mortgage product type (column) from 2006 and 2013. Mortgage product categories are
mutually exclusive. 30-Year FRM includes all non-FHA fixed-rate mortgages with original term of exactly 30 years. <30-Year
FRM includes non-FHA fixed-rate mortgages with original terms under 30 years. ARM includes non-interest-only and non-
FHA adjustable-rate mortgages. FHA includes all Federal Housing Administration loans, regardless of other product
characteristics. IO includes all non-FHA interest only loans. Other includes various other product types including, for
example, fixed-rate loans with an original term over 30 years. Source: LPS and Equifax.




                                                                 69
   Appendix Table 3. Robustness to G-Fees and Credit Spreads: 6-Month Window
                      (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)
Program              QE1          QE2          MEP          QE3        Tapering
                                                       Panel I. Interest Rates
Program x Jumbo           26.039***         -1.594             2.015             12.839***   -25.011***
                           (4.124)          (4.654)           (3.865)             (3.015)     (5.065)
Jumbo Indicator          -32.950***         6.599*           -10.550**            5.174*     12.100***
                           (2.718)          (3.220)           (3.661)             (2.616)     (1.138)
Controls                     Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes          Yes
County x Month FEs           Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes          Yes
Observations               789,945          568,776           351,042             438,201     470,820
R-squared                   0.744            0.489             0.577               0.419       0.569


                                           Panel II. Refinance Origination Volumes
Program x Jumbo             -0.553           0.289             0.176             -0.296**     0.291*
                           (0.323)          (0.173)           (0.142)             (0.125)     (0.142)
Jumbo Indicator           -2.558***        -2.476***         -2.285***           -2.052***   -2.947***
                           (0.074)          (0.079)           (0.084)             (0.074)     (0.116)
County x Month FEs           Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes          Yes
Observations                 984              984               984                984          984
R-squared                     0.942           0.948            0.951            0.943            0.963
Notes: Panel I reports regression coefficients relating interest rates to the quantitative easing programs
and to the other monetary policy programs. The sample includes single-family, first lien, 30-year term,
fixed rate, non-interest only, non-balloon, and non-FHA refinance mortgages with no prepayment
penalties with less than or equal to 80% LTV. Controls include binned original LTV and credit score. In
all columns, we subtract the contribution of an interaction of the Jumbo Indicator with a measure of
Credit Spread (i.e. BBB to AAA spread) and with guarantee fees as described in section 6.1.3 as well as
county by month fixed effects. Panel II reports regression coefficients relating refinancing volume to the
quantitative easing programs and to the other monetary policy programs. The left hand side variable is
defined as the log of the dollar volume of refinanced mortgages as reported in the CRISM data. The
sample includes single-family, first lien, non-FHA refinance mortgages. Counties are included in the
sample that have positive jumbo originations every month. In both Panel I & II for all columns, we
control for the interaction of the jumbo indicator with a measure of Credit Spread (i.e. BBB to AAA
spread), with guarantee fees, and with average bank CDS spreads. QE, MEP ("Maturity Extension
Program"), and Tapering Indicators are dummy variables equal to one after the introduction of each
program. MEP begins in Sept. 2011. Tapering begins in July 2013. Jumbo Indicator is a dummy equal
to one for jumbo loans. QE x Jumbo is the interaction between the program dummies and Jumbo
Indicator. The event window includes the six months prior to and after the beginning month of each QE
period. For example, QE1 begins in December 2008, and the event window lasts from June 2008 through
June 2009. Standard errors are clustered at the month level, and are reported in parentheses. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                      70
               Appendix Table 4. Coefficients on Time-Series Controls
                         (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)                        (5)
                         QE1         QE2          MEP         QE3                      Tapering
                                                   Panel   I. Interest Rates
AB Spread × Jumbo          0.276***       0.206***          0.187***        0.130**     0.189***
                            (0.063)        (0.049)           (0.048)        (0.057)      (0.060)
G-Fee × Jumbo             -1.497***      -1.429***         -1.614***       -1.613***   -1.305***
                            (0.173)        (0.190)           (0.172)        (0.172)      (0.356)
CDS × Jumbo                  -0.011         -0.000            -0.003         0.018        0.004
                            (0.014)        (0.010)           (0.010)        (0.011)      (0.012)

Controls                     Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes
County-Month FEs             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes
Observations              2,618,508      2,839,677         3,057,411      2,970,252    2,937,633
R-squared                   0.781          0.799             0.788          0.740        0.748

                                        Panel II. Refinance Origination Volume
AB Spread × Jumbo            0.002         -0.001         -0.001        -0.002           -0.002
                            (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.002)
G-Fee × Jumbo              0.025***      0.022***       0.026***      0.025***         0.033***
                            (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)          (0.005)
CDS × Jumbo               -0.001***      -0.001**        -0.001*        -0.001          -0.001*
                            (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)          (0.000)

Controls                      Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
County-Month FEs              Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                 4,920          4,920         4,920          4,920          4,920
R-squared                    0.930          0.930         0.930          0.932          0.932
Notes: Each column estimates the relationship between interest rates (panel I) and origination
volumes (panel II) to credit spreads and guarantee fees for all months between 2008-2013 except
for the six months before/after the indicated program. The sample for panel I includes loans with
LTV less than or equal to 80%, controlling for county by month fixed effects. The sample for
panel II has two observations for each county-month: log of total refinance origination below the
conforming loan limit and above the conforming loan limit for counties that had non-zero
refinancing activity in both the jumbo and non-jumbo segments throughout the sample period.
We control for county by month fixed effects. QE1 begins in December 2008, QE2 begins in
September 2010, MEP begins in September 2011, QE3 begins in September 2012, and Tapering
begins in June 2013. Clustered standard errors are reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote
significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                               71
     Appendix Table 5. OLS Estimation of Treasury Rates and Predicted Mortgage Rates
                             (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
                                     Predicted            Predicted            Predicted
                          Predicted Conforming Predicted Conforming Predicted Conforming
                         Jumbo Rate    Rate    Jumbo Rate   Rate    Jumbo Rate   Rate

5-year Treasury Yield     0.631***       0.635***                                       0.063        0.199***
                           (0.025)        (0.018)                                      (0.087)        (0.070)
10-year Treasury Yield                                  0.841***       0.836***       0.762***       0.585***
                                                         (0.030)        (0.019)        (0.120)        (0.093)
Constant                  0.038***       0.037***       0.026***       0.024***       0.027***       0.028***
                           (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.001)

Observations                   156            156            156            156            156              156
R-squared                     0.763          0.862          0.802          0.883          0.803            0.888
Notes: Each column estimates the relationship between interest rates to constant maturity treasury yields. The
odd columns consider the jumbo rates, while the even columns analyze the conforming rates. Columns 1 and 2
consider the relation between mortgage rates and the treasury rate with 5 year maturity, while Columns 3 and 4
investigate the relation to the 10 year maturity. Columns 5 and 6 consider include both treasury rates in the
specification. Clustered standard errors are reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance levels
(***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                       72
       Appendix Table 6. Prepayment Probability during QE1 (Dec. 2008—May 2009)
                   (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)
                                         Prediction      Prediction for  Prediction for
                             Prediction   (Loan &          LTV Cap         LTV Cap
 Current LTV Actual Percent    (Loan      Borrower      Increase to 90% Increase to 90%
     Bin         Prepaid      Controls)   Controls)         (Col. 2)        (Col. 3)

[0%, 60%]                7.4%            7.9%               7.9%               7.9%                 7.9%
(60%, 70%]               7.1%            7.3%               7.3%               7.3%                 7.3%
(70%, 80%]               6.7%            6.8%               6.7%               7.7%                 7.7%
(80%, 90%]               4.1%            4.4%               4.3%               7.3%                 6.9%
(90%, 100%]              2.4%            2.5%               2.4%               4.9%                 4.4%
(100%, 110%]             1.2%            1.4%               1.2%               1.4%                 1.2%
(110%, 120%]             0.7%            0.7%               0.5%               0.7%                 0.5%
Above 120%               0.8%            0.7%             0.4%                 0.7%                 0.4%
Note: Table reports the actual percent of loans prepaying over Dec. 2008—May 2009 in column 1, the predicted
probability of prepayment using the hazard model with loan characteristic controls in column 2, and the predicted
probability of prepayment using the hazard model with loan and borrower characteristic controls in column 3.
Columns 4 & 5 predict prepayment probability by shifting the LTV bins down by one bin for loans with current
LTV between 70% and 100%.




                                                       73
     Appendix Table 7. Cash-Out Estimate during QE1 (Dec. 2008—May 2009)
                        (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                                       Cash-Out Model       Prediction for LTV
 Current LTV Actual Average Cash-      (Loan & Equity       Increase & Equity
     Bin                Out               Controls)          Decrease (Col. 3)

[0%, 60%]                   $39,176                    $39,176                    $40,371
(60%, 70%]                  $17,752                    $17,752                    $18,614
(70%, 80%]                  $9,316                      $9,316                    $14,580
(80%, 90%]                  $2,700                      $2,700                     $7,982
(90%, 100%]                 $2,170                      $2,170                      $501
(100%, 110%]                ($3,796)                   ($3,796)                   ($3,338)
(110%, 120%]               ($89,126)                   ($89,126)                  ($88,387)
Above 120%                  ($144,764)                 ($144,764)                  ($144,184)
Note: Table reports the actual cash-out amounts over Dec. 2008—May 2009 in column 1, and the
predicted cash-out amounts using an OLS model with loan and equity characteristic controls in column
2. Column 3 predicts cash-out amounts by shifting the LTV bins down by one bin for loans with
current LTV between 70% and 100%, and changing the equity calculation from 20% to 10%. Equity
calculated as property value minus unpaid balance on original loan minus 20% of property value.




                                                74
Appendix Table 8. Prepayment Probability during QE1 using Refinance Hazard
                              Model Results
                                                  (1)             (2)
Ln(Original Loan Amount)                                    0.319***            0.251***
                                                             (0.009)             (0.010)
CLL+60000<Current Balance                                   -1.066***          -1.067***
                                                             (0.023)             (0.025)
LTV<=60%                                                    -7.015***          -6.154***
                                                             (0.116)             (0.133)
60%<LTV<=70%                                                -7.088***          -6.175***
                                                             (0.117)             (0.135)
70%<LTV<=80%                                                -7.200***          -6.291***
                                                             (0.117)             (0.134)
80%<LTV<=90%                                                -7.714***          -6.800***
                                                             (0.118)             (0.136)
90%<LTV<=100%                                               -8.320***          -7.366***
                                                             (0.120)             (0.139)
100%<LTV<=110%                                              -8.984***          -8.106***
                                                             (0.134)             (0.155)
110%<LTV<=120%                                              -9.671***          -9.051***
                                                             (0.187)             (0.235)
120%<LTV                                                    -9.779***          -9.348***
                                                             (0.206)             (0.285)


Loan Controls                                                  Yes                Yes
Borrower Controls                                                                 Yes
Observations                                                 2,468,905           2,035,027
Notes: Table reports the results of a hazard model estimating the propensity to refinance. All
specifications include a cubic function of loan age as a non-parametric baseline hazard. Loan-
level controls include current LTV bin, loan size at origination, and current balance over the
conforming loan limit. Borrower controls include DTI, a missing DTI indicator, and FICO bins.
Jumbo is an indicator for loan amount at least $60,000 above the CLL to account for cash-in
refinancing. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                             75
                 Appendix Table 9. Cash-Out Regression Estimates during QE1
                                                     (1)           (2)                               (3)
Equity Available (20%)                                                          0.025***          0.023***
                                                                                 (0.006)           (0.006)
Unpaid Balance > 80% LTV X Equity Available (20%)                                                 0.451***
                                                                                                   (0.098)
Log Unpaid Balance                                          -5,942.455***     -7,736.501***     -5,584.112***
                                                              (293.676)         (526.326)         (699.385)
Unpaid Balance > CLL+$60,000                               -89,972.064***    -94,673.259***    -89,991.239***
                                                             (2,765.606)       (2,889.990)       (2,808.333)
60%<LTV<=70%                                               -17,270.706***    -13,462.585***    -14,157.241***
                                                              (404.527)        (1,017.086)        (968.142)
70%<LTV<=80%                                               -22,716.783***    -17,938.175***    -18,871.462***
                                                              (412.408)        (1,246.156)       (1,186.598)
80%<LTV<=90%                                               -27,876.773***    -22,551.291***    -19,801.435***
                                                              (353.535)        (1,361.538)       (1,341.236)
90%<LTV<=100%                                              -26,181.303***    -20,318.167***     -6,619.607**
                                                              (328.689)        (1,487.384)       (3,150.314)
100%<LTV<=110%                                             -31,690.277***    -26,046.732***    -10,656.271***
                                                              (353.255)        (1,439.077)       (3,467.823)
110%<LTV<=120%                                             -110,364.624***   -101,578.779***   -60,053.387***
                                                             (3,989.665)       (4,443.665)       (9,589.823)
120%<LTV                                                   -166,534.843***   -156,179.071***   -86,735.836***
                                                             (5,896.883)       (6,131.483)      (12,833.365)


R-squared                                                       0.035             0.038             0.040
Observations                                                   820,653           820,653           820,653
Notes: Table reports regression estimates of cash-out refinances. Left-hand side variable is cash-out amount.
To account for rolling closing costs into the balance of the new loan, we add average refinancing costs ($3,000)
to the loan balance before the refinance. All specifications include a cubic function of loan age as a non-
parametric baseline hazard. Equity Available is calculated as property value minus unpaid balance on the
borrower's previous mortgage, minus a 20% down payment (calculated as 20% of the original loan amount).
Loan-level controls include current LTV bin, and loan size at origination. Jumbo is an indicator for loan
amount at least $60,000 above the CLL to account for cash-in refinancing. Robust standard errors in
parentheses.




                                                      76
