                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             RESEARCH AND IMPACTS OF DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES

                                          Dean Karlan
                                          Jake Kendall
                                         Rebecca Mann
                                          Rohini Pande
                                          Tavneet Suri
                                        Jonathan Zinman

                                      Working Paper 22633
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22633


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




Jake Kendall and Rebecca Mann worked for the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation while writing
this paper and the Foundation sponsored some of the research presented in this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research nor of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Dean Karlan, Jake Kendall, Rebecca Mann, Rohini Pande, Tavneet Suri, and Jonathan
Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Research and Impacts of Digital Financial Services
Dean Karlan, Jake Kendall, Rebecca Mann, Rohini Pande, Tavneet Suri, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 22633
September 2016, Revised September 2016
JEL No. G21,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

A growing body of rigorous research shows that financial services innovations can have
important positive impacts on wellbeing, but also that many do not. We first describe the latest
evidence on what works in financial inclusion. Second, we summarize research on key financial
market failures and on products and innovations that address specific mechanisms underlying
them. We conclude by highlighting open areas for future work.


Dean Karlan                                    Rohini Pande
Department of Economics                        Kennedy School of Government
Yale University                                Harvard University
P.O. Box 208269                                79 JFK Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8629                       Cambridge, MA 02138
and CEPR                                       and NBER
and also NBER                                  rohini_pande@harvard.edu
dean.karlan@yale.edu
                                               Tavneet Suri
Jake Kendall                                   MIT Sloan School of Management
Caribou Digital                                100 Main Street, E62-517
kendall_jake@hotmail.com                       Cambridge, MA 02142
                                               and NBER
Rebecca Mann                                   tavneet@mit.edu
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
Seattle, WA                                    Jonathan Zinman
rebecca.mann@gatesfoundation.org               Department of Economics
                                               Dartmouth College
                                               314 Rockefeller Hall
                                               Hanover, NH 03755
                                               and NBER
                                               jzinman@dartmouth.edu
Research and Impacts of Digital Financial Services

By: Dean Karlan, Jake Kendall, Rebecca Mann, Rohini Pande, Tavneet Suri Jonathan Zinman


The value of financial services in the lives of the poor - what works and why?
The roughly 2.5 billion people in the world who live on less than $2 a day are not destined to
remain in a state of chronic poverty. Every few years, somewhere between 10 and 30 percent of
the world’s poorest households manage to escape poverty. Typically this is done by finding
steady employment or through entrepreneurial activities such as growing a business or
improving agricultural harvests. During that same period, however, roughly an equal number of
households slip below the poverty line. Health-related emergencies are the most common
cause, but there are many more: crop failures, livestock deaths, farming-equipment
breakdowns, and even wedding expenses.
In many situations, financial tools such as personal savings, insurance, credit, or cash transfers
from family and friends are important buffers against crippling setbacks. However, key market
failures, such as imperfect information, behavioral biases, high transaction costs, property rights
which are not enforceable, and lack of competition, create wedges that inhibit the delivery of
traditional financial services. The volatile income and subsistence status of the poor also
exacerbate the nature and welfare implications of these market failures. Digital financial
platforms offer many promising opportunities to dramatically improve both products and the
market environment, but require care and a nuanced understanding of the market failures that
currently plague poor families.
A growing body of rigorous research shows that financial services innovations can have
important positive impacts on wellbeing, but also that many do not. We first describe the latest
evidence on what works in financial inclusion. Second, we summarize research on key financial
market failures and on products and innovations that address specific mechanisms underlying
them. We conclude by highlighting open areas for future work.
Rigorous evidence on welfare impacts of financial interventions for poor households
Below, we review the basic evidence of impacts for credit, savings, insurance and payments.
 All but a few of the findings we cite were generated through randomized control trial studies
(see Appendix A for list of studies).
1.     Impact evidence on traditional one size fits all microcredit is mixed but, in general,
       fails to deliver on the historic claims:
Seven randomized evaluations from around the world show that the traditional one size fits all
microcredit product - which is associated with high repayment and low default - did not increase
average income or consumption of households. Expanded access to this product did lead some
entrepreneurs to increase business investments, but rarely increased profits, (though for a
subset of existing entrepreneurs, did produce significant improvements in one study). None of
the studies found an impact on borrowers’ average household income and only one found an
impact on decision-making power for women within the household, (Banerjee et al., 2015 ,
IPA/J-PAL Policy Bulletin, 2015). That said, other forms of credit have shown more promise
including short term credit to smooth consumption in the lean season which lead to a 10 percent
increase in farm output, (Fink et al., 2014); and short term consumer credit in South Africa which
lead to 11 percent more maintaining a job, (most likely by helping to absorb shocks that took
people out of the labor force), higher income and stronger credit scores, (Karlan and Zinman
2010).

1|Page
2.     Impact evidence on savings indicate replicable positive household welfare
       impacts:
Without being exhaustive, we highlight research into the impact of savings products, (see Karlan
et. al., 2014 for a more complete review). With basic savings products, eliminating account
opening costs in Kenya significantly increased uptake, overall savings, and investment levels
among market vendors, (Dupas and Robinson, 2013a). Replication studies in Uganda, Malawi
and Chile, (Dupas et al. 2016), also found that removing account opening costs increased
savings, but was partially offset by a reduction in informal savings. Ultimately, there were no
impacts on business investment or income in the three replications. In Nepal, offering female-
headed households a no-fee basic account with deposit collection service led to high uptake
and usage, with 80 percent still using the account after one year. Households responded better
to health shocks and spent 20 percent more on education and 15 percent more on meat and
fish, (Prina, 2015). In rural Malawi, farmers with access to savings accounts preserved more
savings throughout harvest and planting seasons. They increased cultivated land by 7 percent,
crop output by 15 percent, and expenditure by 10 percent (Brune et al., 2016). For village
savings groups in Mali, researchers found improvements in buffer stock savings, food security
and consumption smoothing, (Beaman et al., 2014). In Uganda, Malawi and Ghana, impacts
were on food security, consumption during droughts, business investment and women’s
empowerment, (Karlan et al., ongoing).
Commitment savings products have lock up periods, fees, or other penalties for early withdrawal
that “commit” the client to the savings goal. Women offered an individually-held commitment
savings account in the Philippines reported increased decision-making power within the
household, (a 0.14-0.25 standard deviation increase in an index of decision-making), with even
larger effects for women who started out with below-median decision-making power. Durable
goods purchased also shifted towards “female-oriented” goods, e.g. washing machines and
kitchen appliances, (Ashraf et al., 2010). In Kenya, a simple “Safe Box” that allowed users to
save for preventive or emergency health in a metal box to which they had a key increased
achievement of health savings goals by 14 percentage points, (Dupas and Robinson, 2013b). In
Uganda, primary school students who were offered a soft commitment savings account, (funds
were available for withdrawal but simply labeled as being “for education”), combined with a
parental outreach program on how to support child education increased spending on school
supplies and improved test scores by 0.14 standard deviations, (Karlan and Linden, 2016).
Overall, savings accounts for low income households demonstrate strong potential to improve
client welfare. Often the beneficial impacts of savings accounts require account features that
help people overcome behavioral biases such as fortifying willpower and memory, (see below
for more on biases). They may also require easier “on-ramps”, given that uptake and active
usage remain puzzlingly low despite positive impacts. These features will become easier to
deliver with the advent of digital platforms which can be configured to create sub accounts,
labeling, real time information, and other decision aids.
3.     Impact evidence on insurance is small but potentially promising however current
       business models fail to deliver scale
Research on insurance has been largely focused on agriculture, though a number of ongoing
studies examine health insurance. In Ghana, farmers who received a rainfall index insurance
grant cultivated more land and spent 13 percent more on fertilizer and labor than those who
received cash grants, implying that uninsured risk - not lack of access to capital - is a primary
constraint for farmer growth, (Karlan et al., 2016). In India, when farmers were given rainfall
index insurance, 6 percent more farmers focused production towards higher-return but higher-
risk cash crops, (Cole et al., 2013, 2014). However, despite the potential of insurance products

2|Page
to provide a “risk floor” for farmers and encourage higher productivity investments and behavior,
uptake at market prices is extremely low so microinsurance is not at scale anywhere except
when heavily subsidized by government.
4.     Early impact evidence on payments and digital financial services indicates
       significant benefit
Digital payments can significantly enhance client well-being both directly as well as through
enabling a broader ecosystem. In Kenya, M-PESA helped households strengthen their informal
risk-sharing networks, enabling them to better respond to shocks by borrowing or receiving gifts
from friends and relatives: non-users of M-PESA reduced consumption by 7 percent in response
to income shocks, while users’ consumption was unresponsive to the shocks. The mechanism
underlying this improvement was domestic remittances: users were more likely to receive
remittances in response to a shock, they also received more, from more different types of
people. These improvements in risk-sharing led to higher savings, higher consumption and
changes in occupation for user households, (Jack and Suri, 2014, 2015; Suri et al., 2012).
In India, biometrically authenticated cards for workers employed by a 19-million person public
works program reduced corruption, (Muralidharan et al., forthcoming). It increased labor market
competition, with private-sector wages rising more than public-sector wages, suggesting an
overall economic benefit for the population, (Muralidharan et al., forthcoming; Imbert and Papp,
2015; Zimmerman, 2015). Digital systems are also being used to disburse cash transfers with
effects on the cost effectiveness of the distribution as well as on nutrition, (Aker et al., 2014) and
to provide salaries (Callen et al., 2015). The use of digital systems for government to person
transfers has had implications for public expenditure management systems - Banerjee et al.,
2016 show that using digital financial services in India to transfer program funds for the same
public works program enabled a 38 percent reduction in program fund expenditure and a 25
percent decline in corruption. Household transfers were unaffected, pointing to significant
efficiency gains for them and the public exchequer.
Understanding underlying market failures is the key to designing products and
interventions that will generate welfare benefits for clients
Client welfare benefits are created when innovations overcome fundamental market failures.
RCT research is most powerful when it goes beyond simple evaluation and is used to
understand the more fundamental market failures against which new generations of products
can be designed. This section takes a step back from the question of welfare and focuses on
the mechanisms - the underlying market failures and distortions - and interventions to overcome
them.
Economic theory highlights the need for the free flow of information, rational behavior, low
transaction costs, enforceable property rights, and competition in order to achieve efficient
markets. In developing economies, market failures and distortions are so strong that all five
conditions often fail at once. Understanding the mechanisms is critical to designing better
strategies:
1.     Information asymmetries are a common source of market failure
(a) Supply side - Adverse selection and moral hazard are two classic causes of market failure.
Adverse selection occurs when providers, (lenders or insurers) cannot easily distinguish high-
risk from low-risk, implying the need to work to screen clients, such as by using “big data”
predictive models for default. Moral hazard occurs when providers are unable to enforce how
much effort and care clients take to repay or avoid insurance losses. If moral hazard is
pervasive, alternative mechanisms to increase the benefits of “good” choices are needed, (e.g.,


3|Page
credit bureaus that reward repayment through improved access to future credit, reminders to
repay loans, and property rights that facilitate enforcement).
Several business practices or policies can serve to minimize adverse selection and moral
hazard while increasing access. For example, introducing a credit bureau across the branches
of a Guatemalan microfinance lender improved screening ability, (27 percent more loans with no
portfolio deterioration), while also increasing repayment rates and reducing delinquencies
among existing borrowers, (De Janvry et al., 2010). In Malawi fingerprinting for microloans
caused high-risk borrowers to take out smaller loans and to improve repayments – 85 percent of
high-risk borrowers fully repaid their loans, relative to 44 percent in the comparison group, (Gine
et al, 2012).
In Kenya, working with a savings and credit cooperative, Jack et al., 2015 compared offers for
an asset collateralized loan, (the asset is repossessed on default), to a standard guarantor
based loan for the same asset. Uptake rates were considerably higher, (44 percent), for the
asset collateralized loan, relative to the guarantor contract, (2 percent), but repayment rates
were similar, implying that guarantor contracts heavily over screen clients. Karlan and Zinman,
2009 separate out adverse selection and moral hazard for consumer loans in South Africa, and
find that the incentives of lower future loan prices have large impacts on current repayment.
Evidence also shows that information asymmetries may inhibit the market provision of
microcredit products that move away from the one-size fits all model. Field et al., 2013 found an
immediate and positive effect of introducing a two-month grace period before microcredit loan
repayment starts: the rate of business formation doubled and loan investment into the business
increased. Three years on, household income was 19.5 percent higher and business profits
nearly doubled, however, grace period clients were more than three times more likely to default,
(albeit from a very low base). Modifying the repayment schedule was similarly important:
switching repayment frequency from weekly to monthly more than doubled business income,
increased household income by about 8 percent, reduced financial stress and in this case left
default rates unchanged, (Field et al., 2012). Use of risk-based pricing, credit bureaus and
administrative data for client screening - by lowering adverse selection -- could greatly enable
product diversity that enhances client wellbeing.
As credit moves to become more digital, (e.g. M-Shwari in Kenya) adverse selection may
become less key for the provider as borrower selection all happens digitally, (via a machine
learning or other scoring algorithm). Experimentation with credit scoring algorithms may be a
low cost way to dramatically reduce the importance of adverse selection, (Suri et al., ongoing
work in Kenya).
(b) On the demand or consumer side - Information asymmetries also matter for consumers. For
instance, a failure to understand the products being offered, (e.g. due to failure to comprehend
or because providers fail to disclose information), may cause consumers to make poor
decisions or withdraw from the market.
A large bank in Turkey informed consumers of a 50 percent rebate on overdraft protection
interest charges, which actually reduced usage by 2 percent relative to clients who did not
receive the rebate - the rebate backfired because it reminded consumers how much they were
paying, (Alan et al., 2015). In Mexico, an anonymous “mystery shopping” audit of microcredit
loan officers found that low-income borrowers received little disclosure information, (only 30
percent received any printed information), and were rarely offered the most affordable or
suitable product (Gine et al., 2014).
Financial literacy has been the go-to intervention by many to tackle such information market
failures, despite a weak evidence base. A meta-analysis, (Miller et al., 2014), from evaluations


4|Page
of 188 financial education programs found that, on average, these programs have not had
positive impacts on financial knowledge or behavior and even where it worked, improvement
was minimal and uptake was low. However, programs that incorporate simplified behavioral
insights can be successful, such as teaching simplified rules-of-thumb, (Drexler et al., 2014).
Researchers are now testing the impact of delivering rule-of-thumb information via SMS in India,
(Cole and Schoar, ongoing).
2.         Rational behavior is not always a safe assumption
There is now a large literature documenting financial behavior that is inconsistent with standard
economic notions of rationality -- real humans exhibit systematic biases and limitations. An
increasingly diverse body of work documents successful strategies for increasing savings, which
has improved client welfare in many cases. Often these strategies amount to simple design
choices and so are effectively cost free on the margin. For example, in Bolivia, Peru, and the
Philippines, where people who received SMS reminders, (which have a near-zero marginal
cost), to save had 6 percent higher savings relative to those who received no reminders, (Karlan
et al., 2014). Amongst low-income farmers in China, researchers found that pension
contributions in a government-backed pension scheme could be increased by 19 percent simply
by showing an example of expected pension benefits. Contributions increased by 40 percent
among those who were shown the example and taught the concept of compound interest,
(Song, 2015). A wide variety of other features have been shown to augment savings behaviors,
including: (i) commitment savings products, (ii) text message reminders for savings and similar
reminders to repay loans, (see Cadena and Schoar, 2011 for Uganda and Karlan et al.,
forthcoming for the Philippines), (iii) automatic savings contributions or default retirement
account enrollment, (Beshears et al., 2008, Benartzi and Thaler, 2004); examples from low-
income countries include defined-contribution savings on mobile money in Afghanistan, (Callen
et al., 2015), automatic withdrawal of savings from salary payments in Ghana, (Buehren et al.,
ongoing), automatic withdrawal of insurance premiums from harvest proceeds for sugarcane
farmers in Kenya, (Casaburi and Willis, 2015).
3.         Transaction costs can generate market distortions
High transaction costs can affect both provider willingness to serve the poor and client
willingness to use financial services. Historically, bank branches are few and far between and
formal bank accounts often came with additional transaction costs such as obtaining formal
identification documents, long wait times, poor service, high withdrawal fees and high required
minimum balances. Intermedia surveys in 8 countries show the poor often cite time, cost and
difficulty of establishing their identity in order to open an account as major barriers to access. 1
Reducing transaction costs, (e.g. with digital platforms), can create large efficiency gains in
financial markets. Research in Kenya showed that digital payment services dramatically
reduced transaction costs in informal markets, strengthening and growing risk-sharing networks,
and thus facilitating households’ ability to respond to shocks, (Jack and Suri, 2014).
Replications of this study are ongoing for Tanzania, Uganda and Pakistan. In related work,
researchers are studying how digital financial products should be optimally designed given they
are accessed and disbursed entirely digitally without any face to face interaction. This has
implications for the provider on how to analyze client risk, how to collect payments, how to
optimally cross-sell products without in-person interactions, (Almazan et al, 2013), how to deal
with higher default and how to manage their portfolio. In addition, client behavior may be
dramatically altered for better or worse through instant access to products and information, new
user interfaces and many other changes, (Benartzi and Lehrer, 2015).

1
    India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Indonesia, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, and Nigeria

5|Page
Despite the rise of digital financial services, many of the world’s poor still function in a cash
economy pointing to the importance of understanding the interface with the digital financial
system. For instance, despite the introduction of digital transfers, research in rural India shows
that last mile banking agents have power to influence who gets paid and how much, (Field at al.,
ongoing). In such a setting group trainings of the less literate and empowered groups on how to
navigate digital financial services increased account usage and deposits, (Field et al., ongoing).



4.     Incomplete property rights often disadvantage women
Power imbalances and limited control over ones property and assets can drive inefficiencies
across social groups and within the household. For instance, women often lack rights to control
resources in a manner equitable with men and, therefore, independent access to financial
services. Research shows the importance of products that enable women to access financial
services in such scenarios. For instance, good product design can help women circumvent
social norms that restrict their mobility: women in Indian microfinance groups that met weekly
were up to 32 percent more likely to pool resources and three times less likely to default on
loans than groups that met monthly, implying that group lending may be beneficial not only due
to social accountability, but also due to social interaction itself, (Feigenberg et al., 2013). A
study on business training found that, relative to women trained alone, those trained with a
friend were twice as likely to take out a loan and had 11 percent higher household income four
months later, effects that were larger for women belonging to groups with more restrictive social
norms. (Field et al., forthcoming). Schaner, 2015 found that the issuance of ATM cards reduced
account usage by 0.19 standard deviations for women in Kenya with low levels of bargaining
power, but increased it for women with high levels of bargaining power. The researchers believe
the women with low bargaining power were apt to have their cards taken by their husbands and
relatives to withdraw funds. In the randomized trials on traditional one-size fits all microcredit,
only one study found impacts on female decision-making power while savings interventions
show more success, (Ashraf et al., 2010). These findings suggest that creating diverse financial
products that address the specific constraints faced by less empowered groups can yield high
returns.
5.     Imperfect competition can be a double edged sword
The intersection of the mobile and financial industries poses unique policy challenges in the
area of competition. Sitbon (2016) documents a number of areas where “competition
bottlenecks” have emerged in developing markets but cautions that policy interventions
targeting monopolistic behavior need to be carefully timed and must balance the benefits of
monopoly power as incentive to invest and drive growth, against the drawbacks of higher prices
and slower innovation. Another line of relevant research relates to the monopoly of bank
providers in various settings. In South Asia, for instance banks have historically had a monopoly
for subsidized credit in geographically defined regions. Cole, 2009 finds that banks that have
monopoly over disbursement of government-funded agricultural credit increase disbursement by
5-10 percentage points in an election year, and that this credit fails to increase agricultural
output implying inefficient credit allocation. However, studies on market power and its
implications for financial services are few and far between - there is more to be done.
Returning to the goal of increasing income for the poorest: An integrated approach
The poor are often afflicted by multiple overlapping market failures that mute the benefits of a
single intervention. While many hoped that the traditional one size fit all microcredit would
increase income for the world’s poorest, it has neither reached the poorest of the poor, nor

6|Page
increased average income of those it has reached. Alternatively, a recent effort, (originally
developed by BRAC in Bangladesh), has tested an integrated approach -- one that requires
subsidy to operate -- but aims to more directly and effectively improve income for the world’s
poorest. The “Graduation” programs provide an integrated set of products and services to
households, some financial, along with a substantive productive asset, training, and
consumption support. These programs have been tested in seven countries now and have
found large impacts as far out as seven years. Pooled data from six countries, (Banerjee et al.,
2015), show Graduation households’ consumption increased 7.3%-Bangladesh, 16.4%-
Ethiopia, 6.9%-Ghana, 13.6%-India and 10.2%-Pakistan, 3% Peru. Most positive impacts on
participating households were consistent three years after intervention and preliminary results
from a seven year follow up in India find even stronger results after seven years. Households
experienced similar improvements in food security, asset holdings, and savings, as well as
some indicators of psychosocial well-being and female empowerment. This is an example of
how a program combines provision of financial instruments with other policies to ultimately
address multiple market failures, (on both supply and demand sides), at once.
Conclusion and strategic implications going forward
A major challenge going forward is how to extend and operationalize the body of knowledge
represented here in a new generation of products, policies, and strategies which are more fact
based. Major hurdles in the way of this goal include: How do we further the development of
products that are both attractive to and beneficial for users? How do we align other funders and
governments around the right approaches to maximizing welfare? And how do we align
business model incentives around products and services that benefit the poor most effectively?
Along these lines, the evidence base suggests some important emerging lessons that raise key
questions for the field:
1.     How to support the delivery of advanced savings products? A number of studies
       now all support the conclusion that client welfare can be significantly improved through
       savings products with commitment features and other decision aids to guide clients
       toward better financial planning and hard to reach savings goals. Despite the gain to
       clients, few successful commercial DFS products exhibit these features. How do we
       support the market to create products that more effectively help people save?
2.     Is there a viable model for insurance? The poor live risky lives. The limited research
       on formal insurance does show benefits to farmers and even accelerating the informal
       insurance patterns through better P2P transfers has produced benefits. Unfortunately,
       the business model around for-profit insurance delivery to the poor is completely fraught
       with no known success cases, while government delivery of insurance is often ineffective
       and inefficient. New automated weather index models using satellite data and mobile
       payments show promise but current iterations are not yet viable. Are there viable models
       to insure poor households and in particular, smallholder farmers?
3.     How to scale safe digital credit? Despite the disappointing results from evaluations of
       traditional microcredit, the evidence does suggest that other forms of credit can benefit
       the poor. Commercial incentives align around credit delivery better than around some
       other products, (clients are willing to pay -- a lot), and we are just starting to see a new
       wave of “digital credit” products using calling and handset data to automate the delivery
       of credit over mobile. That said, we worry that provider incentives to not always align
       around key concepts like protecting client welfare or around reaching the poorest and we
       are already seeing some bad behavior. How do we guide the market to a good outcome
       for poor people?


7|Page
4.   How to align incentives for reaching women and the poorest? Despite evidence that
     financial tools can help to empower women and the poorest, providers do not always
     have the incentives or business models to include these groups. Providers may not have
     incentives to address key sociological barriers and so passive rollouts of products like
     ATM cards may not meaningfully increase access for women and can even have
     perverse effects, (e.g. by allowing relatives easier access to their funds). However, there
     is emerging evidence that well-designed products that are cognizant of, and responsive
     to, social norms can empower women. What levers do we have to maximize the
     incentives to reach women and the poorest?
5.   What are the best ways to leverage digital channels for G2P? The evidence shows
     that using digital methods for social protection transfers is a powerful tool that
     governments can use to align providers’ private incentives with social incentives. How do
     we maximize the benefits of digital transfers while ensuring the least financially literate
     and less empowered groups are included?
6.   How to connect finance to end goals? Finance is a means to an end. Various studies
     show interactions of finance with agriculture; girl school enrollment and maternal health;
     as well as uptake of sanitation services and solar lamps on PAYGO. How do we achieve
     tighter linkages between finance interventions and other sectors to magnify impact?




8|Page
Appendix A
Aker, Jenny C., Rachid Boumnijel, Amanda McClelland and Niall Tierney. 2014. “Payment
Mechanisms and Anti-Poverty Programs: Evidence from a Mobile Money Cash Transfer Experiment in
Niger.” Center for Global Development Working Paper 268.

Alan, Sule, Mehmet Cemalcilar, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. "Unshrouding Effects on
Demand for a Costly Add-on: Evidence from Bank Overdrafts in Turkey." NBER Working Paper No.
20956.

Almazan, M., Kendall, J., and Wright, G. 2013. “New Sales and Distribution Models in Mobile Financial
Services”, Working Paper, SSRN id 2241839.

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2010. "Female Empowerment: Impact of a Commitment
Savings Product in the Philippines." World Development 38(3): 3334.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Clement Imbert, Santosh Mathew, and Rohini Pande. 2016. “Can E-
Governance Reduce Capture of Public Programs? Experimental Evidence from a Financial Reform in
India’s Employment Guarantee.” Working Paper.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William Parienté,
Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2015. “A Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting
Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six Countries.” Science 348(6236), doi: 10.1126/science.
1260799.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. "Six Randomized Evaluations of
Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
7(1): 121.

Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, and Bram Thuysbaert. 2014. "Saving for a (Not So) Rainy Day: A
Randomized Evaluation of Savings Groups in Mali." NBER Working Paper No. 20600.

Benartzi, S. and Lehrer, J. 2015. “The Smarter Screen”, Penguin Press.

Benartzi, Shlomo and Thaler, Richard H. 2004. “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to
Increase Employee Saving.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1): S164S187.

Beshears, J., J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. Madrian. 2008. “The Importance of Default Options for
Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from the United States.” Working Paper.

Brune, Lasse, Xavier Gine, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang. 2016. "Facilitating Savings for
Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi." Economic Development and Cultural Change
64(2): 187-220.

Buehren, Niklas, Markus Goldstein, Tricia Gonwa, Leora Klapper, Robert Darko Osei, and Simone
Schaner. Ongoing. “The Impact of Formal Savings on Salaried Workers’ Spending and Borrowing in
Eastern Ghana.”

Cadena, Ximena, and Antoinette Schoar. 2011. "Remembering to Pay? Reminders vs. Financial
Incentives for Loan Payments." NBER Working Paper No. 17020.
Callen, Michael, Joshua E Blumenstock, Tarek Ghani, and Lucas Koepke. 2015. “Promises and Pitfalls of
Mobile Money in Afghanistan: Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial”. Working Paper.

Casaburi, Lorenzo, and Jack Willis, 2015. “Interlinking Product and Insurance Markets: Experimental
Evidence from Contract Farming in Kenya, Working Paper.

Cole, Shawn. 2009. "Fixing Market Failures or Fixing Elections? Agricultural Credit in India. "American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 21950.

Cole, Shawn A., Xavier Gine, Jeremy Tobacman, Petia Topalova, Robert M. Townsend, and James
Vickery. 2013. "Barriers to Household Risk Management: Evidence from India.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 5(1): 104–135.

Cole, Shawn, Xavier Gine, and James Vickery. 2013. "How Does Risk Management Influence Production
Decisions? Evidence from a Field Experiment." Harvard Business School Working Paper.

Cole, Shawn A., Daniel Stein, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2014. "Dynamics of Demand for Index Insurance:
Evidence from a Long-Run Field Experiment." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings
104(5): 284–290.

Cole, Shawn A., and Antoinette Schoar. Ongoing. “Rules of Thumb: Providing Timely Useful Financial
Management Advice at Scale.”

De Janvry, Alain, Craig McIntosh, and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2010. "The supply- and demand-side impacts
of credit market information." Journal of Development Economics 93, no. 2: 173188.

Drexler, Alejandro, Greg Fischer, and Antoinette S. Schoar. 2014. "Keeping it Simple: Financial Literacy
and Rules of Thumb." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(2): 131.

Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013a. "Savings Constraints and Microenterprise
Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya." American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 5(1): 163192.

Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013b. "Why Don't the Poor Save More? Evidence from
Health Savings Experiments." American Economic Review, 103(4): 113871.

Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal. 2016. “Expanding Access to
Formal Savings Accounts. Experimental Evidence from Uganda, Malawi and Chile.” Working Paper.

Feigenberg, Benjamin, Erica Field, and Rohini Pande. 2013. "The economic returns to social interaction:
Experimental evidence from microfinance." The Review of Economic Studies 80(4): 14591483.

Field, Erica, Seema Jayachandran, Rohini Pande, and Natalia Rigol. “Friends at Work: Can Peer Support
Stimulate Female Entrepreneurship?” Forthcoming American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Field, Erica, Rohini Pande, John Papp, and Natalia Rigol. 2013. “Does the classic microfinance model
discourage entrepreneurship among the poor? Experimental evidence from India.” American Economic
Review 103 (6), 2196–2226.
Field, Erica, Rohini Pande, John Papp, and Y. Jeannette Park. 2012. “Repayment flexibility can reduce
financial stress: A randomized control trial with microfinance clients in India.” PLoS ONE 7 (9).

Field, Erica, Rohini Pande, Simone Schaner, and Natalia Rigol. Ongoing. “Financial Inclusion and
Female Empowerment: An Evaluation of Banking Access on Women’s Socioeconomic Status and
Wellbeing.”

Fink, Günther, B. Kelsey Jack, Felix Masiye. 2014. “Seasonal Credit Constraints and Agricultural Labor
Supply: Evidence from Zambia.” NBER Working Paper No. 20218.

Giné, Xavier, Cristina Martinez Cuellar, and Rafael Keenan Mazer. 2014. "Financial (dis)information:
Evidence from an audit study in Mexico." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6902.

Giné, Xavier, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang. 2012. "Credit Market Consequences of Improved
Personal Identification: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi." American Economic Review 102(6):
29232954

Imbert, Clement and John Papp. 2015. “Labor Market Effects of Social Programs: Evidence from India’s
Employment Guarantee,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7 (2), 233–263.

J-PAL and IPA Policy Bulletin. 2015. “Where Credit is Due.” Cambridge, MA: Abdul Latif Jameel
Poverty Action Lab and Innovations for Poverty Action.

Jack, William, Michael Kremer, Joost de Laat and Tavneet Suri. 2015. “Expanding Access to Micro
Credit: The Role of Asset-Collateralized Loans.” Working Paper.

Jack, William, Adam Ray, and Tavneet Suri. 2012. “Transaction Networks: Evidence from Mobile
Money in Kenya.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 103 (3), pp. 356361.

Jack, William, and Tavneet Suri. 2014. "Risk Sharing and Transactions Costs: Evidence from Kenya's
Mobile Money Revolution." American Economic Review, 104(1): 183223.

Jack, William, and Tavneet Suri. 2015. “The Longer Term Impacts of MPESA in Kenya”. Working
Paper.

Karlan, Dean, and Leigh Linden. 2014. "Loose Knots: Strong versus Weak Commitments to Save for
Education in Uganda." Working Paper.

Karlan, Dean, Melanie Morten, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. "A Personal Touch: Text Messaging for
Loan Repayment." NBER Working Paper 17952.

Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2014. “Getting to the
Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving.” Management Science.

Karlan, Dean, Robert Osei, Isaac OseiAkoto, and Christopher Udry. 2014. "Agricultural Decisions after
Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2): 597652.

Karlan, Dean, Aishwarya L. Ratan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2014. “Savings by and for the Poor: A
Research Review and Agenda.” Review of Income and Wealth, 60: 36–78.
Karlan, Dean, Beniamino Savonitto, Bram Thuysbaert and Christopher Udry. Ongoing. "The Impact of
Village Savings and Loan Groups on Financial Inclusion and Household Welfare."

Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. “Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply
Decisions to Estimate the Impacts.” Review of Financial Studies 23(1), pp. 433464

Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information
Asymmetries with a Consumer Credit Field Experiment.” Econometrica 77 (6): 19932008.

Miller, Margaret; Reichelstein, Julia; Salas, Christian; Zia, Bilal. 2014. “Can You Help Someone Become
Financially Capable? A Meta-Analysis of the Literature.” World Bank.

Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. “Building state capacity: Evidence from
biometric smartcards in India.” Forthcoming American Economic Review.

Prina, Silva. 2015. “Banking the Poor via Savings Accounts: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Journal
of Development Economics, 115: 1631.

Schaner, Simone. 2015. "The Cost of Convenience? Transaction Costs, Bargaining Power, and Savings
Account Use in Kenya." Working Paper.

Sitbon, Elisa. 2015. “Addressing competition bottlenecks in digital financial ecosystems.” Journal of
Payments, Strategy, and Systems 9(3).

Song, Changcheng. 2015. “Financial Illiteracy and Pension Contributions: A Field Experiment on
Compound Interest in China.” SSRN Working Paper.

Suri, Tavneet, William Jack and Thomas Stoker. 2012. “Documenting the Birth of a Financial Economy”,
Proceedings on the National Academy of Sciences, 109 (26), 1025710262.

Zimmermann, Laura. 2015. “Why Guarantee Employment? Evidence from a Large Indian Public Works
Program,” Working Paper, University of Georgia.
