NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVE FEES AND COMPETITION IN PENSION FUNDS:
EVIDENCE FROM A REGULATORY EXPERIMENT
Assaf Hamdani
Eugene Kandel
Yevgeny Mugerman
Yishay Yafeh
Working Paper 22634
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22634

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

This project was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (Grant No. 890/2013) and by the by
the I-CORE program of the Planning and Budgeting Committee and the Israel Science
Foundation (Grant No. 1821/12). Kandel and Yafeh received financial support from the Krueger
Center at the Jerusalem School of Business Administration. We thank Doron Avramov, Michel
Habib, Naomi Hausman, Petri Jylha, Beni Lauterbach, Lavi Schiffenbauer, Clemens Sialm,
Michael Weisbach and seminar participants at Bar Ilan University, the BI Business School
(Oslo), the Conference on Empirical Legal Studies in Europe (CELSE), the CEPR’s First Annual
Symposium in Financial Economics (London), ESMT (Berlin), FIRS (Lisbon, 2016), the Hebrew
University, Harvard Law School (JLFA conference), the NBER, and UC Berkeley for helpful
comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to Ran Cohen, Izik Daniel, Assaf Hasson, Orry
Kaz, Yaniv Makdoosi, Eyal Malka, Roma Poberejsky, Evyatar Sadeh, Noa Shukrun and Tomer
Yafeh for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Assaf Hamdani, Eugene Kandel, Yevgeny Mugerman, and Yishay Yafeh. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Incentive Fees and Competition in Pension Funds: Evidence from a Regulatory Experiment
Assaf Hamdani, Eugene Kandel, Yevgeny Mugerman, and Yishay Yafeh
NBER Working Paper No. 22634
September 2016
JEL No. G22,G23,G3
ABSTRACT
Concerned with excessive risk taking, regulators worldwide generally prohibit private pension
funds from charging performance-based fees. Instead, the premise underlying the regulation of
private pension schemes (and other retail-oriented funds) is that competition among fund
managers should provide them with the adequate incentives to make investment decisions that
would serve their clients’ long-term interests. Using a regulatory experiment from Israel, we
compare the effects of incentive fees and competition on the performance of three exogenouslygiven types of long-term savings schemes operated by the same management companies: (i)
funds with performance-based fees, facing no competition; (ii) funds with AUM-based fees,
facing low competitive pressure; and (iii) funds with AUM-based fees, operating in a highly
competitive environment. Our main result is that funds with performance-based fees exhibit
significantly higher risk-adjusted returns than other funds, but are not necessarily riskier (that
depends on the measure of risk used). By contrast, we find that competitive pressure leads to poor
performance, and conclude that incentives and competition are not perfect substitutes in the
retirement savings industry. Our analysis suggests that the pervasive regulatory restrictions on the
use of performance-based fees in pension fund management may be costly for savers in the longrun.
Assaf Hamdani
Faculty of Law
The Hebrew University, Mount Scopus
Jerusalem 91905, Israel
assaf.hamdani@mail.huji.ac.il

Yevgeny Mugerman
School of Business Administration
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem 91905, Israel
mugi@mscc.huji.ac.il

Eugene Kandel
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus
Jerusalem 91905, Israel
mskandel@mscc.huji.ac.il

Yishay Yafeh
School of Business Administration
The Hebrew University, Mt. Scopus
Jerusalem 91905, Israel
msyafeh@mscc.huji.ac.il

Incentive Fees and Competition in Pension Funds:
Evidence from a Regulatory Experiment
This Draft: September 2016
Assaf Hamdani, Eugene Kandel, Yevgeny Mugerman and Yishay Yafeh*
Abstract
Concerned with excessive risk taking, regulators worldwide generally prohibit private
pension funds from charging performance-based fees. Instead, the premise underlying the
regulation of private pension schemes (and other retail-oriented funds) is that competition
among fund managers should provide them with the adequate incentives to make
investment decisions that would serve their clients’ long-term interests. Using a
regulatory experiment from Israel, we compare the effects of incentive fees and
competition on the performance of three exogenously-given types of long-term savings
schemes operated by the same management companies: (i) funds with performance-based
fees, facing no competition; (ii) funds with AUM-based fees, facing low competitive
pressure; and (iii) funds with AUM-based fees, operating in a highly competitive
environment. Our main result is that funds with performance-based fees exhibit
significantly higher risk-adjusted returns than other funds, but are not necessarily riskier
(that depends on the measure of risk used). By contrast, we find that competitive pressure
leads to poor performance, and conclude that incentives and competition are not perfect
substitutes in the retirement savings industry. Our analysis suggests that the pervasive
regulatory restrictions on the use of performance-based fees in pension fund management
may be costly for savers in the long-run.
* Hamdani is at the Faculty of Law, the Hebrew University, and ECGI (assaf.hamdani@mail.huji.ac.il);
Kandel is at the Department of Economics, School of Business Administration and the Federmann Center
for the Study of Rationality at the Hebrew University, CEPR and ECGI (eukand@gmail.com); Mugerman
is at the School of Business Administration the Hebrew University and the College of Management
(mugi@huji.ac.il), and Yafeh is from the School of Business Administration, the Hebrew University, CEPR
and ECGI (yishay.yafeh@huji.ac.il). This project was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (Grant
No. 890/2013) and by the by the I-CORE program of the Planning and Budgeting Committee and the Israel
Science Foundation (Grant No. 1821/12). Kandel and Yafeh received financial support from the Krueger
Center at the Jerusalem School of Business Administration. We thank Doron Avramov, Michel Habib,
Naomi Hausman, Petri Jylha, Beni Lauterbach, Lavi Schiffenbauer, Clemens Sialm, Michael Weisbach and
seminar participants at Bar Ilan University, the BI Business School (Oslo), the Conference on Empirical
Legal Studies in Europe (CELSE), the CEPR’s First Annual Symposium in Financial Economics (London),
ESMT (Berlin), FIRS (Lisbon, 2016), the Hebrew University, Harvard Law School (JLFA conference), the
NBER, and UC Berkeley for helpful comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to Ran Cohen, Izik
Daniel, Assaf Hasson, Orry Kaz, Yaniv Makdoosi, Eyal Malka, Roma Poberejsky, Evyatar Sadeh, Noa
Shukrun and Tomer Yafeh for outstanding research assistance.

Introduction
Private retirement savings funds play an increasingly important role around the
world. By the end of 2013, retirement funds in the OECD countries held about $25
trillion of assets under management (OECD, 2014). Moreover, countries are increasingly
relying on private pension schemes using the defined-contribution model, where
investment risks are borne by savers (OECD, 2013). The well-being of future retirees
around the world thus depends on the quality of investment decisions made by fund
managers and on the extent to which these managers’ incentives are aligned with the
long-term interests of their investors-savers.
The academic literature on private retirement savings has focused on the U.S.
pension system, where employees generally save through their employer’s pension plan.
In the case of government and some corporate pension plans, employees have little
choice concerning the investment of their savings (Martin, 2014). Other employers’
pension plans, however, offer employees a menu of investment options. Employees thus
assume responsibility for their retirement savings’ investment decisions, and can move
their funds from one investment option offered by their employer to another. Savers
increasingly invest through mutual funds included in their pension plan, although these
funds serve other types of investors as well (Fisch, 2010). Against this background,
research has focused on the (poor) quality of individual investor choices and on mutual
fund behavior and performance.
In many countries, however, the retirement savings landscape is remarkably
different: savers (not employers) choose their own private retirement savings scheme or
pension fund. While they can choose among different schemes, savers cannot make
specific investment decisions. Rather, they are bound to rely on the professional money
managers of their pension funds to make investment decisions on their behalf. Pension
fund managers thus have considerable discretion - they make asset allocation decisions as
well as security selection decisions within asset classes. While the reliance on money
managers may alleviate some of the concerns associated with having individual savers
making specific investment decisions, this regulatory setting creates an inherent agency
problem between fund managers and savers. Pension fund managers make daily decisions

1

with significant long-term effects on savers; their incentives, however, may not be fully
aligned with those of their clients.
In this setting, policymakers can use several types of regulatory strategies to align
the interests of fund managers with those of savers. First, they can regulate the level and
structure of fund fees, including the compensation of individual fund managers. Second,
policymakers can determine the intensity of competition between private pension funds
by imposing restrictions on the mobility of savers or by adopting measures to facilitate
saver choice and reduce the cost of switching pension providers.1 Third, policymakers
can constrain fund-managers’ asset-allocation and other investment decisions, either
directly by imposing quantitative limits on investment in certain asset classes (Antolin et.
al., 2009), or indirectly by subjecting fund managers to fiduciary duties (Gordon, 1987;
Davis, 2002). Finally, regulators can subject fund managers to a variety of corporate
governance and disclosure duties.
In this study, we address the first two policy instruments: fee structure and
competition. We take advantage of a unique regulatory experiment in Israel that enables
us to study the interaction between regulation, fee structure, competition and fund
performance.2 Specifically, we explore the effect of performance-based fees and
competition on fund performance and costs.
What should be the structure of fees paid to private pension funds? A vast
principal-agent literature prescribes some degree of performance-based pay for an agent,
whose performance depends on her unobserved actions. Indeed, most unregulated money
managers, such as venture capital, private equity and hedge funds, normally use
performance-based fees. Institutions, endowments or high-net worth individuals, who can
freely choose, prefer to invest in actively managed funds whose compensation depends
on their performance. Such funds typically receive a significant (around 20%) fraction of

1

In Italy, for example, there is an ongoing debate over the wisdom of allowing full portability of pension
savings, see Moreolo (2015).
2
We have no data on individual money managers’ compensation or their career concerns (e.g., age or
experience). We therefore focus on fees paid to the fund management companies and not to the individual
managers whom they employ; however, there is a clear link between the two. Even though performancebased pay may exist at the individual fund manager level, it is limited by the fact that fund fees are not
related to performance. For a recent study of portfolio manager compensation in the U.S. mutual fund
industry, see Ma et al. (2015).

2

their investors’ returns (Gompers and Lerner, 1999; Metrick and Yasuda, 2010; Kandel et
al., 2011).3 Yet, regulators around the world normally prohibit such incentive fee
arrangements in retirement savings schemes and other retail-oriented investment
products, such as mutual funds.4 Thus, the predominant form of retirement savings (and
mutual) fund fees around the world is a fixed percentage of assets under management
(AUM). A recent OECD survey identifies only two countries - the Czech Republic and
Poland – that allow pension funds to charge fees based on investment returns (OECD,
2011).
The rationale underlying this prohibition is the concern that performance-based
fees might lead to excessive risk taking (e.g., Illig, 2007).5 Excessive risk-taking by fund
managers may present a special concern for retirement savings schemes for two reasons.
First, whereas savers normally allocate their savings among different mutual funds, in the
setting underlying this paper, a saver’s entire retirement portfolio is under the direction of
a single private fund (and its managers). Second, as explained earlier, pension fund
managers typically have more decision-making power than managers of mutual funds, as
they have considerable discretion concerning their portfolio’s asset allocation.
By itself, an AUM-based fee structure does not provide adequate incentives for
fund managers, as it does not directly relate to the funds’ investment returns or cost
structure.6 However, in an environment of AUM-based fees, the role of motivating funds
to ensure savers’ long-term interests is assigned to competition among funds (Cooper,
2010). The premise underlying this regime is that funds with better investment returns
will attract more investors (inflows), thereby increasing assets under management and
fees. According to this logic, competition provides the link between fund performance
3

See also Lim et al. (2016) for a recent attempt to measure direct and indirect incentives in hedge funds.
In the U.K., for example, pension fund fees may be based on assets under management (AUM), on a
combination of AUM and contributions, or on a combination of a fixed fee and AUM
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2015/879/regulation/5/made).
5
Illig (2007) and earlier studies (e.g., Manges, 1972; Lovitch, 1975) indicate that the “hostile” attitude
towards incentive fees in money management in the United States dates back to the Investment Advisers
Act of 1940 and especially to a series of regulations in the 1970s which imposed restrictions on the kind of
incentive fees which could be allowed (e.g., requiring a symmetry of incentives) and on the type of clients
to whom money management funds with incentive fees could be offered.
6
Kahan and Rock (2007) blame this fee structure for the passive attitudes of institutional investors towards
monitoring management in the United States. Mahoney (2004) and Illig (2007) argue that easing regulatory
restrictions on incentive pay for fund managers would benefit investors.
4

3

and fund fees. This important link, however, assumes that inflows are driven by savers’
correct evaluation of the relevant fund performance. We discuss this strong assumption
below.
Empirically, an extensive literature on mutual funds has shown that the
combination of competition and AUM-based fees can distort investment incentives. One
possible reason is that fund managers focus on the kind of investment performance that
would attract inflows and increase AUM. To the extent that inflows are determined by a
fund’s short-term past performance relative to that of its competitors (see, for example,
Sirri and Tufano, 1998), the combination of AUM-based fees and competition may
induce fund managers to maximize absolute short-term, rather than risk-adjusted longterm, returns and focus on relative performance. This may lead to inefficient levels of risk
taking (Chevalier and Ellison, 1997 and 1999) and to “herding” (Grinblatt et al., 1995;
Wermers, 1999), where most funds make similar investment decisions, thereby adversely
affecting performance and possibly threatening the stability of the financial system. In the
context of retirement savings, managerial focus on short-term performance could
seriously jeopardize the long-term interests of savers. While performance-based fees may
also introduce short-term incentives, their structure can be tailored to ensure that they
provide money managers with incentives to focus on the appropriate investment horizon.
Competition does not award such flexibility.
Ideally, one should study the effect of performance-based fees and competition on
investment performance by comparing two otherwise identical funds that differ, for
exogenous reasons, only with respect to their fee structure and competitive environment.
However, as regulators worldwide are generally opposed to performance-based fees, such
a research design may not be feasible with respect to pension funds. In Israel, however, a
unique historical regulatory setting provides a rare opportunity to estimate the effect of
incentives and competition on fund performance. A decade-long process of reform has
created exogenous differences among retirement savings schemes in both their
management fee structure and the intensity of the competition they face, based on the
year in which a specific retirement savings scheme was established. Moreover, in many
cases the same management companies run all types of savings schemes
contemporaneously. This unique environment enables us to study how the fee structure
4

and the intensity of competition affect the quality of management and risk taking of longterm savings schemes.
We use monthly data on asset allocations and returns for 72 long-term savings
funds for the 11-year period between January 2005 and February 2016. There are three
types of funds in the sample: (i) funds with performance-based fees, facing no
competition; (ii) funds with AUM-based fees, facing low competitive pressure; and (iii)
funds with AUM-based fees, operating in a highly competitive environment. The sample
period includes the financial crisis of 2008, when funds taking higher risks would have
been penalized.
Our main findings are as follows: First, funds with performance-based fees
exhibit higher returns than funds with AUM-based fees. They may also exhibit higher
risk, depending on the measures used, although for the most part differences in risk are
not significant. Second, and perhaps more importantly, funds with performance-based
fees consistently exhibit higher risk-adjusted returns, as measured by α (calculated using
several alternative methods). The difference in (gross) α between funds with incentive
fees and those with AUM-based fees is estimated to be about 0.85% per year.7 Third,
when comparing funds with AUM-based fees facing intense competition with similar
funds facing weak competition, we find that funds with AUM-based fees facing intense
competition tend to under-perform funds operating with minimal competitive pressure
(although the differences are smaller than in the comparisons between funds with
performance-based fees and funds with AUM-based fees). Competition, however, seems
to be associated with reduced fees.
These findings have several implications for the regulation of private pension
funds. First, in the retirement savings industry incentives and competition do not appear
to be perfect substitutes.8 The performance of the portfolio of a saver who allocated her
retirement savings to funds with performance-based fees would be different from
7

The relation between α and investment in illiquid assets is discussed below, but other than this effect, we
do not attempt to attribute α to market timing, asset allocation, or security selection. For an attempt to do so
in the context of U.S. pension funds, see Andonov et al. (2013).
8
Giroud and Mueller (2011) discuss several theoretical models of the relation between incentives and
competition. Although studies differ in their assumptions and results, there is considerable theoretical
support for the intuitive conjecture that incentives and competition are, under certain conditions,
substitutes.

5

(superior to) that experienced by a saver whose retirement savings are managed in AUMbased retirement savings schemes. By contrast, the performance of the portfolio of a
saver who allocated her retirement savings to funds with AUM-based fees operating in a
competitive environment would tend to be inferior to the performance of the portfolio of
a saver whose retirement savings’ managers are shielded from competitive pressures.
Note that this finding is consistent with the view that competitive pressures may
have different effects on specific funds depending on their relative performance, fund
age, or their individual managers’ career concerns, as documented in the literature and
discussed in the next section. Our results suggest that, on average, the effects on specific
funds may cancel out so that a competitive retirement savings sector exhibits results
which are not superior to those of a retirement savings industry with weak competitive
pressures.
Second, our findings cast doubt on the efficacy of the prohibition on performancebased fees in retirement savings funds. Specifically, we show that this prohibition may
undermine the quality of fund management. Even though, in line with the regulatory
rationale underlying the prohibition of performance-based fees, funds with such fees may
be perceived according to some measures as riskier than other funds (according to most
measures they are not), performance-based fees seem to raise the quality of fund
management to an extent that savers in such funds consistently realize higher riskadjusted returns than investors in funds with AUM-based fees. We cannot determine
whether the level of risk in the funds with performance-based fees in our sample is
optimal (it may be the case that these funds take excessive risks or that other funds take
too little risk); however, to the extent that the prohibition of performance-based fees
reduces risk, this reduction comes at the cost of reducing the quality of investment
management as well. Stated differently, it is possible that the natural tendency of
regulators to try and prevent a pension savings crisis in the short run (through restrictions
on the use of high-powered incentives and therefore on risk-taking) may come at a
significant long-term cost for the retirees.9 Moreover, our results represent a lower bound,
9

The policy implications outlined here reflect our understanding that the superior performance of funds
with performance-based fees which we observe in the data is not simply due to fraud or accounting
manipulations of fund performance (which would be very difficult under Israel’s strict regulatory regime).

6

as the performance-based fee structure in the funds in our sample is definitely
suboptimal. Introducing a better structure would presumably amplify the results.
Finally, our analysis supports a new direction for regulating pension funds’ fee
structure and competition. Regulators wishing to contain risk-taking have at their disposal
a variety of measures even under a regime of performance-based fees, such as
quantitative limits on investments in certain asset classes and fiduciary duties. Yet,
regulatory measures are unlikely to induce fund managers to “work hard” or focus on the
long term so as to produce better risk-adjusted returns, and competition does not seem to
perform well in this role either. These results suggest that it may be appropriate to
consider amending the traditional prohibition on performance-based feeds, and to explore
regulatory measures that could contain excessive risk-taking. At the same time, it may
well be that regulators regard performance-based fees as detrimental to their own careers,
rather than to the long-term well-being of savers, in which case a change in the current
regulatory regime is unlikely.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section surveys some of
the related literature. Section III describes the institutional background and the regulatory
changes used in this study. The data set, empirical approach and main results are
discussed in Section IV. Robustness tests appear in Section V, and Section VI concludes.

I.

Related Literature
Economic and legal research on the provision of optimal incentives to private

retirement schemes under the defined-contribution model is scant, even though the
economic literature on retirement policy and the design of pension benefits (for instance,
life-cycle investment strategies or retirement age) is quite extensive (e.g., Medill, 2000).
Moreover, both economists and legal scholars have, for the most part, studied the U.S.
retirement landscape, where savers are often responsible for making both contribution

Also important for our conclusion is the view that superior return is not simply due to “luck” or to the
allocation of good investments which arrive at random to a specific type of fund. Instead, we view
performance as a function of effort, skills and so forth. For a recent discussion of the use of incentives in
money management, see also a Financial Times “Insight” article (July 9, 2015, pp. 38):
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/ba9207a8-248e-11e5-bd8371cb60e8f08c.html?siteedition=uk#axzz3fTL1j3Xp .

7

and investment decisions. These studies often focus on the quality of decisions made by
individual savers or on the nature of the investment options that employers offer to their
workers (see, for example, Ayers and Curtiss, 2015). As explained above, however, in
many countries the regulatory landscape concerning pension savings differs from that of
the United States (OECD, 2013). Only a few studies address the policy measures that can
be used to align the interests of managers of private, defined-contribution retirement
savings schemes with those of their savers: Gordon (1987) discusses the nature of the
fiduciary duties imposed on pension fund managers. Antolin et al. (2009) and Davis
(2002) study the regulatory use of quantitative restrictions to contain portfolio risk and
align the interests of fund managers with those of savers.
By contrast, an extensive literature studies mutual funds, especially in the U.S.
Although many U.S. savers use mutual funds for their retirement savings, there are
important differences between mutual funds and private pension funds.10 The literature
on performance-based fees and competition in mutual funds is discussed below.
Consider first performance-based fees. The results in the theoretical literature on
principal-agent relationship in the context of money managers vary significantly with the
model’s assumptions: Das and Sundaram (2002) analyze a model in which managers with
unobserved ability can choose effort levels and the risk of the managed portfolio. They
then compare two forms of fees: the AUM fee and the “fulcrum” (relative to a
benchmark) incentive fee that U.S. mutual funds are allowed to use (see discussion
below). They show that, in many cases, an incentive fee is better for investors. In the
model of Palomino and Prat (2003), a bonus for achieving returns above a certain
threshold is optimal when the risk is controlled by the fund manager. This contract could
induce excessive or insufficient risk relative to the first best, depending on the price of
risk in terms of added return. Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdú (2008) develop a model of a
competitive market of equity mutual funds with unobservable managerial ability. They
10

From a legal standpoint, U.S. mutual funds are organized as corporations and investors are shareholders.
More importantly, as noted above, retirement savings schemes normally hold multiple asset-class portfolios
and fund managers have broad discretion to make not only stock selection but also asset allocation
decisions (Blake et. al., 1999). Relatedly, while a single pension fund manager may be in charge of a
client’s entire retirement savings, the manager of any single mutual fund is normally in charge of only a
fraction of her client’s assets. In addition, assets in mutual funds are tradable and therefore easy to assess
and move, whereas retirement savings portfolios may include a variety of tradable and non-tradable assets.

8

assume that some investors do not use all the available information and show that, in
equilibrium, poorly performing funds may set higher fees than better performing funds.11
Empirical results vary considerably. U.S. law allows mutual funds to charge
incentive fees only under the so-called fulcrum model—where fees must be based on an
index, with increases in fees for superior performance matched by decreases in fees for
inferior relative performance. Elton et al. (2003) find that funds with this (rarely used)
fulcrum fee structure exhibit positive risk-adjusted returns - as measured by α - and end
up costing their investors less than funds with standard AUM-based fees. They also find
that funds with incentive fees assume more risk than funds with AUM-based fees,
especially after periods of poor performance. In their study, however, there is no
exogenous variation in fund fee structure (funds are the ones to choose their fee structure
and investors may choose funds based on this fee structure). Also closely related is Massa
and Patgiri (2009), who show that funds with incentive contracts (of a different type)
exhibit more volatile returns and have a lower probability of survival. At the same time,
they deliver higher risk-adjusted returns in comparison with other funds, and this superior
performance is persistent.12 An advantage of our study in comparison with much of the
above literature is the absence of sample selection issues, which often arise in settings
where funds (and perhaps investors) endogenously choose their own fee structure.
We now turn to the literature on competition between fund managers with AUMbased fees. Coates and Hubbard (2007) argue that fierce competition exerts a strong
disciplinary force on mutual funds, thereby reducing the need for legal intervention to
prevent funds from charging excessive fees. Morley and Curtis (2010) claim that
competition can substitute for both governance regulation and litigation. These studies,
however, do not focus on the impact of competition on investment returns. By contrast, a
11

Also related is a study by Basak et al. (2007) who examine the impact of the convex relationship of fund
flows to relative performance. In the model of Li and Tiwari (2009), benchmark-linked, option-like
“bonus” incentive fees can induce efficient effort exertion by portfolio managers. Theoretical work by
Holmstrom (1999), not specifically in the context of money management, is also related: he shows that
managerial career concerns have incentive effects, but these do not necessarily lead to efficient risk-taking
decisions.
12
Massa and Patgiri (2009) acknowledge the endogeneity of fee structure choice and try to address it by
using a TSLS approach. Also in the same vein, Diaz-Mendoza et al. (2014) show, without controlling for
sample selection, that Spanish mutual funds choosing to charge performance-based fees tend to outperform
other funds.

9

much larger body of literature finds that competition can distort incentives because
AUM-based fees push mutual funds to compete on inflows, which are likely to be
determined by a fund’s short-term performance relative to that of competing funds. In
such an environment, competition may lead to excessive risk taking (Chevalier and
Ellison, 1997), and to investment decisions that are correlated across funds (“herding”),
posing a risk to financial stability (Grinblatt et al, 1995; Wermers, 1999). Dass, Massa
and Patgiri (2008) argue that mutual funds under the AUM-based fees tend to “herd”
more than funds with incentive fees. They show that this behavior had a significant effect
on fund performance during the high-tech bubble of the late 1990s.
Part of the literature on mutual fund competition (starting with Brown et al., 1996)
characterizes it as a “tournament” and shows that a fund’s relative position in the
tournament affects its inflow and therefore its investment decisions and risk taking. In the
same vein, a more recent study by Kempf and Ruenzi (2008) also uses the tournament
analogy to describe competition between large U.S. mutual fund families, arguing that
managers tend to adjust the risk of their funds on the basis of their relative position in the
fund family and the family’s competitive position. Kempf, Ruenzi and Thiele (2009)
show that mutual fund managers respond to poor mid-year performance differently,
depending on their employment risk and compensation package. Higher employment risk
tends to reduce portfolio risk, while stronger incentives tend to increase it.13
While the present paper will not directly test for these phenomena, the problems
that these studies identify in the context of mutual fund competition seem to apply - and
perhaps become more severe - in the context of private pension funds that compete for
savers. The view that competition disciplines money managers hinges on the premise that
savers can compare the performance of various funds and use this information to choose
retirement schemes that are consistent with their long-term interests. Such a choice,
however, would be a particularly difficult task given the complexity of retirement savings
products (for example, the degree to which different products protect against longevity
risks) and their portfolio management. Savers would need to evaluate asset allocation
decisions across very different asset classes, while taking into account their investment
13

On employment termination risk and mutual fund management style, see Chevalier and Ellison (1999).

10

horizons. Empirically, research has established that savers - and especially those who
save for retirement - use very simple heuristics to choose money managers (e.g., Benartzi
and Thaler, 2007), chase past returns (Ben Rephael et al., 2012), are strongly affected by
their peers’ choices (Mugerman et al., 2014), and in general make sub-optimal decisions
with respect to their investment choices (Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2010).14
To summarize, the existing literature casts doubt on the extent to which
competition can provide pension fund managers with optimal incentives to make
portfolio investment decisions. While it does suggest that performance-based fees may
increase portfolio risk, the literature portrays performance-based fees in a more positive
light. Put differently, the literature casts doubt on the justification for the prevalent
regulatory prohibition on the use of incentive fees in the pension sector. The evidence on
the effectiveness of incentives in retirement savings schemes is, however, very limited,
largely because, in most countries, regulators allow only AUM-based compensation in
pensions. Consequently, the contest between the incentive-based and AUM-based fee
structures in the retirement savings setting is still open. The present study attempts to
address this gap.

II.

Institutional Background, Data and Empirical Approach
Our empirical strategy relies on the fact that, in Israel, there are several types of

private retirement schemes that differ, for exogenous (historical) reasons, in the use of
performance-based fees and in the degree of their exposure to competition. “Old Life
Insurance” (OLI) plans, a major instrument for retirement saving established in 1992,
charge performance-based fees. In 2004, however, the concern of excessive risk-taking
by these funds led regulators to prohibit the use of such fees. Starting in 2004, OLI plans
can no longer admit new members, but due to grandfathering arrangements, they continue
to accept monthly contributions from existing members and charge them performancebased fees. Also starting in 2004, the same management (insurance) companies, in
14

Specifically in Israel, Porath and Steinberg (2013) and Shaton (2015) find that short-term returns affect
inflows into retirement savings schemes. At the same time, Shaton (2015) shows that when savers are
provided with easily accessible information on long-term returns, whereas information on short-term
returns can only be indirectly inferred, the sensitivity of fund flows to short-term returns declines
significantly.

11

parallel with managing the OLI plans, began to offer a “New Life Insurance” (NLI) plan,
which is a similar retirement savings scheme (with a life insurance component) except
that fees are based on AUM. Savers in both NLI and OLI face significant switching costs
and hence there are only weak competitive pressures: managers are not afraid of losing
existing savers, but in the NLI case they do have to compete for the new ones.15
A third long-term savings scheme is the “Provident Fund” (PF), in which fees are
AUM-based and members can easily withdraw their savings and switch to a different
fund manager. Some provident funds are run by the same insurance companies managing
the OLI and NLI plans, whereas others are owned by commercial investments houses or
run by employers or labor unions.16 The different features of these three types of longterm savings schemes, and in particular, the differences in fees and in the extent of
competition across the different types of retirement savings, are summarized in Table 1.17
These exogenous differences allow us to test the following hypotheses:

Hypotheses on the Effects of Fee Structure

15

The main switching cost associated with life-insurance-based retirement savings schemes (both OLI and
NLI) is related to changing life expectancy. When a person joins a life insurance plan, the rate at which her
retirement savings will be converted to an annuity upon retirement is fixed; when a person shifts between
similar schemes provided by different management companies, the new scheme will use a different
conversion rate, reflecting the constantly increasing life expectancy and the fact that the individual has
already lived with probability one a certain number of years since joining the original scheme, making her
conditional life expectancy higher than it was initially. This longevity risk constitutes a significant
switching cost which limits the extent of actual shifts across life-insurance plans. Post-2004 life insurance
plans (NLI) may admit new savers, but the pool of potential new clients is mostly limited to individuals
joining the labor force.
16
The category “provident funds” (PF) includes two variants referred to in Hebrew as Kupot Gemel and
Kranot Hishtalmut; the differences between these two are immaterial for much of the present discussion
(the main difference between Kranot Hishtalmut and Kupot Gemel is that the former can be redeemed after
a shorter savings period). PF differ from OLI and NLI plans in not having a life insurance policy embedded
in them. Prior to 2008, it was possible to redeem certain PF savings in the form of a lump sum rather than
an annuity. This has been restricted to a large extent after 2010. In addition, many PF changed owners early
in our sample period following the “Bachar Committee” report which prohibited bank ownership of any
money management funds. Finally, some PF are owned by employers or labor unions. These PF tend to
charge lower fees than commercially-run PF. These institutional characteristics are not expected to have a
major effect on the present analysis and the statistics we report below are averages for the entire PF
industry.
17
We exclude from the analysis another type of retirement savings provider, pension funds. Up to 30% of
the portfolios of these funds consist of “designated” (heavily subsidized) risk-free government bonds,
thereby making their performance and asset allocation decisions not comparable to those of the other types
of retirement savings providers.

12

The first hypothesis largely tracks the policy rationale underlying the prevailing
prohibition of performance-based fees, namely, the perception that performance-based
fees in retirement savings would lead to increased risk taking. Consider two retirement
savings funds, operating in the same competitive environment and differing only in their
fee structure: in Fund A fees are based purely on AUM, while in Fund B fees are
calculated as a fraction of returns.18 We conjecture, in line with commonly-observed
regulatory restrictions, that Fund B will expose its members to a higher level of (priced)
risk than Fund A. Consistent with the standard Finance theory and evidence, Fund B is
expected to yield a higher return.19
Our second hypothesis, based on agency theory, is that performance-based
incentive fees would be associated with higher risk-adjusted returns. This follows from
the predictions in the literature that such fees attract better (and more expensive)
managerial talent, and elicit higher effort by managers. To the extent that managerial
effort and talent affect investment returns, funds with profit-based fees should exhibit
higher risk-adjusted returns than funds with AUM-based fees, while facing the same level
of competition.20 In our setting, the investment decisions of funds with different fee
structures or varying degrees of competition under the same management are often made
by the same individuals working for a fund management company that has multiple
products. It is also possible that a fund management company may assign more able
individuals to one type of funds.21

18

Fees that depend on risk-adjusted returns in excess of a benchmark are theoretically superior to fees
based on absolute returns. We focus on fees based on absolute returns because this is what we observe in
the data.
19
The increased risk can take the form of high systemic risk (β), or appear in other forms, such as large
investments in relatively illiquid and risky “alternative assets.” This issue is discussed further in Section IV.
20
In formulating this hypothesis we do not take an explicit stand on whether it is possible to achieve high
risk-adjusted returns by selecting securities within an asset class (“stock picking”), by allocating investment
across asset classes, or through various forms of “market timing.” We examine if all of these together are
associated with better outcomes in funds with performance-based fees. Dyck et al. (2013) find that active
management in Canadian pension funds tends to be profitable in less than fully developed emerging
markets; our conjecture that active management could matter for retirement savings fund operating in Israel
is consistent with this logic.
21
Fang et al. (2014) show that mutual fund families allocate their most skilled managers to market
segments in which managerial skill is most needed. An executive in one of the life insurance management
companies in the sample has told one of the authors in private that he assigns his best talent to the old life
insurance fund he manages.

13

Hypotheses on the Effects of Competition
Predicting the effect of competition on fund performance is more complicated.
Compare Fund A to Fund C: in both funds, fees are calculated as a fraction of AUM but,
unlike Fund A, Fund C operates in a competitive environment where savers who are
unhappy with the fund’s performance can costlessly withdraw their savings, while savers
from other funds can join if they like the fund’s track record. Assuming full rationality of
savers, theory suggests that competition should lead to a better outcome in Fund C, which
would be induced to hire better portfolio managers who, in turn, will exert more effort.
However, as discussed above, the existing literature suggests that the effect of
competition on (mutual) fund performance may depend on the fund’s short-run
performance relative to competing funds and on the fund manager’s career concerns. We
sidestep these concerns in our analysis and use measures of average risk and return for
the subsample of retirement savings funds facing strong competitive pressures (PF) and
compare them with the average measures of risk and return for funds facing very weak
competitive pressures (NLI plans). In addition, there are doubts in the literature about the
ability of traditional measures of fund performance to capture fund management quality,
or managerial skill, in a competitive environment (Berk and van Binsbergen, 2015). This
issue is discussed in detail below, when we interpret our findings. Intuitively, however,
given the preference of regulators to use competition as a mechanism to achieve desirable
outcomes in the retirement savings sector, our conjecture is that a dollar of savings
invested in a competitive money management segment should result in a better outcome
than a dollar allocated to a retirement savings sector with little competitive pressure.

IV. Data and Results
Data
Our sample is constructed from official data on retirement savings schemes
published by the Israeli Ministry of Finance. We have data on monthly returns for the
period starting in January 2005 and ending in February 2016, and on asset allocation
starting in January 2008. Our sample period includes the years of the global financial
crisis.

14

The Effect of Incentives on Risk and Return
Table 2 presents summary statistics by fund type: average AUM, average monthly
returns, cumulative ten-year returns (gross and net of fees), the standard deviation of
monthly returns, and average fees.
OLI plans, which are large (in terms of assets under management) relative to other
retirement savings schemes,22 exhibit higher returns than NLI plans (which, with one
exception, are run by the same management companies, but have a different fee
structure). The average monthly return in OLI plans is about 0.04 percentage points
higher than in the NLI plans (gross of fees). Over the entire 11-year sample period, the
cumulative return of OLI plans is about eight percentage points higher than the
cumulative return of NLI plans (107% vs. nearly 99% in nominal terms).23 OLI plans are,
on average, slightly more expensive than NLI plans yet, even net of fees, savers in the
OLI plans realized, over the entire period, returns which were five percentage points
higher than those of savers in the NLI plans. All these differences are statistically
significant.24
In Table 2, risk, measured in terms of return volatility, appears to be similar in
OLI and NLI plans. Another possible indication of the riskiness of OLI and NLI plans
can be inferred from their performance in the face of an adverse shock experienced in
financial markets in 2008 (and to a much smaller extent, in 2011). In 2008, the average
monthly return of OLI plans was approximately -1.54%, roughly similar to the
corresponding figure for NLI plans, -1.47% (the figures for 2011 are also similar for the
two types of plans, around -0.33% per month, on average). According to this measure,
then, there are also no substantial differences in the riskiness of OLI and NLI plans.
There is, however, one dimension of potential risk where OLI plans do differ
22

In the multivariate regressions that follow, we control for fund size to make sure our results are not
driven by the allocation of talent to, or managerial focus on, the larger funds of each provider.
“Conventional wisdom” has it that small funds can generate higher returns than large funds because of their
“flexibility;” If this is the case, our tests may be biased against finding superior performance of the larger
OLI plans.
23
The cumulative inflation from January 2005 to December 2015 is about 23%.
24
To derive the statistical significance of the comparisons between OLI and NLI plans presented in Table 2
and in later tables, we conduct pairwise tests (i.e., the returns of the eight pairs of OLI and NLI plans under
the same management). This approach assumes that the eight pairs are independent observations. We
discuss this assumption in the robustness section below.

15

significantly from other retirement savings schemes: Figure 1 shows that the fraction of
illiquid assets (private loans and non-tradeable bonds, real estate, VC and PE investments
etc.) is about twice as high in the portfolios of OLI plans than in other retirement savings
schemes (about 27% of the OLI portfolios, on average, for the entire sample period vs.
about 14-15% in the portfolios of NLI plans and PF; we discuss this issue in detail
below).25 These differences may be, in part, due to the fact that OLI plans invest more
than other retirement savings schemes in illiquid assets to take advantage of the liquidity
premium, as they theoretically should. Presumably, investment in such assets is not only
risky, but also requires effort and skill on behalf of fund managers. The profit-based
incentives in OLI plans can explain the choice of managers in these schemes to assume
the additional risk and exert the additional effort involved in investment in this asset
class. This issue is examined more closely when we estimate risk-adjusted returns.
Taken together, the preliminary statistics presented in this section suggest that, in
contrast with the prevailing regulatory perception, OLI plans provide higher returns in
comparison with NLI plans, without necessarily bearing higher risk (except when risk is
measured by the proportion of illiquid assets in the portfolio). All this is despite the fact
that, from the management company’s perspective, the simplest and the least costly
course of action would have been to hold a single portfolio and then to allocate it
proportionally to OLI and NLI plans.

The Effect of Competition on Risk and Return
Similar comparisons between NLI plans and PF allow us to evaluate the effects of
competition. Recall that, in comparison with NLI plans, PF are exposed to intense
competition for savers. Nevertheless, cumulative and average monthly returns (gross of
fees) are nearly identical in the PF sector and in the NLI industry (Table 2). The standard
deviation of monthly returns (Table 2) and the proportion of the portfolio invested in
illiquid assets (Figure 1) in the two schemes are also quite similar for much of the sample
period. This suggests that, on average, the expected performance of a retirement savings
25

The proportion of investment in equity is also marginally higher in OLI plans. Note that, because the
population of savers in the OLI plans is older than in NLI plans (as these plans were started earlier), the
measures of risk used in this section may under-estimate the true tendency to assume additional risk in OLI
plans.

16

account in a competitive money management industry is unlikely to be very different
from the performance of a similar account invested in a sector facing weak competitive
pressures.26
In Table 2, the only economically meaningful difference between NLI plans and
PF is in management fees, which are substantially lower in the PF industry, where
competition is intense (0.7% per annum, on average), than in the NLI sector, where
switching costs are high and savers rarely move from one provider to another (the
average fees in NLI plans are about 1.15% per year). Nevertheless, these figures are
probably an over-estimate of the effect of competition on management fees for two main
reasons: First, as noted above, NLI (and OLI) plans pre-commit to the rate at which
savings will be converted to an annuity upon retirement and savers are therefore insured
against the risk of rising life expectancy. Savers in PF are exposed to this longevity risk.27
In addition, as noted above, some of the PF are non-profit schemes operated by labor
unions or employers, charging very low fees to employees in order to cover the fund’s
operating costs only. Hence, the differences in fees between PF and other retirement
savings schemes reported in Table 2 are probably higher than the difference in fees an
average investor would experience when switching to a commercially-owned PF from
another retirement savings scheme; hence the actual net-of-fees performance of PF may
be lower than what Table 2 might suggest.
Given that funds differ in size and their performance varies over time, Table 3
presents regression results where the dependent variables are gross monthly returns or the
annual standard deviation of monthly returns, controlling for fund size as well as for
management company- and period-fixed effects. OLI plans exhibit higher returns than

26

The literature discussed in Section II argues that competition does not have the same effect on all
(mutual) funds. Poorly performing (laggard) funds or funds whose management team is young would be
affected differently than leading funds or funds whose management team is mature. In addition, within our
sample, labor union-owned PF might differ than commercially-run PF in both their performance and their
fees. We do not examine these differences here and present only a comparison of the average performance
of retirement savings schemes operating in a highly competitive environment (PF) vs. the average
performance of NLI plans, where competitive pressures are weak.
27
Industry sources estimate the cost of this insurance provision at 0.3-0.35% per annum; if this figure is
true, the difference in fees shrinks dramatically.

17

NLI plans (the omitted category) and PF.28 The difference between OLI and the NLI
plans in the standard deviation of monthly returns regression is not statistically
significant, indicating that funds with performance-based fees do not seem to take
excessive risks. The comparison between PF and NLI plans suggests that PF exhibit
lower returns (although the magnitude of this difference is smaller than the magnitude of
the difference between OLI and NLI plans), as well as lower volatility.29 We conclude
from the evidence presented so far that performance-based fees are associated with an
increase in returns (there is less evidence on increased risk), whereas competition is
associated, on average, with low returns and low risk. In addition, management fees are
lower in a competitive environment (PF). We now turn to a comparison of risk-adjusted
returns in the three retirement savings schemes.

Risk-adjusted Returns by Fund Type
Our primary measure of management quality (risk-adjusted returns) is α, the
excess return generated by fund managers, controlling for a set of risk factors, as is
common in the literature. A recent study by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), following
earlier work by Berk and Green (2004), casts doubt on the ability of α to measure
managerial skill in fund management; this is discussed when we interpret our results.
Unlike equity-only or bonds-only mutual funds, which have been the focus of
much the existing literature, funds in our sample manage portfolios consisting of many
asset classes, such as government and corporate bonds, in addition to equity. Therefore,
to derive α, we focus on a simple set of easily identified indices as commonly used
proxies for risk factors. In our benchmark specification, we regress the monthly excess
return (above the risk-free rate, derived from short term government bonds) of each fund
28

In non-tabulated tests, we also examine a specification where we regress the (excess, above the risk-free
rate) return of each of the eight OLI plans on the returns of the same management company’s NLI plans.
The correlation between the two portfolios is high, in the order of 0.9, and yet in all eight regressions, there
is a positive intercept suggesting that, while the two portfolios are similar, they are not identical and OLI
plans exhibit higher returns. Casual examination of a few portfolios of OLI and NLI plans suggest that
differences in the portfolios often emanate from differences in investment in illiquid assets and, in addition,
there are also occasional differences in the stock and bond portfolios held by the plans, especially in
holdings of small and foreign shares.
29
One possible reason why NLI plans may do better than PF is “positive spillovers” from OLI plans. We
return to this issue below.

18

on the excess return of two equity indices, the Tel Aviv 100 Index and the MSCI World
Index, as well as on the excess returns of three bond indices: inflation-indexed
government bonds, non-indexed government bonds, and inflation-indexed corporate
bonds.30 To address the possibility that these factors may not fully capture the funds’
systemic risk, we examine several additional specifications for robustness.
In much of our empirical analysis, we divide the sample into four periods of 36
monthly observations each: January 2005 to December of 2007; January 2008 to
December of 2010; from January 2011 to December 2013; and from January 2013 to
December 2015.31 The average values of the parameters in the regressions in which α is
estimated are presented in Table 4. First, notice that the average values of the R-squared
are very high and roughly the same for all fund types, indicating that the risk control
measures work well for all the retirement savings schemes in the sample. Second, the
absolute magnitudes of the estimated α for all three categories appear to be high in
comparison with the values of α typically reported in the literature for equity-only mutual
funds, an issue we return to below. At this stage, it is important to note that the average α
in OLI plans is substantially higher than in NLI plans. Moreover, α is higher in OLI plans
in each of the four 36-month sub-periods, with somewhat smaller differences later in the
sample period, an issue we discuss in Table 8 below. The t-statistics of the estimated α’s
are also much higher for OLI plans. We interpret this as indicative evidence that OLI
plans exhibit superior long-term money management skills due to the talent they employ
and the incentives they provide. The effect of competition on α appears to be in the
opposite direction from the effect of incentives: the average α in PF is smaller in

30

The five risk factors that we use were developed by Professors Jacob Boudoukh and Zvi Wiener for the
Ministry of Finance’s official website to allow comparisons of long-term savings instruments. These are
appropriate for the retirement savings schemes in our sample, because most of their investments are in
these five asset categories. A unique feature of the Israeli capital market is that many government bonds
and most corporate bonds are inflation-indexed. This is a remnant of the hyper-inflation in the 1980’s.
31
To make the last period equal in length to the previous three periods, we use a 36-month period in which
the first 12 months (2013) overlap with the previous period’s last 12 months. This is not ideal, as the two
α’s calculated for the two periods may not be independent. To alleviate this concern, we also examine a
specification where the last period is shorter, 24 months only (January 2014 to December 2015, not
tabulated), another where the entire sample period is divided into four equal periods (reported in Table 6)
and a third where we calculate α for the entire sample period (discussed in the text below). The results
remain unchanged.

19

magnitude than that of NLI plans, even though this difference is not statistically
significant.32
Next, we introduce various control variables: Table 5 presents regression results
where the calculated α is the dependent variable and the right-hand-side variables
include, in addition to fund type, fund size (the natural logarithm of assets under
management at the beginning of the period for which α is calculated), as well as period
and management company-fixed effects. Given that we calculate four periodic estimates
of α for each fund, the standard errors are clustered at the fund level.33 Column 1 of Table
5 presents our benchmark specification and main finding: controlling for other factors,
OLI plans generate an annual risk-adjusted return that is 1.3 percentage points higher
than that generated by NLI plans. This difference is highly statistically significant. Figure
2 illustrates this phenomenon, depicting the difference in the risk-adjusted return for each
management company that provides both products. For all eight companies, α is higher in
the OLI plan, and the difference is highly statistically significant (t=5.7). The probability
that such a result would be obtained at random, under the assumption that the eight
managers constitute independent observations and have the same skills and incentives, is
about 0.25%.
Column 1 also shows that NLI plans outperform PF on average, although the
difference is smaller (and less statistically significant) than the difference between OLI
and NLI plans. This confirms our preliminary conclusion that competition (to which PF
are exposed) is not associated with superior performance.
Recall that OLI plans invest more in illiquid assets such as private loans, PE and
VC, or real estate. There is no readily available index to capture the returns on this asset
class;34 however, we do observe the proportion of illiquid assets in the portfolios of most

32

Table 4 also indicates that OLI plans have marginally higher equity β’s than NLI plans, whose equity β’s
exceed those of PF.
33
The results remain qualitatively unchanged when the standard errors are clustered at the management
company level.
34
This is due to the heterogeneity of this asset class (real estate, private loans, VC and PE, etc.) and the
unavailability of regular, high frequency reports on the returns on such investments. Notice also that, while
PF facing competition (and possible outflows) may be limited in their ability to invest in illiquid assets,
OLI and NLI plans are both equally able to do so. The larger fraction of the portfolio allocated to illiquid
assets in OLI plans suggests that the effort associated with this investment is worthwhile only in OLI plans

20

funds in each month starting in 2008. Using this information, we calculate the average
fraction of the portfolio invested in illiquid assets during the period in which α is
calculated. The presumption is that, if investment in illiquid assets affects the
measurement of risk-adjusted returns, it should manifest itself in funds (and periods) of
higher proportions of such assets in the portfolio, assuming they all invest in similar types
of alternative assets. The result, presented in Column 2 of Table 5, indicates that the
coefficient on OLI plans declines by about 40% relative to its magnitude in Column 1,
but remains positive and significant. Thus, the higher α of OLI plans is attributable, in
part though not completely, to the returns on the high proportion of illiquid assets held by
OLI plans (the coefficient on illiquid assets itself is positive and significant).35 The
difference between NLI and PF in Column 2 remains similar in magnitude to that of
Column 1, although the level of statistical significance is slightly lower.
The findings in Table 5 cast further doubts on the desirability of the ubiquitous
regulatory restrictions on the use of performance-based fees in retirement savings
schemes. Again, funds with performance-based incentive fees (OLI plans) appear to outperform funds with AUM-based fees; and, the difference between AUM-based funds
with weak competitive pressures (NLI plans) and AUM-based funds operating in a highly
competitive environment (PF) indicates that competition is unlikely to be a close
substitute to incentives.
Our interpretation of the results in Table 5 is based on differences in effort and
ability between OLI plans and other retirement schemes. Can there be different
explanations for the results in Table 5? There are no substantial differences in fund
characteristics and clienteles that can easily account for these findings. Cross-plan
subsidization and outright fraud over long time periods are unlikely, given the prevailing
tight regulatory regime. Another alternative interpretation for the results in Table 5 can
where fees are profit-based. It may also suggest that illiquid assets are available in limited supply so that
management companies have to allocate them to either OLI or NLI plans.
35
To the extent that the value of investments in illiquid assets are updated less frequently than the value of
investments in liquid asset classes, a large investment in illiquid assets may smooth returns and raise the
measured α. This effect, however, is unlikely to explain differences in risk-adjusted returns over long time
periods. Note that the sample period used in the regression in Column 2 is shorter, as data on investments in
illiquid assets become available only in 2008. Running the benchmark regression for this sample period
without including investment in illiquid assets yields a coefficient on OLI plans of 1.06, so part of the
difference between the coefficients in Column 1 and Column 2 is due to the sample period.

21

perhaps be derived from Berk and van Binsbergen (BvB, 2015), who argue that α
depends on the intensity of competition and should not be regarded as a measure of
money management quality: a positive α, in their view, would be driven to zero through
competition between investors, i.e., funds grow until the (decreasing) returns to
managerial skill or talent are equalized across all funds. In the BvB view, in order to
evaluate fund management quality, or managerial skill, a measure of “value added,”
taking into account fund size should be used, rather than a measure of return like α, which
is independent of fund size.
We do not believe that this view of the world can explain our findings. First, as a
group, OLI funds are not supposed to exhibit superior performance unless fees provide
very strong incentives. After all, OLI managers are not able to increase the size of their
funds and get higher fees due to inflows even if they exhibit superior return, which
reduces their incentives to perform. Performance-based fees in OLI plans must provide a
set of incentives which is much stronger than the ability to attract additional funds (in
NLI plans, for example), leading to superior performance. Second, OLI and NLI plans are
often run by the same individuals or investment committees, so that performance
differences between them are unlikely to be determined by inherent management ability,
but rather by the differences in incentives. Third, OLI plans are significantly larger than
NLI plans (and PF) yet they nevertheless exhibit higher α; thus, OLI plans would have
out-performed NLI plans by a much bigger margin using the BvB “value added”
measure. Would the superior α of OLI plans disappear in a regime of free flows in and
out of these schemes? Possibly (we do not have empirical evidence on this), but, even if
this were the case, it is not clear that this would be a desirable outcome, as free inflows
and outflows might lower the flexibility of OLI plans, for example, with respect to
investment in illiquid assets which, as we have seen, account for part of their superior
performance.
The BvB critique of the use of α is perhaps more relevant to the comparison
between the NLI plans and the PF industry, which differ in their competitive
environment. It is interesting to note, however, that even though NLI plans and PF
operate in different competitive environments, the difference between them in α turns out
to be smaller than the incentives-induced difference between the OLI and NLI plans. In
22

addition, in recent years NLI plans have been growing, yet the difference in α between
them and PF seems to have increased, rather than declined as one would expect according
to the BvB logic (see Table 8, which is discussed below). Overall, while the measured
performance of PF could be affected by competition, we do not believe that the BvB
critique undermines the importance of the role of incentives documented in Table 5.36
The possible conclusion, that incentives and competition should not be viewed as
perfect substitutes, could be a very troubling message for regulators around the world,
who tend to rely almost exclusively on competition to bring about better incentives for
the pension managers. It is important to repeat, however, that our analysis examines
incentives and competition separately; we have no evidence on the equilibrium and on the
retirees’ welfare in an environment where funds with performance-based fees compete
with AUM-based funds.

V. Robustness Tests
Table 6 presents a number of robustness tests. For ease of comparison, the
benchmark specification of Table 5, Column 1, is reproduced in Column 1 of Table 6.
In Column 2 we use an “industry peer index” as an additional risk factor in the
estimation of the risk-adjusted return, following the methodology of Hunter et al. (2014).
We proceed as follows: first, we construct a “peer index,” which is a simple average of
the excess return of all funds in the entire sample. We then regress this “peer index” on
the five risk factors (indices) used in the benchmark specification and include the
residuals from this regression as a sixth risk factor in the estimation of α for each fund.
This procedure is designed to control for possible omitted risk factors in all portfolios and
to improve the precision of the estimated α. The regression results across categories are
virtually unchanged from those of the benchmark specification. Controlling for size and

36

It is also possible to use α net of fees to measure fund performance (Table 10 below). We prefer to focus
on the gross-of-fees α to measure of the “size of the pie” generated by fund managers, whereas the net-offees α distributes the returns between the management company and the savers. Net of fees α is
nevertheless higher for OLI plans than for NLI plans, which have net-of-fees α of similar magnitude to
those of PF. Another possible measure of fund performance is the Sharpe Ratio which may be more
relevant to savers than α; we nevertheless choose to focus on α because, despite the Berk and Green (2015)
critique, it is commonly perceived as a proxy for the quality of fund management, our main variable of
interest.

23

management-company and period fixed effects, OLI plans have α which is 1.27% higher
than that of NLI plans (vs. a difference of 1.31% in the benchmark specification). The
difference in peer-adjusted α between NLI plans and PF remains the same as in the base
case. Thus omitted risk factors, if they are common across the three categories of funds,
do not seem to explain the differences.
In Column 3, we examine the possibility that the risk factors used in our
regression estimates of α for each fund are correlated. We address this issue by using a
specification where α is calculated in a regression that does not include the return on
indexed government bonds (which is correlated with the returns on nominal government
bonds and indexed corporate bonds). The estimated α’s are not different from those of the
benchmark specification and the regression results remain virtually unchanged as well.
In Column 4 we examine the robustness of the results to the choice of subperiods. We divide the entire sample (consisting of 134 months, from January 2005 to
February 2016) into three equal sub-periods of 45 months each (44 in the last period).
The results are qualitatively unchanged.37
In Column 5 we use the t-statistic of the calculated base-specification α as the
dependent variable to capture the differences in the estimation precision across funds and
periods. In essence, this specification weighs observations of α according to their
statistical significance. As shown in Table 4, the estimated α is more likely to be
statistically significant for OLI plans than for other retirement savings schemes and the
regression results indicate that OLI plans exhibit superior performance in this
specification as well. The sign of the difference between the NLI and PF remains
unchanged, but its magnitude and statistical significance is slightly lower than in other
specifications.38
Table 7 presents (together with the benchmark specification reproduced in
Column 1), regression results for three subsamples: in Column 2, we include only

37

We also examine specifications with no management-company and no period fixed effects with
clustering at the fund and at the management-company levels. The OLI coefficient is positive and highly
statistically significant in all of these specifications.
38
In another robustness test, not tabulated, we use preliminary calculations of a four-factor model for Israel
derived by Garyn-Tal and Lauterbach (2015) and find that our results remain unchanged in this
specification as well.

24

insurance-owned retirement savings schemes (OLI and NLI plans as well as insuranceowned PF); in Column 3, only NLI and PF; and in Column 4, only NLI plans and
insurance-owned PF. The general thrust of the results remains unchanged: OLI plans with
profit-based fees exhibit higher α than NLI plans which, in turn, tend to do better than PF
operating in a competitive environment.39
Table 8 presents the evolution over time of the differences between OLI and NLI
plans, as well as between NLI plans and PF. When using α calculated for the entire
period, OLI plans out-perform NLI plans and PF. Furthermore, OLI plans out-perform
NLI plans in all periods. The gap between them, however, is larger in the first two subperiods than later in the sample. By contrast, the under-performance of PF relative to NLI
is primarily a feature of the second half of the sample period. It therefore appears that the
relative performance of NLI plans improves over time.40 One interpretation of this could
be that, recently, NLI plans have begun to resemble OLI plans, with increasing
investment in illiquid assets (Figure 1). As an illustration of this, one insurance company
has recently announced that its OLI and NLI plans will be jointly managed and hold the
same portfolio. In addition, in non-tabulated tests, we observe a (small) increase in the
correlation of returns between OLI and NLI plans of the same managers in recent years.
If PF have become less attractive alternatives to NLI (for example, because, starting in
2008, withdrawals from PF can only be made in the form of annuities rather than as a
lump sum), then perhaps there is less “herding” (similarity in investment policies)
between NLI plans and PF, and NLI plans, which may have become less concerned about
capital outflows, invest more in illiquid assets. This is, of course, a mere conjecture.

39

A comparison of Column 3 and Column 4 may suggest that insurance-owned PF tend to do better than
other PF, perhaps because of “spillovers” from insurance-owned OLI plans (which affect the performance
of NLI plans and insurance-owned PF relative to other PF). Presumably, illiquid and alternative assets are
available in limited supply so that it is not possible for NLI plans and insurance-owned PF to completely
mimic the portfolios of OLI plans.
40
An alternative way to derive the statistics presented in Table 8 would to construct portfolios of funds of
similar types and calculate, for each period, the portfolio α. This relaxes the assumption that observations
on the eight pairs of OLI and NLI are independent. Mathematically, instead of calculating α for each fund
in each period and then calculating the average α by fund type, this procedure begins by averaging returns
for each fund type and then deriving α for each portfolio of funds. The two procedures could differ if some
observations are missing in some months, for example. In practice, the results are virtually identical for the
two procedures and the conclusion from Table 8 hold on the basis of OLI and NLI portfolios as well.

25

Table 9 presents regression specifications where we use only three of the four
periods for which α is estimated in each regression. In the first period (early 2005 to the
end of 2007), for example, returns may have been distorted because the volume of
inflows into the newly-formed NLI plans was large relative to their AUM. This period
also witnessed ownership changes in some PF, following the government-appointed
Bachar Committee which forced banks to sell off bank-owned PF. The movement of
savers across PF may have been different in this first period than in later periods.
Consistent with Table 8, our results remain unchanged when the first period α is omitted
from the regression, with a smaller difference between OLI and NLI plans and a more
pronounced under-performance of PF relative to NLI plans. In the second period (early
2008 to the end of 2010), which includes the onset of the financial crisis, OLI plans may
have had an “accounting advantage” to the extent that the valuation of the large
proportion of illiquid assets in their portfolios did not adjust fully to the crisis. Yet our
results remain qualitatively unchanged when the second period α is omitted from the
regression. When the fourth period α is omitted, the estimated difference between OLI
and NLI plans is larger than in the benchmark specification and in the other sub-periods
because the difference in α between OLI and NLI plans is the smallest in the last sample
period (see also Table 8). Differences between NLI plans and PF are insignificant in the
regression where the last estimation period is omitted because NLI plans outperform PF
later in the sample, whereas in the earlier periods the estimated α is similar, or even
slightly higher, for PF.
Overall, our main findings remain unchanged and are consistent with the view
that funds with performance-based fees are associated with superior risk-adjusted returns,
in contrast with competition which tends to be detrimental to performance.

VI. Concluding Remarks
Our main findings, evaluating the effectiveness of two key policy measures, the
regulation of management fees and the introduction of competition among retirement
savings schemes, are summarized in Table 10: Retirement savings schemes with profit
based incentives (OLI plans) out-perform similar schemes with no incentives (NLI plans)
by about 0.04% in terms of gross monthly returns (0.03% of the net monthly returns) and
26

by 0.07% in terms of gross monthly α (0.06% of the net monthly α). Gross of fees, the
performance of retirement savings schemes subject to significant competitive pressure
(PF) is not very different from that of similar funds operating in an environment of
limited competition (NLI plans); because competition is associated with low fees, net
performance of PF is slightly better than that of NLI plans.
We believe that these findings are of relevance for the design of an efficient
regulatory environment for defined contributions-type private pension funds, which play
an increasingly important role in providing retirement income around the world. In many
countries it is the managers of these pension fund managers—and not savers—who make
both asset allocation and specific investment decisions. One implication of our results is
that incentives may be more effective than competition in aligning the interests of
pension fund managers with those of their clients. This is important, because misaligned
incentives could not only harm future retirees, but also undermine investor protection,
financial development, and even financial stability. Competition however, leads to lower
fees for investors.
Another implication of our results has to do with the regulation of risk taking in
retirement savings schemes. While most regulators worldwide take the view that profitbased fees are risky and should be prohibited in pension fund management, our results
cast doubt on the validity of this view: funds with performance-based fees are associated
with more risk-taking in comparison with AUM-based funds only if risk is measured in
terms of investment in illiquid and presumably risky assets. Comparisons based on other
measures of risk, such as return volatility, are not highly consistent with the regulatory
view. By contrast, funds with performance-based fees are clearly associated with highquality investment management. Stated differently, even if funds with performance-based
fees can be regarded as riskier than other funds, there seems to be a tradeoff whereby this
higher risk is accompanied also by better investment management.
Given that it is unclear whether competition (or other regulatory mechanisms) can
effectively incentivize fund managers, our analysis suggests that it may be appropriate to
consider regulatory measures to directly contain risk-taking by fund managers, along with
relaxation of the prohibition on performance-based fees. Policymakers have at their
disposal a variety of such mechanisms they already use, including the imposition of
27

fiduciary duties or quantitative limits on certain types of risky investment. Any potential
changes should, of course, be considered with caution, given that our analysis cannot
provide direct evidence on the equilibria which would arise in possible real-world hybrid
combinations of competition and incentives. If, for example, funds with performancebased fees competed with funds with AUM-based fees, would the funds with incentives
be able to attract the best managerial talent? Would the funds without incentives
disappear? Our empirical setup enables us to compare only “pure” funds with incentives
and no competition (OLI plans) vs. funds without any incentives and no competition
(NLI plans), and funds with competition and no incentives (PF).
Why is it, then, that regulations which are possibly sub-optimal govern the
pension fund industry in most countries? It may well be that the aversion of regulators to
performance-based fees reflects their own risk aversion, viewing the risk-taking of fund
managers as detrimental to their own careers. After all, nobody would blame past
regulators for getting a pension that is lower than what it could have been. At the same
time, one case of excess risk taking by a manager could unleash a tsunami of criticism
and perhaps lead to a demise of a regulator. Rational regulators respond accordingly. In
that context, the fact that the average risk taking of OLI funds does not seem to be higher,
suggests that regulators may worry about extreme events. This effect could be magnified
by an “information cascade” (Bikhchandani et al., 1998) across countries: the perceived
disadvantage of profit-based incentive fees found its way into regulation in a few
countries, and the rest have just copied it under the assumption that the first countries had
been better informed. To the extent that this is the case, while a revision in the current
regulatory regime should perhaps be considered, it seems unlikely.
References
Andonov, Aleksander, Rob Bauer and Martijn Cremers (2013), “Can Large Pension
Funds Beat the Market? Asset Allocation, Market Timing, Security Selection, and the
Limits of Liquidity,” unpublished manuscript, University of Notre Dame.
Antolín, Pablo, Sandra Blome, David Karim, Stéphanie Payet, Gerhard Scheuenstuhl and
Juan Yermo (2009), “Investment Regulations and Defined Contribution Pensions,”
OECD Working Papers on Insurance and Private Pensions No. 37, OECD Publishing.

28

Ayers, Ian and Quinn Curtis (2015), “Beyond Diversification: The Pervasive Problem of
Excessive Fees and “Dominated Funds” in 401(k) Plans,” Yale Law Journal Vol. 124, pp.
1476-1552.
Basak, Suleiman, Anna Pavlova and Alexander Shapiro (2007), “Optimal Asset
Allocation and Risk Shifting in Money Management,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol.
20, pp. 1583-1621.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard Thaler. (2007). “Heuristics and Biases in Retirement
Savings Behavior,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, pp. 81-104.
Ben Rephael, Azi, Shmuel Kandel and Avi Wohl (2012), “Measuring Investor Sentiment
with Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 104, pp. 363-382.
Berk, Jonathan and Richard Green (2004), “Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in
Rational Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112, pp. 1269-1295.
Berk, Jonathan and Jules van Binsbergen (2015), “Measuring Skill in the Mutual Fund
Industry,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 118, pp. 1-20.
Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer and Ivo Welch (1998). “Learning from the
Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cascades,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 12, pp. 151-170.
Blake, David, Bruce Lehmann and Allan Timmermann (1999), “Asset Allocation
Dynamics and Pension Fund Performance,” Journal of Business, Vol. 72, pp. 429-471.
Brown, Keith, W.V. Harlow and Laura Starks (1996), “Of Tournaments and
Temptations: An Analysis of Managerial Incentives in the Mutual Fund Industry,”
Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, pp. 85-110.
Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison (1997), “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response
to Incentives,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, pp. 1167-1200.
Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison (1999), “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund
Managers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114, pp. 389-432.
Coates, John and Glenn Hubbard (2007), “Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry:
Evidence and Implications for Policy,” Journal of Corporation Law, Vol. 33, pp. 151222.

29

Cooper, Jeremy (2010), “Super for Members: A New Paradigm for Australia’s
Retirement Income System,” Rotman International Journal of Pension Management,
Vol. 3, pp. 8-15.
Das, Sanjiv and Rangarajan Sundaram (2002), “Fee Speech: Signaling, Risk-Sharing and
the Impact of Fee Structures on Investor Welfare,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 15,
pp. 1465-1497.
Dass, Nishant, Massimo Massa and Rajdeep Patgiri (2008), “Mutual Funds and Bubbles:
The Surprising Role of Contractual Incentives,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 21, pp.
51-99.
Davis, Philip (2002), “Prudent Person Rules or Quantitative restrictions? The Regulation
of Long-term Institutional Investors` Portfolios,” Journal of Pension Economics and
Finance, Vol. 1, pp 157-191.
Dıaz-Mendoza, Ana, German Lopez-Espinosa and Miguel Martınez (2014) “The
Efficiency of Performance-Based Fee Funds,” European Financial Management, Vol. 20,
pp. 825-855.
Dyck, Alexander, Karl Lins and Lukasz Pomorski (2013), “Does Active Management
Pay? New International Evidence,” Review of Asset Pricing Studies, Vol. 3, pp. 200-228.
Elton, Edwin, Martin Gruber and Christopher Blake (2003), “Incentive Fees and Mutual
Funds,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 58, pp. 779-804.
Fang, Jieyan, Alexander Kempf and Monika Trapp (2014), “Fund Manager Allocation,”
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 111, pp. 661-674.
Fisch, Jill (2010), “Rethinking the Regulation of Securities Intermediaries,” University of
Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol. 158, pp. 1961-2041.
Garyn-Tal, Sharon and Beni Lauterbach (2015), “The Formulation of the Four Factor
Model when a Considerable Proportion of Firms is Dual-Listed,” Emerging Markets
Review, Vol. 24, pp. 1–12.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer (2010), “What Comes to Mind,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 125, pp. 1399-1433.
Gil-Bazo, Javier and Pablo Ruiz-Verdú (2008), “When Cheaper is Better: Fee
Determination in the Market for Equity Mutual Funds,” Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organizations, Vol.67, pp. 871-885.
30

Giroud, Xavier and Holger Mueller (2011), “Corporate Governance, Product Market
Competition, and Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 66, pp. 563-600.
Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner (1999), “An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S.
Venture Capital Partnership,” Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 51, pp. 3–44.
Gordon, Jeffrey (1987), “The Puzzling Persistence of the Constrained Prudent Man
Rule,” New York University Law Review, Vol. 62, pp. 52-115.
Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman and Russ Wermers (1995), “Momentum Investment
Strategies, Portfolio Performance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 85, pp. 1088-1105.
Holmstrom, Bengt (1999), “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective,”
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 66, pp. 169-182.
Hunter, David, Eugene Kandel, Shmuel Kandel and Russ Wermers (2014), “Endogenous
Benchmarks,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 112, pp. 1-29.
Illig, Robert (2007), “What Hedge Funds Can Teach Corporate America: A Roadmap for
Achieving Institutional Investor Oversight,” American University Law Review, Vol. 57,
pp. 225-339.
Kahan, Marcel and Edward Rock (2007), “Hedge Funds in Corporate Governance and
Corporate Control,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol. 155, pp. 1021-1093.
Kandel, Eugene, Dima Leshchinskii and Harry Yuklea (2011), “VC Funds: Aging Brings
Myopia,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 46, pp. 431-457.
Kempf, Alexander and Stefan Ruenzi (2008), “Tournaments in Mutual-Fund Families,”
Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 21, pp. 1013-1036.
Kempf, Alexander, Stefan Ruenzi and Tania Thiele (2009), “Employment Risk,
Compensation Incentives, and Managerial Risk Taking: Evidence from the Mutual Fund
Industry,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 92, pp. 92–108.
Li, Wei and Ashish Tiwari (2009), “Incentive Contracts in Delegated Portfolio
Management,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 22, pp. 4681-4714.
Lim. Jongha, Berk Sensoy and Michael Weisbach (2016), “Indirect Incentives of Hedge
Fund Managers,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 71, pp. 871-918.
Lovitch, Fred (1975), “The Investment Advisers Act of 1940-Who Is an Investment
Adviser?” University of Kansas Law Review, Vol. 24, pp. 67-104.
31

Ma, Linlin, Yuehua Tang and Juan-Pedro Gómez (2015), “Portfolio Manager
Compensation in the U.S. Mutual Fund Industry,” unpublished manuscript, IE Business
School.
Mahoney, Paul (2004), “Manager-Investor Conflicts in Mutual Funds,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 18, pp. 161–182.
Manges, Gerard (1972), “The Investment Company Amendments Act of 1970-An
Analysis and Appraisal after Two Years,” Boston College Industrial and Commercial
Law Review, Vol. 14, pp. 387-436.
Martin, Roger (2014), “Why Monopolistic Pension Funds Undermine Capitalism,”
Harvard Business Review Online, October 6, 2014.
Massa, Massimo and Radjeep Patgiri (2009), “Incentives and Mutual Fund Performance:
Higher Performance or Just Higher Risk Taking?” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 22,
pp. 1777-1815.
Medill, Colleen (2000), “The Individual Responsibility Model of Retirement Plans
Today: Conforming ERISA Policy to Reality,” Emory Law Journal, Vol. 49, pp. 1 – 53.
Metrick, Andrew and Ayako Yasuda (2010), “The Economics of Private Equity Funds,”
Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 23, pp. 2303-2341.
Moreolo, Carlo (2015), “Italian Regulator Questions Merit of Pension Fund Competition
Bill,” Investments & Pension Europe, July 3, 2015.
Morley, John and Quinn Curtis (2010), “Taking Exit Rights Seriously: Why Governance
and Fee Litigation Don’t Work in Mutual Funds,” Yale Law Journal, Vol. 120, pp. 84142.
Mugerman, Yevgeny, Orly Sade and Moshe Shayo (2014), “Long Term Savings
Decisions: Financial Reform, Peer Effects and Ethnicity,” Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization, Vol. 106, pp. 235–253.
OECD (2011), Pensions at a Glance: Retirement-income Systems in OECD and G20
Countries (Paris, OECD Publishing).
OECD (2013), Pensions at a Glance: OECD and G20 Indicators (Paris, OECD
Publishing).
OECD (2014), Pension Market Focus No. 11 (Paris, OECD Publishing).

32

Palomino, Frederic and Andrea Prat (2003), “Risk Taking and Optimal Contracts for
Money Managers,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 34, pp. 113-137.
Porath. Yehuda and Nadav Steinberg (2013), “Chasing Their Tails: Inflow Momentum
and Yield Chasing among Provident Fund Investors in Israel,” Israel Economic Review
Vol. 10, pp. 71–106.
Shaton, Maya (2015), “The Display of Information and Household Investment Behavior,”
unpublished manuscript, the University of Chicago.
Sirri, Erik and Peter Tufano (1998), “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of
Finance, Vol. 53, pp. 1589-1622.
Wermers, Russ (1999), “Mutual Fund Herding and the Impact on Stock Prices,” Journal
of Finance, Vol. 54, pp. 581-622.

33

Table 1: Types of Retirement Savings Schemes in the Sample
Competition/Fee
Structure

AUM

Incentive Fees

OLI(i)
No competition

Weak Competition

Strong Competition

N/A
NLI(ii)
N=9
Provident Funds(iii)
N=55

N=8

N/A

N/A

(i)
Old Life Insurance (OLI) Plans (established before 2004): Life-insurance policies with a very
substantial savings component. Fees are based on a combination of a relatively small AUM-based fee (up to
0.6%) and a large performance-based fee (up to 15% of inflation-adjusted returns). A high-watermark
provision ensures that the fund manager collects such fees only after any losses from previous years have been
recouped; no fees are charged on deposits. These funds are closed to new members; old members can leave
without a tax penalty, but lose important benefits when doing so. Old members can, however, discontinue
deposits and retain some of their benefits. In January 2013 two insurance companies merged, leaving a sample
of seven OLI plans in the years 2013-2016.
(ii)
New Life Insurance (NLI) Plans (established in 2004 or later): These are generally similar the OLI
plans, except that fees are based primarily on AUM (and on monthly deposits). Unlike the OLI plans, the NLI
ones are open to new members, but savers face substantial switching costs and are unlikely to leave or switch
plans. In addition to the eight insurance companies providing OLI plans, the sample includes one additional
insurance company offering only a NLI plan. The same merger mentioned in (i) reduced the sample of NLI
plans to eight in the years 2013-2016.

(iii)

Provident (including shorter term) Funds (PF): A long-term saving scheme with roughly the same
tax benefits as life insurance plans, but without insurance coverage. Fees on these products are based on AUM
and the environment they operate in today is highly competitive and without switching costs. Tax regulations
allow most savers in PF to withdraw their savings after 15 (and sometimes fewer) years without any tax
penalty, although such a withdrawal involves the loss of tax benefits on future returns. PF are closest to U.S.
mutual funds in the environment they operate in. Our sample includes only PF whose assets under
management, as of 2013, exceeded NIS 500 million (about $125 million). To the extent that there are some
funds which used to be above the threshold and no longer satisfy the size criterion in 2013, the performance of
the PF industry that we measure may be an upper bound on the sector’s actual performance. The actual number
of funds varies slightly in some months.

34

Table 2: Sample Statistics by Fund Type

Average
Average Fund AUM
(billions NIS, as of 12/2013)

Average Gross

Cumulative Gross

Annual

Monthly Return

[Net] Returns

STD of

(1/2005-2/2016)

(1/2005-2/2016)

Monthly

Average
Annual Fees

Returns

Old Life Insurance

18.5*

0.57%*

107.07%*

1.56%

1.28%*

Plans

(6.5)

(0.06)

[79.85%]

(0.06)

(0.07)

New Life Insurance

4.2

0.53%

98.67%

1.56%

1.15%

Plans

(1.6)

(0.05)

[74.86%]

(0.06)

(0.02)

2.8

0.52%

96.71%

1.51%

0.71%

(0.5)

(0.02)

[81.82%]

(0.03)

(0.02)

Provident Funds

Notes: Fund size in US dollar terms is about ¼ of the reported size in NIS terms. Monthly and cumulative returns are gross returns in nominal terms. The
standard deviation of monthly returns is calculated annually and then averaged across years and fund types. Fees refer to total fund fees charged (excluding life
insurance fees). OLI and NLI funds provide “longevity insurance” that does not exist in the PF, thus the differences in the fees and net returns may be overstated
(see footnote 27). Standard errors (standard deviations divided by the square root of the number of observations) appear in parentheses except for cumulative
returns where returns net of fees appear in square brackets. * denotes cases where differences between OLI and NLI plans are statistically significant at
conventional levels in pairwise (within fund-manager) t-tests. None of the differences between all NLI plans and all PF (in non-paired tests) is statistically
significant, except the difference in fees.

35

Table 3: Comparison of Risk and Return of Retirement Savings Schemes
1/2005-2/2016
Monthly Return
Old Life Insurance Plans
Provident Funds Scheme
Size (log AUM)

(1)
0.08 ***
(0.02 )
-0.03 **
(0.01 )
-0.03 **
(0.01 )

Standard Deviation
of Monthly Returns
(2)
0.03
(0.05 )
-0.07 *
(0.04 )
-0.02
(0.02 )

8, 623

711

.25

.77

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Management Company
Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Observations

Notes: OLS regressions; robust standard errors, clustered at the fund level (72
funds) are in parentheses. The dependent variables are, in Column 1, monthly
gross return (%) and, in Column 2, the annual standard deviation of monthly
returns (%). ***=Significant at the 1-percent level; **=Significant at the 5-percent
level; *=Significant at the 10-percent level.

36

Table 4: Comparison of Individual Fund Regression Results by Fund Type

R2

Old Life Insurance Plans
New Life Insurance Plans
Provident Funds

(1)
0.91
(0.01)
0.92
(0.01)
0.93
(0.01)

α
(2)
2.53*
(0.19)
1.66
(0.23)
1.42
(0.10)

t-stat of α

β
Tel Aviv 100

β
MSCI World

(3)
2.23*
(0.18)
1.57
(0.21)
1.42
(0.075)

(4)
0.22
(0.01)
0.22
(0.01)
0.20†
(0.003)

(5)
0.19
(0.01)
0.16
(0.01)
0.125†
(0.005)

β
Corporate
Bonds
(6)
0.39
(0.04)
0.36
(0.04)
0.39
(0.02)

Notes: The table reports factor loadings from fund-specific regressions where the dependent variable is the monthly excess return (and the risk free rate
is derived from yields on short-term government bonds) on a number of indices (proxies) for risk factors. α is expressed in percent, in annual terms. 36month periods are used in all regressions (2005-2007; 2008-2010; 2011-2013; 2013-2015), with 1/2005 as the starting month. All means are
unweighted; standard errors (the standard deviation of the variable, divided by the square root of the number of observations) are in parentheses. *
denotes cases where differences between OLI and NLI plans are statistically significant at conventional levels in pairwise (within fund-managers) t-tests.
† denotes cases where differences between NLI plans and PF are statistically significant at conventional levels (in non-paired tests).

37

Table 5 – The Effect of Incentive Fees and Competition on Risk-Adjusted Return

Whole Sample
(1)
1.31 ***
(0.26 )
-0.32 *
(0.17 )

Old Life Insurance Plans
Provident Funds
Percentage in Illiquid Assets

-0.22 ***
(0.08 )
224
.46

Size (log AUM)
Observations

(2)
0.77 **
(0.32 )
-0.40
(0.26 )
4.75 ***
(1.67 )
-0.35 **
(0.16 )
160
.47

Period Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Management Company Fixed
Effects

Yes

Yes

Notes: OLS regressions; robust standard errors, clustered at the fund level (Column 1 – 72 funds, Column 2
– 64 funds) are in parentheses. The dependent variable is the calculated α for four 36-month periods,
expressed in percent in annual terms. Column 1 presents our main specification, and includes all funds in
the sample; Column 2 adds to the regression the average percentage of the portfolio invested in illiquid
assets during the estimation period as a control variable. ***=Significant at the 1-percent level; **
=Significant at the 5-percent level; *=Significant at the 10 percent level.

38

Table 6 – Alternative Specifications

Base Spec
Old Life Insurance Plans
Provident Funds Scheme
Size (log AUM)
Observations
Period Fixed Effects
Manager Fixed Effects

(1)
1.31 ***
(0.26 )
-0.32 *
(0.17 )
-0.22 ***
(0.08 )
224
.46
Yes
Yes

Peers

Factor

(2)
1.27 ***
(0.26 )
-0.33 *
(0.17 )
-0.22 ***
(0.08 )
224
.46

(3)
1.29 ***
(0.26 )
-0.33 *
(0.18 )
-0.22 ***
(0.08 )
224
.45

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Period
(4)
0.957 ***
(0.238 )
-0.372 **
(0.168 )
-0.09
(0.08 )
162
.63
Yes
Yes

t-stat
(5)
0.910 ***
(0.184 )
-0.205
(0.184 )
-0.13 **
(0.05 )
224
.38
Yes
Yes

Notes: OLS regressions; robust standard errors, clustered at the fund level (72 funds in Columns 1-3 and Column 5;
and 71 funds in Column 4) are in parentheses. In Columns 1-3 the dependent variable is calculated α for four 36month periods, expressed in percent in annual terms. Column 1 reproduces the benchmark specification from Table
5, Column 1. In Column 2 the dependent variable is the peer-adjusted α where an additional risk factor is added
based on the performance of all funds in the industry (see Hunter et al., 2014 and explanation in the text). In Column
3 the dependent variable is α which is derived from a specification without the indexed government bonds factor. In
Column 4 we estimate α using three non-overlapping periods (consisting of 45 months in the first two periods and
44 months in the third). In Column 5 the dependent variable is the t-statistic of the estimated α in the base
specification. ***=Significant at the 1 percent level. ** =Significant at the 5 percent level .*=Significant at the 10
percent level

39

Table 7 – Restricted Samples

Base Spec

Old Life Insurance Plans
Provident Funds Scheme
Size (log AUM)
Observations

Period Fixed Effects
Manager Fixed Effects

(1)
1.31 ***
(0.26 )
-0.32 *
(0.17 )
-0.22 ***
(0.08 )
224
.46
Yes
Yes

Provident
Insurance- Provident (Insurance& New
owned)
only
& New
(2)
0.75 ***
(0.26 )
-0.30 **
(0.13 )
0.00
(0.09 )
94
.31
.

Yes
Yes

(3)

-0.33 *
(0.17 )
-0.24 ***
(0.08 )
194
.45
Yes
Yes

(4)

-0.26 **
(0.11 )
-0.06
(0.10 )
64
.26
Yes
Yes

Notes: OLS regressions; robust standard errors, clustered at the fund level (Column 1 - 72 funds,
Column 2 – 27 funds, Column 3 – 64 funds, Column 4 - 19 funds) are in parentheses. The
dependent variable is the calculated α for four 36-month periods, expressed in percent in annual
terms. Column 1 reproduces the benchmark specification from Table 5, Column 1. In Column 2 the
sample is restricted to insurance-owned OLI and NLI plans and insurance-owned PF; in Column 3,
to NLI plans and PF only; and in Column 4, to NLI plans and insurance company-owned PF.
***=Significant at the 1-percent level; ** =Significant at the 5-percent level; *=Significant at the
10 percent level.

40

Table 8: Estimated α by Fund Type and Period

Entire

1/2005-

1/2008-

1/2011-

1/2013-

Period

12/2007

12/2010

12/2013

12/2015

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Old Life

2.26%*

2.20%*

3.05%*

2.27%*

2.56%*

Insurance Plans

(0.22)

(0.19)

(0.57)

(0.30)

(0.34)

New Life

1.57%

1.31%

1.36%

1.81%

2.19%

Insurance Plans

(0.20)

(0.35)

(0.74)

(0.21)

(0.20)

1.25%

1.58%

1.47%

1.39%

1.08%

(0.15)

(0.25)

(0.22)

(0.12)

(0.11)

Provident Funds

†

Notes: The table reports α estimated for sub-periods, expressed in percent, in annual terms. Column 1
presents the calculated α for the entire sample period (134 months). Column 2 presents the calculated α for
the first period (1/2005-12/2007); Column 3 the calculated α for the second period (1/2008-12/2010);
Column 4 the calculated α for the third period (1/2011-12/2013); and Column 5 presents the calculated α
for the last period (1/2013-12/2015). All means are unweighted; standard errors (the standard deviation of
the variable, divided by the square root of the number of observations) are in parentheses. * denotes cases
where differences between OLI and NLI plans are statistically significant in pairwise (within fundmanagers) t-tests. † denotes cases where differences between NLI plans and PF are statistically significant
at conventional levels (in non-paired tests).

41

Table 9 – Regressions for Sub-Periods

1st, 2nd and
3d Periods

Base Spec

Old Life Insurance Plans
Provident Funds Scheme
Size (log AUM)
Observations
Period Fixed Effects
Manager Fixed Effects

(1)
1.31 ***
(0.26 )
-0.32 *
(0.17 )
-0.22 ***
(0.08 )
224
.46
Yes
Yes

1st, 3d and 4th 2nd, 3d and
Periods
4th Periods

(2)
1.58***
(0.28)
-0.08
(0.19)
-0.26***
(0.08)
187
.52

(3)
1.09***
(0.35)
-0.45***
(0.16)
-0.19
(0.12)
154
.61

(4)
1.06***
(0.30)
-0.50**
(0.23)
-0.22
(0.133)
168
.44

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Notes: OLS regressions; robust standard errors, clustered at the fund level (around 70 funds in each
regression) are in parentheses. The dependent variable is the calculated α for 36-month periods, expressed
in percent in annual terms. Column 1 replicates the benchmark specification from Table 5, Column 1. In
Column 2 we use the calculated α for the first three periods only (1/2005-12/2007, 1/2008-12/2010, and
1/2011-12/2013) and omit the fourth period; in Column 3 we use the calculated α for the first and last two
periods (1/2005-12/2007, 1/2011-12/2013, and 1/2013-12/2015) and omit the second period; in Column 4
we use the calculated α for the last three periods (1/2008-12/2010, 1/2011-12/2013, and 1/2013-12/2015)
and omit the first period. ***=Significant at the 1-percent level; ** =Significant at the 5-percent level;
*=Significant at the 10 percent level.

42

Table 10: Summary of the Main Results

Monthly Gross

Monthly Gross

Monthly Net

Monthly Net

Raw Return

Alpha

Raw Return

Alpha

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Old Life Insurance

0.57%*

0.21%*

0.46%*

0.13%*

Plans

(0.06)

(0.02)

(0.06)

(0.02)

New Life Insurance

0.53%

0.14%

0.43%

0.07%

Plans

(0.05)

(0.02)

(0.05)

(0.02)

0.52%

0.12%

0.46%

0.08%

(0.02)

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.01)

Provident Funds

Notes: Column 1 reproduces figures presented in Table 2. Figures in Column 2 are differences across fund
types in the average α (from Table 4), expressed in monthly terms. Figures in Column 3 are the differences
in gross raw monthly returns from Table 2 (reproduced here in Column 1) minus the differences in fees
(expressed in monthly terms), also from Table 2. Column 4 presents differences in net α using the gross
monthly α from Column 2 and the fees (expressed in monthly terms), from Table 2.

43

Figure 1: Percent of Assets Invested in Illiquid Assets

Note: The figures are calculated as the simple average of the allocation of all funds of each type in a given
month.

44

Figure 2: Estimated α in Old and New Life Insurance Plans

Notes: Average values by fund type and manager. α is estimated using four 36-month periods (1/200512/2007; 1/2008-12/2010; 1/2011-12/2013; and 1/2013-12/2015), and expressed in percent in annual terms.
Manager 6 has only a NLI plan and is omitted.

