                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         TRADE AND THE ENVIRONMENT:
                   NEW METHODS, MEASUREMENTS, AND RESULTS

                                     Jevan Cherniwchan
                                     Brian R. Copeland
                                       M. Scott Taylor

                                     Working Paper 22636
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22636


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




Preliminary version prepared for the Annual Review of Economics: Doi: 10.1146/annurev-
economics-063016-103756. Funding from the Economics and Environmental Policy Research
Network (EEPRN) is gratefully acknowledged. Taylor also acknowledges support from the
Canada Research Chairs Program and SSHRC. Copeland conducted part of this research while
visiting Université Paris-Est Marne la Vallée. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jevan Cherniwchan, Brian R. Copeland, and M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade and the Environment: New Methods, Measurements, and Results
Jevan Cherniwchan, Brian R. Copeland, and M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 22636
September 2016
JEL No. F1,F14,F64,Q5,Q56

                                          ABSTRACT

We review recent research linking international trade to the environment, with a focus on new
results and methods. The review is given structure by a novel decomposition linking changes in
emissions to changes in productive activity at the plant, firm, industry, and national levels. While
some new results have emerged from the application of a Melitz-style approach to trade and the
environment, its full potential has not yet been exploited. We discuss existing empirical and
theoretical work, introduce three new hypotheses, and suggest paths for future researchers to
follow.


Jevan Cherniwchan                                     M. Scott Taylor
Alberta School of Business                            IEE Canada Research Chair
University of Alberta                                 Department of Economics
Edmonton, Alberta                                     The University of Calgary
Canada, T6G 2R6                                       2500 University Drive, N.W.
jevan@ualberta.ca                                     Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
                                                      CANADA
Brian R. Copeland                                     and NBER
Vancouver School of Economics                         m.scott.taylor1@gmail.com
The University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
Canada
brian.copeland@ubc.ca
1     Introduction

The relationship between international trade and the environment has been viewed largely
through the lens of comparative advantage. Its focus on the emergence of pollution havens
and the environmental impact of growth were natural given the policy concerns in the lead
up to NAFTA and the rapid growth in several developing countries. Today’s concerns differ
little; what has changed is the set of tools available to examine firm-level adjustments to
trade liberalization. This review places these new methods, tools for measurement, and their
results within the broader context of the literature and asks what this new focus has brought
to the trade and environment debate.
    A “firm-level focus” to trade and environment questions is very promising, but researchers
have not yet fully exploited its potential. There are many new insights, but much remains
poorly understood. Theories where comparative advantage drives across-industry adjust-
ment are often treated as competitors to theories based on within-industry adjustments,
rather than as complements studying different units of analysis. As a result there is little
work that attempts to integrate empirical findings from the old and the new approaches.
Moreover, there are several new and potentially important hypotheses that cry out for fur-
ther study.
    To help us organize the literature we develop two tools. The first is a decomposition
that attributes emissions to productive activity at the economy, industry, firm, and plant
level. The second is a simple partial equilibrium model of firm behavior. The decomposition
identifies the set of possible adjustments to trade liberalization; the model then establishes
causal connections to these same adjustments. Decompositions alone tell us nothing about
causality; a model of firm and within-industry adjustments gives us an incomplete picture of
economy wide responses. Pairing the two allows us to reconcile a focus on new micro-level
mechanisms with previously studied macro-level channels.
    Decompositions have been used to understand how international trade affects the envi-
ronment since the work of Grossman and Krueger (1993) and Copeland and Taylor (1994);

                                              2
here we move past the typical focus on national and industry-level aggregates to allow for
both within-industry and with-firm changes in productive activity. We do so because re-
searchers have shown there is considerable heterogeneity in emissions and emissions per unit
of output across firms in even quite narrowly defined industries. By allowing for adjustments
at the firm level, we can discuss how trade-inspired decisions to outsource production, invest
in abatement, or offshore intermediates can affect measured emissions. Since empirical work
now exploits plant level observations, this level of detail seems unavoidable, and allowing
for intermediate good trade opens a useful discussion of measurement issues related to final
sales versus value-added.
       Our partial equilibrium model is deliberately simple. Firms are differentiated by produc-
tivity since across firm heterogeneity is key to discussions of how selection and market-share
reallocations affect emissions. We allow firms to choose abatement and produce intermediate
goods at home or to outsource production abroad. The simple model guides our discussion of
both theory and empirical work. Model details and some derivations are left to the appendix.
       Any review has to decide on its sins of omission. To maintain intellectual clarity we
focus on trade’s effect on industrial pollution, leaving its impact on consumption-generated
pollution1 , resource use and natural habitats untouched. We do not review the work on the
effects of trade on emissions from international transport, but do discuss empirical studies
employing data on carbon emissions.2 To remain focussed on empirical evidence, we do not
discuss findings drawn from computable general equilibrium or simulation models. While
these exclusions are unfortunate, we provide a reasonably cohesive and constructive review
of new theoretical and empirical research contributions to what has been the main body of
research examining the environmental impact of trade.
       Our review makes three contributions. We bring the interested reader up to speed on
   1
      There is relatively little empirical work on the effects of trade on consumption-generated pollution. For
an interesting example see Davis and Kahn (2010).There is a larger literature on regulating consumption-
generated pollution in open economies. See for example McAusland (2008) and Copeland (2011).
    2
      Two recent empirical studies of the effects of international transport on carbon emissions, are Cristea et
al. (2013) and Shapiro (2016).



                                                       3
the latest research and glean from this new research its key insights. We then place these
new contributions within the context of the original research program to understand how
international trade affects environmental outcomes. Our purpose is to integrate and syn-
thesize. Finally, we develop a set of new hypotheses to evaluate novel predictions coming
from models with firm-level heterogeneity. The Pollution Reduction by Rationalization Hy-
pothesis links market share reallocations and selection effects in the Melitz (2003) model to
changes in industry emissions. The Distressed and Dirty Industry Hypothesis links changes
in abatement and emission intensities to heightened foreign competition brought about by
trade liberalization. And the Pollution Offshoring Hypothesis, which is the natural analog to
the PHH but now explicitly links firm level decisions to offshore dirty intermediate inputs to
trade liberalization. There is no empirical work that explicitly addresses these hypotheses,
although many existing papers contain evidence relevant to their evaluation.
    The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we develop our new decomposition.
With this in hand, in Section 3 we revisit existing evidence and review new evidence on the
core hypotheses that have guided the literature thus far. This review provides context for
the study of theory and empirical work of firm-level adjustments in Section 4. Section 4 also
includes a discussion of our three new hypotheses. Section 5 concludes.



2     The Mechanics Of Pollution Emissions

We begin with a simple accounting exercise. Our objective is to decompose changes in
the aggregate emissions of some pollutant Z into components reflecting changes in industrial
activities within an economy. This type of decomposition has been influential in the literature
on trade and the environment, but has typically focused on industry-level outcomes. We
build on this earlier work by allowing for changes in the mix of firms within each industry,
the mix of productive activities at each firm, and the emission intensity of each activity.
    Consider an economy with aggregate pollution emissions Z generated by N industries.



                                              4
Each industry i emits Zi units of pollution. Letting Si denote the scale of production in
industry i (measured as domestic value-added at base period prices), the economy’s aggregate
emissions can be written as:
                                                     N
                                                     X
                                           Z=              Si Ei                              (1)
                                                     i=1

where Ei = Zi /Si is the emission intensity of industry i.
   Taking logs and differentiating yields:

                                               N
                                               X                N
                                                                X
                                   Ẑ = Ŝ +         Θi Φ̂i +         Θi Êi                  (2)
                                               i=1              i=1


            PN
where S =     i=1    Si is the economy-wide scale of output (measured by real GDP), Θi = Zi /Z
is the fraction of overall emissions Z coming from industry i, Φi = Si /S is industry i’s share
of the economy’s final output, and Ẑ = dZ/Z, etc.
   Equation (2) is an industry-level decomposition, similar to that introduced by Grossman
and Krueger (1993) and Copeland and Taylor (1994) and subsequently used by many authors
(see Levinson (2009) for a recent example). Changes in pollution are decomposed into three
channels. The first term in (2) is the scale effect, and represents the change in pollution due to
a change in the overall level of economic activity. The second term is the composition effect,
which reflects the change in pollution due to changes in the composition of economic activity
across industries. The third term is the technique effect; it reflects changes in pollution due
to changes in the emission intensities of each industry. Adding up these responses yields the
full effect of a shock such as trade liberalization.
   While the industry-level decomposition in equation (2) has been influential in shaping our
understanding of what drives changes in aggregate pollution emission levels, it tells us little
about the micro-level adjustments generating change at the industry level. We therefore
proceed with a firm-level decomposition. Referring to (2), this means that we are going to
decompose changes in industry-level emission intensities into effects determined by changes
at the firm level.


                                                      5
       Suppose each industry i has a continuum of firms on the interval [0, ni ], where ni is the
marginal firm that is endogenously determined by the industry’s profitability.3 Let zi (n)
denote the emissions produced by firm n. Aggregate industry emissions are given by:

                                                                Z       ni
                                                  Zi =                       zi (n)dn                           (3)
                                                                    0



Denoting the value-added produced by firm i as vi (n), define the scale of output in industry
i as
                                                                Z       ni
                                                  Si =                       vi (n)dn                           (4)
                                                                 0

Using (4), we can write the emission intensity of industry i as:

                                                                Z       ni
                                                Zi
                                           Ei =    =                         ei (n)ϕi (n)dn                     (5)
                                                Si                  0



where
                                                                             zi (n)
                                                      ei (n) =                                                  (6)
                                                                             vi (n)

is the emission intensity of firm n, and

                                                                             vi (n)
                                                      ϕi (n) =                                                  (7)
                                                                               Si

is the share of firm n in the value of production in industry i. Hence, the emission intensity
of industry i is a weighted average of the emission intensities of the firms in the industry.
Taking logs and differentiating yields:

                         Z   ni                       Z    ni
                 Êi =            êi (n)θi (n)dn +             ϕ̂i (n)θi (n)dn + ni [θi (ni ) − ϕi (ni )]n̂i   (8)
                         0                             0
   3
    We are not the first to develop a firm-level decomposition. The literature on productivity has used
decompositions that allow for heterogeneous firms for many years (see, for example, Foster et al. (2008)),
and several authors in the trade and environment literature have recently adopted these methods (see, for
example, Martin (2012), Cherniwchan et al. (2013), and Barrows and Ollivier (2016)).




                                                                        6
where θi (n) = zi (n)/Zi is firm n’s share of emissions in industry i.
   Equation (8) shows how a change in industry i’s average emission intensity reflects three
distinct within-industry changes. The first term captures changes in firm-level emission
intensities. The second term is an industry composition effect – industry average emission
intensities rise if the market share of firms with higher emission intensity rises. The final
term captures the impact of entry and exit. Its magnitude and sign depends on the difference
between the marginal firm’s share of industry emissions and its share of industry output.
Industry average emission intensity rises if an entering firm is more pollution intensive than
the average firm.
   When firms are identical, the second two terms in the decomposition drop out and the
first term simplifies to êi , which is the emission intensity change experienced by all firms in
industry i. When firms are not identical, all three terms come into play. If we do not account
for these channels we may misidentify the way that abatement and emission intensities adjust
to policy changes and other shocks.
   For example, suppose environmental regulation is tightened and industry level emission
intensities fall. We may falsely conclude that firm emission intensities are very responsive to
regulation when in fact they are not. Even if firm level emission intensities do not change
(êi (n) = 0 for all firms), the industry’s emission intensity could have fallen because relatively
dirty firms lost market share (the second terms is negative) or the dirtiest firms left the
industry (the last term is negative). This distinction is likely to be important. For many
policy questions we would like to understand whether the adjustment occurs primarily via
within-firm abatement, across firm market share reallocations, or changes in firm numbers
and therefore industry competition.
   Second, it is common to relate industry wide emission intensities (or pollution abate-
ment costs) to outcome variables such as exports, imports, productivity etc. But once we
admit that these industry level aggregates are a function of the type, size, and number of
firms present then they are no longer primitive characteristics of the industries, but rather


                                                7
endogenous outcomes that are likely related to exports, imports, productivity etc. This
endogeneity of the aggregates means that special care has to be taken in exploiting across
industry variation in these primitives to explain variation in outcome variables.4
       While a within industry decomposition is useful in clarifying the set of potential ad-
justments within industries, should we drill down further to examine potential adjustments
within firms and across plants? Empirical work suggests that there exists substantial plant
level heterogeneity within firms in terms of production processes, engagement in trade, etc.
and this may make within firm adjustments relevant to pollution outcomes. Moreover, out-
sourcing production to other firms will affect also emission intensities at the firm level.
       For these reasons, we now examine the potential role of firm-level adjustments. Suppose
each firm n produces output yi (n) by completing a set of Mi (n) tasks (although Mi varies
by firm, we suppress the “n” in what follows to economize on notation). Let Ti be a measure
of the scale of task i. Then we assume that the firm’s output is:


                                     yi (n) = fi,n (T1 , T2 , . . . , TMi )                            (9)


where fi,n is weakly increasing in all of its arguments. Each task may be performed entirely
by the firm at one or more of its plants, or it may be outsourced to either domestic or
foreign producers. These tasks could be producer services contracted for by the firm, or task
completion could be embodied in intermediate goods delivered to the firm as part of their
production process.
       Let λIij (n) be the fraction of task j performed in-house by firm n, let λdij (n) be the
fraction of task j outsourced domestically and λ∗ij (n) be the fraction of task j completed
offshore. We require
                                    λIij (n) + λdij (n) + λ∗ij (n) = 1                                (10)
   4
     Levinson and Taylor (2008) were the first to recognize these issues and discuss them within a neoclas-
sical framework where sectors (the unit of analysis for empirical work) were themselves comprised of many
heterogenous industries.




                                                       8
If the task is entirely offshored, then λ∗ij = 1; alternatively, if it is entirely carried out within
the firm then λIij = 1. Let pi (n) denote the price used to value output, and let wij be the
price used to value a unit of task j where ever it is completed. Let µi (n) be the rate at which
firm n marks up the unit cost of tasks; that is define µi (n) such that

                                                                Mi
                                                                X
                             pi (n)yi (n) = (1 + µi (n))               wij (n)Tij (n)              (11)
                                                                 j=1


Then we can write the value-added produced by firm n as:

                                                   Mi
                                                   X
                   vi (n) = pi (n) yi (n) −              [1 − λIij (n)]wij (n) Tij (n)
                                                   j=1
                             Mi
                             X                                              Mi
                                                                            X
                         =         λIij   (n) wij (n) Tij (n) + µi (n)            wij (n)Tij (n)   (12)
                             j=1                                            j=1


Value added is the market value of final sales minus the cost of tasks completed elsewhere.
This is equivalent to the value added of tasks produced in house, plus the return generated
by the firm’s markup (which is the value added created by the right to assemble, market,
and brand the firm’s unique product).
     The completion of each task potentially generates some pollution (for simplicity we as-
sume that assembling the final good by aggregating tasks does not generate additional pol-
lution). If the level of task j performed in-house by the firm is Tij (n) and if this generates
emissions zij (n), then the emission intensity of task j (in emissions per unit value) is defined
as
                                                             zij (n)
                                            eij (n) =                                              (13)
                                                         wij (n)Tij (n)

The total level of pollution emitted domestically by firm n in industry i is the sum of
emissions from its domestic plants:

                                            Mi
                                            X
                              zi (n) =            λIij (n)eij (n) wij (n) Tij (n)                  (14)
                                            j=1



                                                           9
so the overall emission intensity of firm n (per dollar of value added) can be written as

                                                               Mi
                                                             λIij (n)eij (n)σij (n)
                                                               P
                                               zi (n)    j=1
                                      ei (n) =        = M                                                         (15)
                                               vi (n)   Pi I
                                                           λij (n)σij (n) + µi (n)
                                                              j=1


where
                                                               wij (n)Tij (n)
                                                  σij (n) =   Mi
                                                                                                                  (16)
                                                              P
                                                                    wij (n)Tij (n)
                                                              j=1

is the share of task j in the total cost of all tasks.
       To obtain a decomposition of the emission intensity of firm n in industry i, take logs and
totally differentiate (15):

                   Mi
                   X                        Mi
                                            X
       ebi (n) =         θij (n)b
                                eij (n) +         (θij (n) − ϕij (n)) σ
                                                                      bij (n)
                   j=1                      j=1
                       Mi
                       X                                      Mi
                                                              X
                   −                             bd (n) −
                             (θij (n) − ϕij (n)) λ                                       b∗ (n) − ϕiµ (n)b
                                                                     (θij (n) − ϕij (n)) λ               µi (n)   (17)
                                                  ij                                       ij
                       j=1                                    j=1



where θij (n) = zij (n)/zi (n) is the fraction of firm n’s in-house emissions generated by task
j, ϕij (n) is the share of the firm’s in-house production of task j in value added, and ϕiµ (n)
is the share of revenue from markups in value added.5
       Equation (17) highlights how even a firm level decomposition conceals some potentially
important responses driving aggregate changes in emissions. As the equation shows, a change
in any firm’s emission intensity depends on changes along four different margins.
       The first term reflects changes in the emission intensity of each task conducted at each
domestic plant. These could be changes precipitated by changes in environmental policy,
input prices, technological change, or abatement. This term is, in effect, the firm’s true tech-
nique effect since it represents a weighted average of its plant level changes in the techniques
   5
     For simplicity in presentation, we have shown the decomposition for the case where initial levels of eij (n),
σij (n), λdij (n), λ∗ij (n) and µ are all positive. If any of these is zero, the corresponding term cannot be written
in per cent change form and we would have to focus on the absolute rather than relative change.


                                                                10
of production.
   The second term is a firm-level composition effect. It captures the changes in the im-
portance of various tasks required for production. The average emission intensity of a firm
will change depending on whether cleaner or dirtier tasks become more intensively used. We
refer to it as the firm-reorganization effect.
   The third and fourth terms reflect changes in the extent of outsourcing production to
other domestic firms and to foreign producers. We will refer to these new terms as the
domestic outsourcing effect and the offshoring effect. To interpret these terms, note that
an increase in outsourcing of task j will reduce firm-level emission intensities if the share of
in-house emissions from the outsourced task is greater than the share of in-house production
of that task in value added. In other words, emission intensity falls if outsourced tasks are
relatively emission-intensive.
   Firms may outsource tasks to either other domestic firms or the tasks may be offshored
to other countries. The implications for aggregate domestic emissions depend on whether
the outsourcing is domestic or offshored. For domestic outsourcing, a fall in firm n’s emis-
sion intensities may be offset by the emissions generated by an increase in production at
some other domestic firm (possibly in a different industry, depending on what has been out-
sourced). This will show up elsewhere in the decomposition via potential changes in scale,
composition and emission intensities of other domestic firms. On the other hand if the task
is offshored, then the change in the firm’s emission intensities will have a direct effect on
aggregate emissions in the domestic economy. In either case it is important to distinguish
between emissions per unit of value-added (which is given in equation (15)), and emissions
per unit sales which is given by the numerator of equation (15) divided by the mark up
1 + µi (n). Emissions per unit of sales is always less than emissions per unit value added
when outsourcing occurs. This gap is increasing in the extent of outsourcing, increasing in
the share of those inputs heavily outsourced, and larger in industries with smaller markups.
Any one of these three effects might arise with trade liberalization.


                                                 11
   Finally, the last term in our emission intensity decomposition is the effect of a change
in the firm’s markups. We have assumed the activities giving the firm the ability to charge
markups does not generate pollution, and therefore we can think of markups as a non-
polluting activity. An increase in the share or level of markups in value added will lower the
firm’s emission intensity.
   It should be apparent from our earlier discussion how ignoring these potential adjustments
may come at some cost. Firms may get cleaner without emission intensities in any of its
plants falling; and their emission intensities can respond in quite complicated ways to changes
brought about by a trade liberalization.
   Combining equations (17) and (8) with (2) yields our now much more detailed decompo-
sition:

              N
              X                N
                               X           Z   ni                           N
                                                                            X
  Ẑ = Ŝ +         Θi Φ̂i +          Θi            ϕ̂i (n)θi (n)dn +             Θi ni [θi (ni ) − ϕi (ni)]n̂i
              i=1              i=1         0                                i=1
                                N
                                                        "M                                      #
                                X          Z       ni    X i

                           +          Θi                       (θij (n) − ϕij (n)) σ
                                                                                   bij (n) θi (n)dn
                                i=1            0         j=1
                                N
                                                        "M                                      #
                                X          Z       ni    X i

                           −          Θi                       (θij (n) −            bd (n)
                                                                            ϕij (n)) λ              θi (n)dn
                                                                                       ij
                                i=1            0         j=1
                                N
                                                        "M                                      #
                                X          Z       ni    X i

                           −          Θi                                           b∗ (n) θi (n)dn
                                                               (θij (n) − ϕij (n)) λ ij
                                i=1            0         j=1
                    N
                    X          Z ni "X
                                     Mi
                                                                  #                 N
                                                                                    X           Z   ni
               +          Θi                          eij (n) θi (n)dn −
                                               θij (n)b                                    Θi            [ϕi (n)b
                                                                                                                µi (n)] θi (n)dn (18)
                    i=1         0      j=1                                           i=1        0



The first term is the economy-wide scale effect; the second is the across industry composition
effect. Both of these appeared in the earlier decomposition (2). The remaining terms com-
prise a decomposition of the classic technique effect. Industry emission intensities are affected
by changes in the composition of firms within the industry and changes within each firm.
The third and fourth terms capture the effects of changes in firm market shares and entry
and exit. The other terms all capture within firm adjustments: the fifth term is the within


                                                                      12
firm reorganization effect; the next two terms capture the effects of domestic outsourcing
and offshoring; the second to last term is the effect of direct changes in emission intensities of
tasks within firms, and the final term captures the effects of changes in firm-level markups.
        The key insight that comes from using this more detailed decomposition is that changes in
pollution that have previously been attributed to changes in industry-level emission intensi-
ties are in fact influenced by within-industry composition effects, within-firm reorganization
effects, and directly by trade via offshoring – in addition to plant or task-level changes in
emission intensities. A key theme throughout the rest of the review is to what extent a focus
on these more detailed channels of adjustment helps us understand how trade effects the
environment.



3         Comparative Advantage and the Environment

Early work assumed comparative advantage was the key driver of inter-industry trade flows,
and hence the industry-level decomposition (2) was a natural starting point.6 This approach
identifies three channels by which trade affects the environment:

    1. Trade raises the scale of economic activity which increases pollution.

    2. Trade raises real income and the demand for environmental quality. If governments
          are responsive, policies are strengthened and pollution falls via a technique effect.

    3. Controlling for incomes and scale, changes in the sectoral composition of clean and
          dirty industries affects emissions. These trade-created composition effects vary across
          countries depending on their comparative advantage.

        Much of this work was motivated by the Pollution Haven Hypothesis (PHH) which as-
serts that following a reduction in trade barriers, pollution intensive industries will contract
    6
        Detailed expositions of that work can be found in Copeland and Taylor (2004) and Copeland (2011).




                                                      13
in countries with relatively strong environmental regulation and expand in those where envi-
ronmental policy is relatively weak, meaning that environmental policy differences serve as
an important source of comparative advantage.7 While this hypothesis grew out of popular
concerns, it has a strong grounding in theory: pollution havens can arise from income-
induced differences in environmental policy (Copeland and Taylor, 1994, 1995), differences
in institutional capacity or property rights (Chichilnisky, 1994; Brander and Taylor, 1998),
or differences in environmental carrying capacity (Copeland and Taylor, 2003).
      A necessary condition for the PHH to hold is that environmental policy differences trans-
late into large differences in production costs. Therefore, an important research question is
simply whether more stringent environmental policy adversely affects comparative advan-
tage. We refer to this as the Pollution Haven Effect (PHE). Only if this effect is strong
enough to dominate other sources of comparative advantage will it determine the pattern
of trade in dirty industries. Antweiler et al. (2001) and Copeland and Taylor (2003) study
a model where policy differences across countries interact with capital abundance to deter-
mine comparative advantage. If pollution intensive industries are also capital intensive then
a capital abundant country with relatively stringent environmental policy may export the
pollution intensive good. In this case, a PHE exists (tightening up environmental policy
weakens comparative advantage in polluting industries), but the PHH nevertheless fails.


3.1       Do Environmental Regulations Affect Trade Flows?

A large empirical literature studies the PHE, or in other words, sets out to test the hypothesis
that more stringent environmental policy reduces competitiveness.
      Initially this literature generated a puzzle: despite the seemingly weak assumptions
needed to generate a PHE, most of the empirical work prior to the late 1990’s (and some
work subsequent to that) found either a zero or positive effect of more stringent environmen-
tal policy on net exports.8 Subsequent work attributed these paradoxical results to problems
  7
      For a detailed overview of the PHH, see Taylor (2005).
  8
      See for example Jaffe et al. (1995).

                                                     14
arising from endogenous policy. For example, successful, large and competitive industries
may draw greater scrutiny and regulation; while politicians will be reluctant to tighten envi-
ronmental policy in sectors facing heavy import competition. Empirical work accounting for
unobserved heterogeneity and endogenous policy have found more stringent environmental
policy adversely affects competitiveness.9
      Here we provide a selective overview of recent work on the effects of environmental
policy, with the aim of highlighting key empirical issues and promising strategies used in the
literature.
      Levinson and Taylor (2008) examine the effects of environmental regulations on bilateral
trade between the U.S. and Mexico and the U.S. and Canada over the period 1977-1986. They
develop a simple partial equilibrium model to illustrate how the use of indirect measures of
environmental regulations (such as pollution abatement costs (PAC)) may imply downward
biased estimates. This suggests earlier findings of small or non-existent pollution haven
effects were largely due to the presence of omitted variables and measurement error.
      To address these issues, they adopt a panel IV approach and construct instruments using
geographic variation in factors that affect pollution demand and supply. Their results (using
the IV approach) suggest that environmental regulations have a large, significant effect on
trade flows: a 1% increase in PAC increases net exports from Mexico and Canada by 0.4%
and 0.6%, respectively. Moreover, their IV estimates are much larger in magnitude than the
corresponding OLS estimates, highlighting the downward bias arising from using PAC as a
measure of regulatory stringency.
      The usefulness of a close connection between theory and empirical work is further illus-
trated by Kellenberg (2009) who studies the effects of environmental policy on the activities
of U.S. multinational firms in 50 countries over the period 1999-2003. He outlines a simple
game in which production decisions of multinational firms are affected by strategic environ-
mental policy choices of governments. This model forms the basis of his research design – he
  9
      For reviews see Brunnermeier and Levinson (2004), Copeland and Taylor (2004) and Levinson (2010).



                                                   15
uses the model to both derive an estimating equation, and motivate the use of neighboring
country characteristics as instruments to address the potential endogeneity of environmental
policy. Using this IV approach, he finds that weak environmental policy is associated with
increased activity by U.S. multinationals, providing further evidence of the Pollution Haven
Effect.
   One issue with the aforementioned studies is that they rely on research designs that
employ model-based arguments for identification. This makes it difficult to ensure that
the resulting estimates are causal; if the theoretical model is misspecified, it is likely that
corresponding identification assumptions will not hold. One way to address this issue is to
use policy changes or other shocks as sources of identifying variation.
   Several researchers have used the US Clean Air Act as a source of such variation (see for
example, Becker and Henderson (2000)). The Clean Air Act mandates federal air quality
standards, which are enforced at the county level. Counties whose air quality does not meet
these standards (non-attainment counties) must tighten up environmental regulations. This
yields a source of policy variation across locations. In addition, non-attainment status is
reevaluated each year, which results in temporal variation. Hanna (2010) uses a panel of
firm-level data on US manufacturing firms from 1966-1999 and finds that the Clean Air
Act caused US multinationals to increase their foreign assets by 5% and their foreign sales
by 9%. Larger firms account for most of this effect. Her results provide support for the
Pollution Haven Effect – more stringent US regulation shifts production out of the US in
affected industries. A natural question is where does that production move to? If the
Pollution Haven Hypothesis held, we would expect production to move to countries with
weak environmental regulations, and in particular to developing countries. She finds no
evidence to support this, which is consistent with the view that pollution regulation is one
of only many factors that affect comparative advantage.
   Aichele and Felbermayr (2015) exploit a different source of policy variation. They study
the effects of the Kyoto Protocol on the carbon content of trade for 15 industries in 40


                                              16
countries over the period 1995-2007.10 They sketch out a simple model that yields a grav-
ity equation linking the quantity of bilateral trade between two countries to cross-country
differences in carbon prices. In the absence actual data on environmental regulation, they
exploit differences in country commitments under the Kyoto Protocol as a source of exoge-
nous variation in carbon prices. They find evidence of a significant PHE: for a bilateral pair
with a committed importer and non-committed exporter, the Kyoto Protocol led to a 5%
increase in imports.
      These and other recent studies find that environmental regulations have a significant
effect on trade flows. A natural question is how large are these effects relative to traditional
determinants of comparative advantage. This is addressed by Broner et al. (2015), who build
on an empirical approach developed by Romalis (2004) to examine the relative importance
of environmental regulation in determining success in exporting to the US in 85 industries
from 101 countries for the year 2005. Using a novel IV approach they find a strong PHE. The
impact of weak environmental regulations on comparative advantage is similar in magnitude
to the effects of physical and human capital.


3.2       Does International Trade Affect Environmental Outcomes?

While recent work has found evidence that environmental policy affects trade flows, there is
still little support for the Pollution Haven Hypothesis. From the perspective of trade being
driven by comparative advantage, this suggests that trade has a relatively small effect on
the environment.
      In early work, Antweiler et al. (2001) used an international panel of data on air quality in
cities to estimate the scale, technique and composition effects of openness to trade on sulfur
dioxide concentrations. Consistent with theory, they found that scale effects raise pollution,
income induced technique effects lower pollution and the sign of composition effects varies
across countries. These composition effects were however very small, while the measured
 10
      The effects of the Kyoto Protocol on trade are also examined in Aichele and Felbermayr (2012, 2013).



                                                     17
technique effects were large. Somewhat surprisingly they found openness tends to raise sulfur
dioxide concentrations in rich countries (which have more stringent environmental policy)
and lower concentrations in poor countries (which have weaker environmental policy). This
is consistent with the view that traditional determinants of comparative advantage (factor
endowments, technology differences) have a much large effect than environmental policy on
trade flows. These conclusions echo those of Grossman and Krueger (1993). Subsequent
empirical work by Cole and Elliott (2003) and others (Managi et al., 2009) also finds small
composition effects, again suggesting a small impact on the environment.11
       An alternative to estimation is to measure composition effects directly. This approach
was used by Levinson (2009) to study the large decrease in pollution emitted by the US
manufacturing sector between 1987 and 2001. Levinson adopts the industry decomposition
given by equation (2) and uses it to calculate the scale, composition and technique directly.
The scale and composition effects are calculated from observed data; the technique effect
is calculated as a residual by subtracting the scale and composition effects from observed
changes in emissions. His estimates suggest the reduction is largely a product of the technique
effect. The composition effect accounts for only about 12% of the reduction.12 Levinson
then asks if the size of the composition effect can be explained by trade. He employs another
accounting identity to calculate the pollution displaced by US imports and compares it with
the magnitude of the observed composition effect. He finds trade plays almost no role: it
can account for only about 4% of the overall reduction in emissions.
       Subsequent research has found similar patterns in other jurisdictions and time periods.
Shapiro and Walker (2015) use product level data to study the fall in emissions from US
manufacturing for the period 1990-2015. They find very large technique effects and very
  11
      One potential concern is that trade and income are endogenous so that estimates could be biased.
Frankel and Rose (2005), Chintrakarn and Millimet (2006) and McAusland and Millimet (2013) adapt an
instrumental variables approach to study the effects of trade on the environment in various settings. They
all find the effects of trade are relatively small.
   12
      Levinson (2015) addresses potential errors created by the residual method by instead calculating the
technique effect directly using data from the National Emissions Inventory maintained by the US Environ-
mental Protection Agency. His estimates again show that technique effects account for the majority of the
cleanup of the US manufacturing sector.


                                                   18
small composition effects. Grether et al. (2009) decompose emissions of sulfur dioxide for
62 countries between 1990 and 2000 and find that the despite a 10% increase in the scale
of production, emissions have fallen by close to 10%. This is primarily due to a significant
negative technique effect: compositional changes are less than one-fifth the size of the tech-
nique effect. Similarly, Brunel (2016) shows that technique effects are the primary driver
of reductions in EU emissions over the 1995-2008 period. Interestingly, Brunel documents
a small positive composition effect in the EU, meaning production was shifting towards rel-
atively dirty industries during her period of study. However, like Levinson (2009), Brunel
finds that trade explains little of this compositional change.
   One exception to this pattern is Barrows and Ollivier (2016) who study carbon emissions
in India. They find that composition effects are similar in magnitude to technique effects.
This raises the possibility that explanations for evolution of emissions over time may differ
between developing and developed countries. Using a very different research strategy, Bo-
marbardini and Li (2016) try to directly identify the effect of trade on pollution in China
by adopting an approach similar to that used by Autor et al. (2013) to look at the effects
of trade on labour markets. Bomarbardini and Li exploit regional variation in comparative
advantage within China to identify the effects of trade on regional pollution levels, and the
subsequent effects of these pollution changes on infant mortality rates. They find robust evi-
dence that increased regional participation in export markets increases infant mortality rates
due to increased ambient pollution concentrations. Their results are suggestive of potentially
large effects from trade on pollution driven by comparative advantage.
   The findings of small composition effects and large technique effects, especially for the US
and EU, but also in large cross country studies has led many to conclude that international
trade has had little to no effect on pollution emissions via composition effects. Emissions from
US manufacturing have fallen quite dramatically over the past 25 years, but the evidence from
aggregate industry level decompositions points to large drops in emission intensities and not
changes in the composition of production as the explanation. This is puzzling, particularly


                                              19
in light of the work discussed in the previous section that indicates that environmental
regulations are a significant determinant of trade flows. This work also raises an interesting
related question - why have emission intensities fallen so dramatically?
   One possible explanation is that the effect of environmental policy on trade patterns
is not economically significant, and that emission intensities have fallen because of more
stringent environmental policy. Shapiro and Walker (2015) for example find that a doubling
of the implied pollution tax from 1990 to 2008 would be sufficient to explain the observed fall
in emission intensities, and they argue that this is not unreasonable in light of the increase
in regulatory stringency in the US during this time.
   A second potential explanation for the puzzle is that the measurement of technique effects
is in many cases flawed. A failure to account for important within industry and within firm
adjustments created by trade may be driving emission intensities downward. To see how
this could be true consider a simple example. Take a finely defined industry that uses no
domestic intermediates, and suppose it experiences a reduction in pollution over some time
period. Over this same time period imports rose by 20,000 units and exports rose by 10,000
units. Our data also gives us emissions per unit of output prior to the change, output pre
and post, and aggregate emissions pre and post. Output changes times emission coefficients
give us the scale effect; there is no measured composition effect; and the impact of trade in
this exercise would simply be the change in net exports times emission intensities. Taking
all these changes into account and subtracting from the actual changes in emissions yields
a remainder we would call the technique effect. It is tempting and common to conclude
that trade’s contribution to the emission reduction is simply the reduction in net imports of
10,000 units times the pre-existing emissions per unit output.
   As we will show in the following sections, if the change in net imports was due to a
trade liberalization much could be wrong with this calculation. For example, if the re-
duction in production for domestic consumption caused by imports came from the dirtiest
firms, then the reduction in emissions attributed to trade should be higher because imports


                                              20
are displacing the dirtiest of home production. If the increase in domestic production for
exports was produced by the cleanest firms, then the increase in emissions attributed to
trade should be smaller because exports are encouraging expansion by the cleanest firms.
Standard industry-level decomposition methods will miss a fall in emissions arising from a
trade-induced reallocation of output across clean and dirty firms. As a result it can also
underestimate the effects of trade and mis-classify them as technique effects.



4        Trade, Firm Heterogeneity and the Environment

Recently researchers have used plant and firm level datasets to investigate how international
trade may affect the environment. We develop a simple theoretical model of a representative
firm inspired by Melitz (2003) to highlight key mechanisms13 , and then discuss empirical
findings. For model details and derivations see the appendix.


4.1       Technology and Costs

We consider a firm producing a differentiated good in a monopolistically competitive indus-
try. Preferences are the usual CES Dixit-Stiglitz specification. Firms must pay a fixed entry
cost to obtain a productivity draw and a fixed cost to engage in any production. The firm
produces goods by assembling a continuum of intermediates x(j), j ∈ [0, 1]. Each interme-
diate is produced with clean and dirty inputs, and we choose the index j to be increasing in
the pollution intensity of intermediates.
       Pollution emissions are created by the use of dirty inputs, but can be reduced by investing
in abatement. Governments regulate pollution with emission taxes, so the full price to firms
of the dirty input depends on its market cost, its emission intensity (which can be reduced
by abatement), and the emission tax.
  13
    Several recent papers have used the Melitz model to study the interaction between trade and the envi-
ronment. See for example Yokoo (2009), Cui (2014), Forslid et al. (2015), Kreickemeier and Richter (2014),
Cole et al. (2014), Ravetti and Baldwin (2014), Konishi and Tarui (2015), and Barrows and Ollivier (2016).



                                                   21
                      $




                                     (1+κ)T(j)




                    w/w*




                                                      j0        1    j
                           0



                               Figure 1: The Decision to Offshore

   Firms decide to produce intermediates in-house or offshore them to a foreign producer
by comparing relative costs. A parameter κ > 0 reflects the variable costs of offshoring. To
generate a motive for offshoring we assume Home’s pollution charges are relatively high. For
given abatement, the outsourcing decision follows from Figure 1. The curve T (j) measures
the role of environmental policy and emission intensities in determining the cost of foreign
production relative to home production. It is downward sloping because pollution charges
are relatively high at home. One can show that intermediate good j is offshored if


                                       w
                                          > (1 + κ)T (j)                                 (19)
                                       w∗

Intermediates on the interval (j0 , 1] are offshored, because of Home’s relatively stringent
environmental policy.
   The firm minimizes costs by choosing abatement (taking into account offshoring). Higher
emission charges increase the incentive to abate, as do higher output levels. Since more
productive firms use less of the dirty input to produce output, they invest less in abatement,



                                                 22
                                                                    πe1   πe0
                Profit

                                                                                πd0
                                                                                       πd1

                                                                                      ~
                                                                                      πe1    ~
                                                                                             πe0




                           0      γ0d   γ1d    γe1       γe0                                       γ




             Figure 2: The Decision to Export and the Effects of Trade Liberalization

but if their output were to increase more than in proportion to an increase in productivity,
abatement rises. When the firm produces less in-house it has a smaller incentive to abate.14
Firms have to pay an additional fixed cost Fe (in terms of labor) to export and suffer variable
shipping costs for delivery to foreign markets.


4.2        Production Choices and the Decision to Export

Firms can produce for only the domestic market, or choose to export but suffer additional
costs. If firms sell in the domestic market they earn profits π d . If they sell in both mar-
kets, they earn π e , which accounts for the costs of exporting. The incremental profits from
exporting are given by:
                                                     π̃ e = π e − π d                                  (20)

It is straightforward to show that all profit functions are increasing in productivity, and
hence in Figure 2, we depict them in a typical Melitz (2003) diagram. Ignore the dashed
lines, and first consider the profit functions labelled π̃0e and π0d .
  14
       The role of outsourcing as a substitute for abatement is highlighted in Cole et al. (2014).


                                                               23
   Low productivity firms with γ < γ0d are not viable because π0d < 0. They must exit the
industry. High productivity firms with γ ≥ γ0e can cover the fixed costs of exporting to earn
positive incremental profits (π̃ e > 0). Firms with intermediate productivity serve only the
domestic market. The upper envelope represents profits to firms conditional on exporting
decisions. More productive firms are larger, more profitable, and exporters.


4.3      The Effects of Trade Liberalization

Suppose there is bilateral trade liberalization between Home and Foreign. Environmental
policy is fixed. There are adjustments across firms within a given industry; and adjustments
within firms in a given industry that may involve offshoring and abatement decisions. We
discuss these using both our decomposition and specific examples from the theory sketched
above.


4.3.1    Across Firm Adjustments to Trade Liberalization

To focus on adjustments across firms, assume firm-level emission intensities are constant
(abatement is fixed, outsourcing is not possible, and trade does not affect the price of dirty
inputs). In this case, the effects of trade liberalization are very similar to those found in
Melitz (2003). The reduction in trade costs changes the profitability of serving the domestic
and foreign markets, alters the set of active firms, and redistributes outputs across firms.
   These effects are illustrated by the dashed set of lines in Figure 2. Increased foreign com-
petition lowers the profits from the domestic market, and raises the productivity cutoff for
domestic firms from γ0d to γ1d . Low productivity firms exit. Exporters face more competition
in the local market but have more lucrative export opportunities because trade costs have
fallen. This raises the incremental profits from exporting and domestic firms between γ1e and
γ0e enter the export market. The most productive firms experience profit increases; the least
productive profit decreases.
   Because emission intensities are constant, the effect of this trade liberalization on emis-


                                              24
sions is given by a drastically simplified version of (18) given by:

                                    Zni
                       dZ = dS +          ei (n)dϕi (n)dn + ϕ(ni ) [ei (ni ) − Ei ] dni               (21)
                                    0


We have written the decomposition in terms of absolute changes to highlight the key new
forces introduced by the Melitz framework – the potential for market share reallocations (the
second term in equation (21)) and selection effects (the third term in equation (21)) to affect
emissions.
       In the model developed above, emission intensities are decreasing in firm productivity
even without an active abatement decision.15 Therefore, since trade liberalization redis-
tributes market share towards firms at the upper end of the productivity spectrum, the
second term is therefore negative driving down emissions. Since low productivity, dirty firms
exit when liberalization occurs the selection effect is also negative. The only element push-
ing up emissions is the scale effect. The net impact on pollution comes from weighing the
positive scale effect against the emission-reducing effects created by industry rationalization.
       The possibility of reducing emissions solely from trade-inspired industry rationalization
generates a testable hypothesis which we will refer to as the Pollution Reduction by Ratio-
nalization (PRR) Hypothesis. When the PRR hypothesis is true, trade liberalization lowers
industry emissions because a mix of exit, entry, and market share reallocations overwhelm
the positive scale effects created by new export opportunities.
       Evaluating the PRR hypothesis is an empirical task, but in an interesting recent paper,
Kreickemeier and Richter (2014) provide some insight. They develop a Melitz-style setting
much like the one we developed above and consider the environmental implications of a uni-
lateral trade liberalization by one country in a two identical country pair. The liberalization
is marginal, there is no abatement, but emission intensities vary with the productivity of
  15
     This follows because we assumed that variable production is homothetic and that increases in produc-
tivity are equivalent to neutral technical progress. Similar results are obtained in Cui et al. (2012). If
productivity variations across firms are non-neutral, and more productive firms use a more energy intensive
technology, firms may be both more productive and dirtier.


                                                      25
the firm in a flexible manner. They highlight the interaction between the scale and industry
rationalization effects and find that if emission intensities fall more than in proportion to
productivity, trade reduces aggregate emissions and the PRR hypothesis holds.
   If the PRR hypothesis is true, this then presents some interesting and confusing possibil-
ities for research. For example, an industry’s average emission intensity will fall with trade
liberalization, and this fall may be misinterpreted as a technique effect. Trade liberalization
did not cause any firm to become cleaner, even though we would observe relatively clean
exporting firms, relatively dirty domestic producers, and a fall in industry emissions with
trade. Trade causes emissions to fall, but only because of trade-induced rationalization.


4.3.2   Within-Firm Adjustments to Trade Liberalization

We now consider within firm adjustments. For ease of exposition we focus on a single firm
and suppress both n and i. Then this firm’s total emissions z are the product of the scale of
its value added v times its emission intensity e. That is z = ve and hence


                                          zb = vb + eb                                    (22)


   We have already discussed how a trade liberalization affects a firm’s scale, so here we
focus on changes within firms affecting emission intensities. In the model developed above,
we made three simplifications relative to the more general decomposition. We assumed the
firm assembles intermediates in fixed proportions, and so there is no scope for emissions to
change from a reorganization of production. We assumed all outsourcing is to foreign firms
(offshoring), so if a firm’s emissions fall from outsourcing production it cannot be offset by
increases elsewhere at home. And we assumed task production is specialized so that a change
in outsourcing is always an adjustment on the extensive margin via j0 .
   With these simplifications, the decomposition of our firm’s change in emission intensity




                                              26
reduces to:
                                             Zj0
                                      eb =         θj ebj + (θj0 − ϕj0 ) dj0                (23)
                                             0

The firm’s emission intensity is affected by changes in the emission intensities of various
tasks, and by offshoring. We treat them in turn.


4.3.3      Emission Intensities and Abatement

A firm’s emission intensities are affected by trade in various ways, but a key question is
whether firms’ endogenous abatement choices reinforce the rationalization and selection ef-
fects that operate at the industry level. At first blush it may seem so. In our simple model,
(treating outsourcing as given) abatement investment rises with firm productivity as long
as the output rises more than in proportion to productivity. In a CES framework where
markups are fixed, a fall in costs lowers prices proportionately and raises output relatively
more. Therefore, output rises more than proportionately to productivity changes, and more
productive firms abate more. The emission-reducing forces we found in the PRR effect ap-
pear to be strengthened by abatement. There are, however, several complications which
alter this simple story and open up an entirely new possibility.
      First, this result is sensitive to the demand structure. Cao et al. (2016) use a Melitz and
Ottaviano (2008) preference structure, and show that more productive firms may invest less
in abatement. Since demand is no longer constant elasticity, highly productive firms operate
on the relatively inelastic portion of their demand curves. Markups are lower and output
responds less than proportionately to productivity. The simple channel linking higher firm
productivity to greater abatement and lower emission intensity is now broken.
      A second complication is that investment in abatement need not lower emission inten-
sities. An increase in abatement has two effects on emission intensity. There is the direct
effect that emissions per unit of the dirty input fall. But there is also a classic rebound
effect.16 When abatement lowers emissions per unit of the dirty input, pollution charges
 16
      See Gillingham et al. (2016).

                                                         27
per unit of the dirty input fall, reducing the cost to firms for using the dirty input. This
encourages substitution towards the dirty input. If the elasticity of substitution is not too
large (σ ≤ 1 is sufficient), an increase in abatement lowers emission intensities. However
for σ sufficiently large (that is, if the dirty and clean inputs are very close substitutes) an
increase in abatement expenditure can raise emission intensity.17 Therefore, the response of
emission intensities to abatement can depend quite delicately on technology.
      A third complication arises because trade creates both winners and losers. Suppose the
rebound effect is weak so abatement reduces emission intensities. Then exporters become
cleaner because they increase their abatement as their output expands, but domestic produc-
ers who survive see their output fall and reduce their abatement. Their emission intensities
will rise because of trade. While industry output does shift away from these firms, there is
no reason to believe this generates a net reduction in pollution for the industry as a whole.
      Forslid et al. (2015) study the interaction between these effects in a two country symmet-
ric world within a Melitz-type framework. Trade liberalization induces exporting firms to
increase abatement and become cleaner while non-exporting firms invest less in abatement
and become dirtier. Their main result is that the net effect is to reduce emissions in each
country with a symmetric trade liberalization. An unresolved question is what features of
the model ensure this result. For example consider a simple case where technologies are ei-
ther clean or dirty and there is a fixed cost for using the clean technology. Suppose initially
all firms are large enough to pay the fixed cost. If trade liberalization pushes some firms
below the threshold at which the clean technology is cost-effective, then those firms would
revert to the dirty technology and emissions would rise.
      Allowing for endogenous abatement complicates considerably the set of adjustments we
may expect, and at worst introduces a decidedly negative, but novel, potential outcome from
trade liberalization. Out of these complications comes two implications for empirical work.
      The first is a new hypothesis. With active abatement, trade can indeed cause some
 17
      For details, see the appendix.



                                                28
firms to become cleaner and this induced technique effect may lower industry emissions.
But it can also cause some firms to become dirtier. Industries hit hard by trade liberaliza-
tion may feature a set of dirty and distressed domestic firms who have forsaken abatement
expenditures. Even exporters who face increased competition in local markets may lower
their abatement expenditures if the liberalization is severe enough.18 Therefore, endogenous
abatement choices introduce a new possibility we will refer to as the Distressed and Dirty
Industry Hypothesis (DDI). It holds when a trade liberalization increases industry emissions
because of reductions in pollution control or abatement expenditures by firms that downsize
as a result of trade.
      A second implication comes from considering a simple difference in difference methodol-
ogy to measure trade’s causal effect on firm level emission intensities. Suppose we compare
the emission intensities of exporters vs. domestic firms, both pre and post liberalization.
Domestic firms are the control group. If we were to conduct such an evaluation on the
stripped down model of our previous section with no abatement and fixed emission intensi-
ties, then this method would reveal the correct answer – trade has no causal effect on firm
level emission intensities – and that is because trade merely reallocates output and selects
firms. But if we conduct the same experiment with endogenous abatement, we may find a
very large effect – but for the wrong reasons. Exporters become cleaner relative to domestic
firms, because trade makes them cleaner and their “control” group dirtier.


4.3.4      Offshoring Dirty Inputs

The interaction between trade liberalization, offshoring and aggregate pollution emissions is
complex and currently not well understood. A trade liberalization that reduces the cost of
offshoring shifts down the T (j) schedule in Figure 1 and increases the range of intermediates
offshored. Since the marginal outsourced intermediates are the dirtiest, this will reduce
firm-level emission intensities. This effect is captured by the final term in our decomposition
 18
      See Forslid et al. (2015).



                                              29
above (23). This is a potentially important channel because domestic firms become cleaner
not because they have reduced the emission intensity of their activities, but because they
have shifted the dirtiest parts of their production out of the country. We will refer to this as
the Pollution Offshoring Hypothesis (POH). It is reminiscent of the PHH, but in that case the
focus was typically on dirty final good producers moving production or plants to countries
with weak environmental policy. The POH is more subtle in that in leads to fragmentation
of production in countries with stringent environmental policy – only the dirtiest parts of
the production process are shifted abroad.
       The POH interacts with abatement in interesting ways. Abatement investments and
offshoring dirty intermediates are substitute channels for firms to respond to more stringent
environmental regulation. Both lead to lower measured emission intensities in firms subject
to regulation but whereas abatement leads to real reductions in pollution, offshoring shifts
the incidence of pollution elsewhere.19 If the POH holds, one possibility is that trade liber-
alization may reduce the incentives for pollution abatement investments because the option
of fragmentation has become more cost effective.


4.4       Empirical Evidence

The literature providing micro-level evidence on international trade and the environment
is still in its infancy. It can be usefully divided into two branches: studies examining the
relationship between export status and pollution emitted by firms and plants; and stud-
ies examining the effects of trade liberalization.
  19
    Cole et al. (2014) develop a simple model in which firms can either pay an abatement cost or a fixed
cost to offshore all of their polluting activity. The model predicts that large firms will outsource polluting
activity. Using Japanese data, they find a positive relation between their measure of abatement costs (based
on survey data) and outsourcing. Their data does not allow them to determine whether the outsourced
activities are relatively pollution intensive.




                                                     30
4.4.1   Exporting and the Environment

To date, researchers have focused on export status as a key determinant of pollution emis-
sions. This can largely be attributed to the work of Holladay (2016), who examines how
export status and import competition affected the level of toxic pollution emitted by U.S.
manufacturing plants over the period 1990-2006. Holladay employs emissions data reported
in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Risk Screening Environmental Indi-
cators database and data on plant characteristics from the National Establishment Time
Series (NETS). This yields a unbalanced panel dataset with information on toxic pollution
emissions and several plant characteristics, including an indicator of the plant’s export status
in the last year it was observed.
   Holladay estimates several versions of the following:


                     ln Zijt = α + β 1[Exporter]i + πWijt + γj + δt + ijt                 (24)


where Zijt is pollution emitted by plant i in industry j at time t, 1[Exporter]i is a time-
invariant indicator of plant i’s export status, Wijt are additional controls, γj and δt are
industry and year fixed effects, and ijt is the error term. The coefficient of interest, β mea-
sures the average difference in log pollution emissions between exporters and non-exporters.
   Holladay finds that conditional on log sales, and industry, state and year fixed effects,
exporters emit 10% less pollution than non-exporters. Holladay suggests productivity dif-
ferences across these groups of plants are driving the result, although he does not provide
productivity evidence directly.
   There are several reasons to be skeptical of Holladay’s finding. When he estimates equa-
tion (24) for twenty subsamples, each corresponding to one of the twenty major industrial
groups (2-digit SIC categories) that make up U.S. manufacturing, the estimates are negative
and statistically significant for only 7 of 20 industry groups. Exporters are significantly more
pollution intensive than non-exporters in 4 of the 20 industry groups.


                                              31
   One potential explanation for this fragility is that these estimates are capturing a different
mechanism. One possibility is offshoring. If offshoring requires the payment of fixed costs,
then large productive plants that are more likely to export, may be more likely to offshore
dirty intermediate inputs. This is a material possibility since Harrison and McMillan (2011)
report increased use of offshoring by U.S. manufacturing plants during this time.
   Another potential explanation is that this fragility reflects problems arising from endo-
geneity. Export status is not an exogenous characteristic of plants (e.g. Lileeva and Trefler
(2010)), which means the negative relationship between pollution emissions and exporting
may be capturing a more primitive characteristic that drives the decision to export.
   These concerns do not mean the negative relationship documented by Holladay is unin-
formative; and we can exploit theory to understand the broader implications of this result.
   Suppose, for example, that the negative correlation between export status and pollution
emissions is driven solely by productivity differences, as suggested by Holladay. This case
resembles the scenario discussed in section 4.4.1; only the most productive plants are able
to afford the fixed cost required to export, and these plants pollute less because they require
fewer inputs per unit of output. The effects of trade liberalization are then immediate. Trade
will redistribute market share to the most productive plants that have lower emission inten-
sities and lead to the exit of dirty plants from the industry, meaning that trade liberalization
will reduce emissions through industry rationalization. Hence, Holladay’s findings can be
interpreted as suggestive evidence of a necessary condition for the PRR.
   Holladay also examines the effects of import competition on pollution emissions and plant
entry and exit. He does so by adopting a version of the estimating equation (24) that includes
measures of import competition. These estimates indicate that plants in import competing
industries emit more pollution on average and import competing industries are characterized
by less entry and more exit than non-import competing industries. If we again assume a
negative relationship between emissions and productivity exists and allow for endogenous
abatement decisions, then we can interpret these results with the aid of our theory. In


                                              32
this case, Holladay’s estimates suggest that import competition increases emissions from the
average plant even though the dirtiest plants are exiting. This can be attributed to the loss in
market share caused by foreign competition, meaning that the remaining plants are getting
dirtier as result of decreased pollution abatement. Thus, the effects of import competition
documented by Holladay are suggestive of the mechanism underlying the DDI.
       Altogether, the results presented by Holladay suggest that exporting and import compe-
tition have significant effects on the pollution emitted by U.S. manufacturing plants. These
findings are however subject to significant caveats, some of which have been addressed in
subsequent research.
       One example of this is the work of Cui et al. (2016), who also examine the effects of
exporting on the pollution emitted U.S. manufacturing plants. While they use a similar
research design, and also employ data from the NETS, the analysis presented by Cui et
al. differs from Holladay along two key dimensions. First, Cui et al. obtain pollution
data from the U.S. National Emissions Inventory for the years 2002, 2005 and 2008, which
allows them to examine four common pollutants: sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, ozone
and particulate matter. Second, they construct a productivity estimate for each plant.
While the lack of information on capital stocks and other inputs in the NETS data prevent
them from constructing a standard TFP measure, this approach allows them to provide
some preliminary evidence of the relationship between export status, plant productivity and
pollution emissions.
       Cui et al. find that exporters are less pollution intensive than non-exporters for each
of the four pollutants they study.20 However, these effects are estimated conditional on
productivity, which indicates that the differences are not simply due to productivity dif-
ferences. Instead, some other mechanism is likely driving the relationship. One potential
channel is plant abatement; recall from our earlier discussion that for a given productivity
level, plant abatement decisions will depend on market size. In this case, the effects of ex-
  20
   These effects are substantially larger than the effects documented by Holladay. Cui et al. find that
exporting is associated with a 26.2-29.5% reduction in emission intensity depending on the pollutant.


                                                  33
porting documented by Cui et al. can be interpreted as capturing the effects of market size
differences. Indeed, their estimates are consistent with this conjecture; once they control for
plant employment, a plant characteristic that is determined in part by market size, the effect
of exporting is no longer statistically significant. Of course, given that Cui et al. share a
similar empirical approach to Holladay, these findings are subject to the same identification
concerns expressed above.
   The relationship between export status and pollution emissions is also examined by
Forslid et al. (2015), who study the relationship between export status and the emissions
of carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide from Swedish manufacturing firms over
the period 2000-2011. Forslid et al. use data from a statistical agency (Statistics Sweden),
which allows them to address key measurement issues. First, and foremost, the data contains
information on export sales by year, meaning Forslid et al. are able accurately track export
participation over time. In addition, the data contains detailed information on value added
and input use, which allows Forslid et al. to accurately measure the productive activity at
each plant and calculate firm productivity using the approach developed by Levinsohn and
Petrin (2003).
   To examine the relationship between exporting and pollution emissions, Forslid et al.
exploit the fact that they observe firm exports in all years and adopt a research design that
has been used elsewhere in the trade literature. This design treats firms that do not export
as a counterfactual for those that do, using a logic similar to differences-in-differences; the
average pollution emissions from exporting firms (the treatment group) are compared to
the average pollution emissions from non-exporters (the control group) before and after an
exporting episode begins.
   Using this approach Forslid et al. show that export status and emission intensity are
negatively related for each of the pollutants they study. Exporters are 11.4% less carbon
dioxide intensive, 18.7% less nitrous oxide intensive and 26.7% less sulfur dioxide intensive
than non-exporters conditional on firm productivity and industry and year fixed effects.


                                              34
However, dividing the sample into energy-intensive and non-energy intensive industries shows
no effects in the energy intensive industries which is worrisome.
   Forslid et al. also provide evidence that exporting affects firm abatement decisions.
They show that exporting is associated with a 62-73% increase in investment in abatement
activities for firms in non-energy intensive industries.
   Although Forslid et al. cite their abatement findings as evidence in support of their
main finding of a large negative relationship between emission intensity and exporting, our
theory suggests another potential explanation. As we discussed above in section 4.4.3, when
abatement is endogenous, trade can make exporters cleaner and non-exporters dirtier. In the
present setting this means the control group is contaminated and Forslid et al.’s estimates
overstate the effects of exporting.


4.4.2   The Effects of Trade Liberalization

A second set of studies has begun to move past simply documenting the relationship between
export status and pollution emissions to examine the effects of trade liberalization on firms.
This branch of the literature has exploited tariff changes that occur during episodes of trade
liberalization as a source of identifying variation.
   The use of tariffs as a source of identifying variation is typified by the work of Martin
(2012), who examines the effects of India’s trade liberalization in 1991 on the greenhouse
gas emissions emitted by the Indian manufacturing sector. She constructs a firm-level panel
dataset from India’s Annual Survey of Industries that includes detailed information on the
output and inputs of manufacturing firms over the period 1985-2004. Martin supplements
this data with yearly estimates of firm greenhouse gas emissions that are constructed from
the observed energy use of firms using time-invariant emissions factors.
   Martin begins her analysis by adopting a decomposition similar to the one developed in
section 2 to divide aggregate changes in greenhouse gasses emissions and fuel use into across-
industry, within-industry, and within-firm changes. She then uses industry tariff changes to


                                               35
examine how trade liberalization affects the changes she observes. Her underlying research
design is similar in spirit to differences-in-differences; the average change in outcome for
industries that are affected by a change in trade policy (the treatment group) are compared
to the average change in the outcome for industries that are unaffected by the policy (the
control group), before and after the policy change occurs.
   Given that India’s trade liberalization occurred as part of a larger set of economic reforms,
Martin also examines the effects of changes in regulations on FDI and industrial licensing.
She finds that decreases in intermediate input tariffs increased the energy efficiency of affected
firms by 23%, while the relaxation of industrial licensing requirements shifted market share to
more fuel efficient firms. There is a possibility, however, that these effects capture differences
in outcomes due to both the effects of trade policy changes and the effects of other political-
economy driven policy changes that occurred during India’s liberalization. Overall, this is a
potentially very useful approach using elements from an emissions decomposition as inputs
in a regression framework.
   A related approach is adopted in Cherniwchan (2016), who examines the effects of trade
liberalization between the United States and Mexico following the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) on the pollution emitted by U.S. manufacturing plants over
the period 1991-1998. Cherniwchan constructs a plant-level panel data set using data on
the emissions of particulate matter and sulfur dioxide constructed from the Toxic Release
Inventory maintained by the EPA, and data on plant characteristics from the NETS database.
   To identify NAFTA’s effects on plant pollution emissions, Cherniwchan develops a triple
difference research design that exploits two sources of variation in the costs of trade: tariffs
and the trade costs created by geography. His approach is based on the idea that geographic
variation in trade costs will cause the effects of a tariff reduction to differ across states: a
tariff reduction will have little effect on plants that are located in states where the costs of
moving goods to and from foreign markets are very high, but a large effect on plants in states
these costs are low. This variation means that a change in trade policy will only affect (or


                                               36
“treat”) the subset of plants that are located in states with low geographic trade costs.
    Using this approach, Cherniwchan shows that NAFTA led to substantial reductions in
the emissions of particulate matter and sulfur dioxide from affected US manufacturing plants.
These reductions are driven by two aspects of the liberalization: increased foreign market
access, and decreases in the cost of importing intermediate inputs. Cherniwchan finds that,
for the average plant, increased foreign market access reduced particulate matter and sulfur
dioxide emissions by approximately 1.7% annually, while reductions in the cost of importing
inputs reduced sulfur dioxide emissions by close to 1.3% annually. Moreover, he finds that
these reductions are primarily due to within-plant changes in the emission intensity of pro-
duction. He also presents some evidence suggestive of the Pollution Offshoring Hypothesis;
he finds that the plant emission intensities are falling in part due to changes in access to
relatively dirty intermediate inputs. Altogether, his estimates suggest that NAFTA played
a large role in the clean up of the U.S. manufacturing sector during the 1990s.



5     Conclusion

We have reviewed recent evidence linking international trade and the environment and found
significant advances in many areas. In particular, our focus on evidence brought by hetero-
geneous firm models of international trade revealed new and interesting possibilities, but
there is still much work to be done.
    We found considerable new and convincing evidence linking tighter environmental regu-
lations to reduced trade flows. This new evidence is clear support for the Pollution Haven
Effect. While there is certainly value-added in examining how its strength varies across
instruments and industries, we view its existence as a settled question. Despite this find-
ing, there remains little evidence that trade liberalizations shift dirty good production to
low income or weak regulation countries as suggested by the Pollution Haven Hypothesis.
How to reconcile strong pollution haven effects with little evidence for the pollution haven



                                             37
hypothesis remains an open question.
   We found there has been significant application of heterogenous firm models to trade and
the environment questions. There is some evidence that exporters are cleaner than other
firms, but this relationship varies not only in strength across industries but in its direction
as well. There is better, but limited, evidence that trade liberalizations lower firm and
perhaps even industry emissions, although the exact mechanisms by which this occurs needs
further study. Much of this research is hamstrung by lack of data on capital stocks and
value-added making productivity measurement either impossible or heroic; but much of it
is also hampered by identification problems. While some researchers have adopted clever
strategies to identify the causal impact of trade, others have been less careful. Despite these
limitations, this research agenda is extremely valuable and should be pursued vigorously.
The set of studies is still very small and there is still much in dispute; but more importantly,
researchers have yet to realize the full potential of this new approach to answer important
questions - both new and old.
   Two important and old empirical puzzles in the literature are the apparent weakness of
trade liberalization in shifting the composition of national output towards dirty (or clean)
products; and the apparent strength of technique or technology effects to drive emissions
downward. Weak composition effects were typically explained by recourse to offsetting forces
governing comparative advantage in dirty products; large technique effects were attributed
to some combination of surprisingly strong policy responses or technological progress.
   A simple and attractive alternative explanation for both puzzles is provided by models
with heterogenous firms. The logic is simple: if much of dirty good trade is intra-industry,
then the pollution consequences of trade will be felt most strongly within industries and
not across them. Small composition effects arise because trade primarily causes within dirty
industry specialization. With heterogenous firms, specialization begets rationalization, and
with only slight additional assumption, trade can drive industry level emissions downward
as the dirtiest firms exit, and output is reallocated to the cleanest firms. This is not a


                                              38
necessary outcome, but it is a possible one and we have named it the Pollution Reduction
by Rationalization Hypothesis. If the PRR hypothesis holds in each and every industry, and
if most trade in dirty products is intra-industry and not driven by the forces of comparative
advantage, then changes in the overall dirtiness of any one country’s production will be
limited, but declines in emissions may well be large. And hence both puzzles are solved.
   This neat explanation however side-steps many complications. As we have shown, the
Distressed and Dirty Industry Hypothesis would work against this outcome, if true; and
the Pollution Offshoring Hypothesis, if true, would mean success in lowering emissions at
home might come with failure abroad. Moreover, it also assumes within-industry differences
in emission intensities are more important to outcomes than across-industry differences.
Exploring the strength of these new hypotheses, and their workings in a world where inter-
industry trade is driven by comparative advantage, will greatly improve our understanding
of the mechanisms by which international trade affects the environment.




                                             39
A        Appendix: Model Details

In this appendix we develop the model sketched out in the main text of paper in more depth.
Because we want to use the model to highlight the effects on emissions of firm-level responses
to trade, we focus on the cost function for a typical firm in some detail. We do not develop
the full market equilibrium – a brief description of market outcomes appears in the text, and
more detailed analyses appear in the various published work we cite below.


A.1        Technology and Costs

As noted in the text, the work in this area is heavily influenced by Melitz (2003), who
pioneered the use of heterogeneous firm models to analyze the response of economies to
trade liberalization. This approach has recently been used to study the response of polluting
industry to changes in both trade policy and environmental policy by (among others) Yokoo
(2009), Cui et al. (2012), Forslid et al. (2015), Kreickemeier and Richter (2014), Barrows and
Ollivier (2016), Ravetti and Baldwin (2014), and Konishi and Tarui (2015). The model is
based on that literature, but is modified to allow for international outsourcing (offshoring) of
some production. The outsourcing model used here builds on Feenstra and Hanson (1996),
Yeaple (2008) and Dean and Lovely (2010). Cole et al. (2014) also develop a model in which
firms have the option of outsourcing dirty production. Their approach differs in that their
firms either outsource all polluting activity or none; we focus on the intensive margin.
      We consider a firm that must pay a fixed cost Fd (in terms of the clean input defined
below) to engage in any production activity. To allow for the possibility of international
outsourcing, we assume that the firm produces goods using a Leontief technology with a
continuum of intermediates x(j), j ∈ [0, 1]. Intermediates may either be produced in-house
or outsourced to a foreign production facility.21 Each intermediate good j is produced with
 21
      For simplicity we do not consider domestic outsourcing.




                                                     40
a CES production technology:


                                                       1−δ δ 1/δ
                                x(L, D; j) = γ a1−δ δ
                                                           
                                                j L + bj D                                            (25)


where δ < 1 , aj > 0, and bj > 0. L is a clean input (such as labor) with factor price w = 1,
D is a dirty input, and γ > 0 is a productivity parameter. Our assumption that w is fixed
may either be due to the existence of an outside sector with constant returns using only L
and facing a fixed price, or we can think of the model as being partial equilibrium. D is
perfectly elastically supplied to all firms at some fixed world price r.
       Pollution emissions are directly proportional to the use of the dirty input; but firms can
pay a fixed cost A to invest in abatement equipment and this reduces emissions generated
by the dirty output; that is pollution emissions are given by


                                              z = g (A) D                                             (26)


where g(A) is decreasing in A and 0 ≤ g(A) ≤ 1.22 To guarantee an interior solution we
assume the initial unit of abatement is infinitely productive but g 00 > 0 . For simplicity,
any investment A in abatement reduces the emission intensity of the dirty input for all
intermediates produced by the firm at home. This would for example be the case if abatement
was capturing pollution particles/effluent from a common combustion/discharge chamber, if
it was an investment in knowledge making all processes cleaner, etc.
       Governments may regulate pollution with an emission tax τ . The cost to the firm of using
a unit of the dirty input, τD , is therefore the sum of its market price r and the emission
  22
     This specification (with the option to upgrade the abatement technology with a fixed cost investment)
has been influenced by Bustos (2011) who studied the effects of trade on technology upgrading, and Girma et
al. (2008), Batrakova and Davies (2012) and Forslid et al. (2015) who also specify an abatement technology
that can be upgraded with a fixed cost investment. Other specifications are possible. For example firms
may invest in technology that is either labour-biased or emission-biased. That is, investment in more
productive technology need not necessarily yield a cleaner production process. See Cui (2014) who explores
the implications of this in a model with a discrete choice between two types of technology.




                                                    41
charge τ g (A):
                                            τD (r, τ, A) = r + τ g (A)                              (27)

The unit cost function corresponding to (25) is

                                                1
                           c(w, τ, A; j) =        [aj w1−σ + bj τD (r, τ, A)1−σ ]1/(1−σ)            (28)
                                                γ

where σ = 1/(1 − δ).
   Using Shephard’s Lemma, we can find the unit input ratio demanded at any factor price
ratio, D/L as:
                                                                σ
                                            Dj   bj      w
                                               =                                                    (29)
                                            Lj   aj τD (r, τ, A)

We choose the index j such that bj /aj is increasing in j. As a result, low j intermediates
are relatively clean.
   If the intermediate is obtained offshore rather than produced in-house, the unit cost is

                                                1+κ                                ∗ 1−σ 1/(1−σ)
                  c∗ (w∗ , τ ∗ , A∗ , κ; j) =             ∗1−σ         ∗       ∗
                                                                                         
                                                    a j w      + b j τ D (r, τ   , A )              (30)
                                                 γ∗

Input costs reflect the foreign wage w∗ and pollution tax τ ∗ and we allow for neutral tech-
nology differences (γ ∗ and γ may differ). The parameter κ > 0 reflects trading costs. These
costs could be associated with contracting and monitoring foreign production and possibly
foreign markups on foreign costs. The level of A∗ and all foreign determinants of costs are
taken as given.
   The domestic firm compares the cost of producing intermediate good i in-house and
abroad and will offshore intermediates for which


                                     c ∗ (w∗ , τ ∗ , A∗ , κ; j) < c(w, τ, A; j)                     (31)




                                                          42
To illustrate the decision to offshore, define

                                               bj              1/(1−σ)
                                                    ∗   ∗ 1−σ 
                                         γ 1 + aj (τD /w )
                                           
                                 T (j) ≡ ∗                                                                 (32)
                                        γ 1 + bj (τD /w)1−σ
                                                aj



T (j) measures the role of environmental policy and emission intensities in determining the
cost of foreign production relative to home production. Then (31) is equivalent to

                                             w
                                                > (1 + κ)T (j)                                             (33)
                                             w∗

       If κ is sufficiently high, outsourcing is prohibitively expensive and all production takes
place in-house. For lower levels of κ outsourcing may be feasible but this depends on factor
prices and relative technology levels. When outsourcing is profitable, the pattern of trade
in intermediates depends on the slope of T (j). There are several possibilities, depending on
the importance of international wage differentials relative to pollution tax differentials. We
assume that home’s pollution regulation is relatively more stringent than foreign’s in the
sense that:
                                                  τD  τ∗
                                                     > D∗                                                  (34)
                                                  w   w

In this case T (j) is decreasing in j and Foreign has a relative cost advantage in dirty
intermediates. This case is illustrated in Figure 3. Intermediates on the interval [0, j0 ]
are produced in-house, while intermediates on the interval (j0 , 1] are offshored. The firm
outsources the most pollution intensive intermediates because of Home’s relatively stringent
environmental policy.23
       The extent of offshoring depends on relative technology levels and trading costs since these
shift the T (j) schedule uniformly. Low trade costs or relatively better foreign technology
increase the extent of offshoring, but have no effect on the pattern of trade. When offshoring
  23
    This is not the only possibility. If pollution policy differences are not large across countries and foreign
had relatively low wages, then the pattern of trade could be reversed. We focus on the case where pollution
policy is the determining factor guiding the offshoring decision.



                                                      43
                  $




                                      (1+κ)T(j)




                w/w*




                                                              j0                    1        j
                       0


                               Figure 3: The Decision to Offshore

is active, the firm’s minimum unit cost of final output y, for given A and A∗ , is determined
by summing up the costs of the intermediate inputs:

                                              Zj0                       Z1
            C(w, τ, w∗ , τ ∗ , A, A∗ , κ) =         c(w, τ, A; j)dj +        c∗ (w∗ , τ ∗ , A∗ , κ; j)dj   (35)
                                              0                         j0



   To clean up the notation slightly we ignore the reliance on (fixed) foreign attributes
and simplify to rewrite the unit cost of production as C(w, τ, A). And then, the final step
in determining unit costs is for the firm to choose the cost minimizing level of abatement
investment A. For given taxes, abatement is chosen as follows:


                               C̃(w, τ, y) = min{yC(w, τ, A) + A}                                          (36)
                                                     A



where the firm takes into account the dependence of the outsourcing margin on the choice of



                                                         44
abatement. Several results follow from the first order conditions for the solution of equation
(36). Not surprisingly, one can show that higher emission charges increase the incentive to
invest in abatement.24 As well, for given productivity levels, higher output also increases
the incentive to increase abatement (since more output makes it easier to cover the fixed
cost). Less obvious is that for given output levels, more productive firms invest less in A.
The reason is simply that more productive firms use less inputs to produce a fixed output
and hence face lower pollution charges as a result. If we put these last two results together,
it is possible to show that if a firm’s output were to increase more than in proportion to
an increase in productivity, then abatement rises. This result suggests that the elasticity of
firm demand may play an important role in determining how abatement investment varies
across firms of different productivity, and opens the possibility that larger, more productive
firms may in fact abate less and not more. Finally, abatement investments and outsourcing
are substitutes. As the cost of outsourcing falls, the firm produces less in-house and so has
less incentive to invest in abatement.
       There are two additional costs for the firm to consider although these are largely out
of their control. If firms want to export, they have to pay an additional fixed cost Fe (in
terms of labor) and incur variable shipping costs raising the cost of goods delivered to foreign
markets by a factor s > 1.


A.2        Emission Intensities

A key implication of this model is that emission intensities are inversely related to a firm’s
productivity. Here we confirm that.
       Emissions per unit of intermediate good j, which we denote by eeij (n), are given by


                                         eeij (n) = g(Ai (n))dij (n)                                       (37)
  24
     For brevity, we do not show the first order conditions here. Note also that if A is sufficiently large then
it is possible for the outsourcing pattern to be reversed. Home’s high pollution charges can be more than
offset by very low emission intensities. We assume that this does not happen so that Home’s relatively high
pollution tax is the driver of production location.


                                                      45
where dij (n) is the amount of the dirty input used to produce 1 unit of intermediate input
j by firm n. The latter can be obtained from the unit cost function via Shepherd’s Lemma.
Hence we have:                               "             #σ/(1−σ)
                                                    1−σ
                                     bj g(A)     w
                          ẽij (n) =          aj        + bj                               (38)
                                         γ       τD

   With no outsourcing, emission intensities per unit of output of the final good are just
the sum of emission intensities across intermediates produced in-house, and we divide this
by an industry price index pi to get a measure of emissions per unit value added:

                                                       R1
                                                            eeij (n)dj
                                                       0
                                       ei (n) =                                            (39)
                                                                  pi

Firm level emission intensities are decreasing in firm productivity γ.
   With outsourcing, the firm’s emission intensity is:

                                                            Rj0
                                                                  eeij (n)dj
                                                            0
                                ei (n, j0 ) =                                              (40)
                                                Rj0                     R1
                                                      wij dj + µ             wij dj
                                                0                        0


where wij is an industry price index for intermediates, and recall that µ is the firm’s markup
rate. The numerator is domestic emissions per unit final output and the denominator is the
firm’s domestic value added per unit final output. So the ratio is emissions per unit value
added. This is also decreasing in the firm’s productivity.


A.2.1    Emission Intensities and Abatement

As noted in the main text, investment in abatement need not lower emission intensities.
An increase in abatement has two effects on emission intensity. First, there is the direct
effect that emissions per unit of the dirty input fall lowering emissions per unit final output.
But there is also an indirect effect which acts much like the classic rebound effect. When
abatement lowers emissions per unit of the dirty input, pollution charges per unit of the dirty

                                                      46
input fall, reducing the net price to firms for using the dirty input falls. This encourages
the firm to substitute towards the dirty input raising emissions per unit of final output. The
relative strength of these two effects depends on the elasticity of substitution between inputs,
σ. To clarify, differentiate the emission intensity of an intermediate eij with respect to A.
Writing in percent change form, we find:
                                      "                                      #
                             eb               τg                  bj σ
                                = g,A 1 −                      τD σ−1
                                                                                                          (41)
                                            r + τg
                                                                  
                             Ab                       aj         w
                                                                         + bj

where g,A < 0 is the elasticity of g with respect to A.
       If σ ≤ 1 the expression above is unambiguously negative - an increase in abatement
necessarily lowers emission intensities. However if τD < w then for σ sufficiently large (that
is, if the dirty and clean inputs are very close substitutes), the sign is reversed - an increase
in abatement expenditure raises emission intensity, because the substitution toward the dirty
input induced by the fall in τD dominates the direct effect of lower emissions per unit of the
dirty input.25 Therefore, the response of emission intensities to abatement can depend quite
delicately on the technology for abatement.




  25
    Consider an extreme example. Suppose that one unit of the intermediate can be produced from one
unit of either the clean or dirty input (that is, they are perfect substitutes) and that the only cost of using
the dirty input is the pollution tax τ ). Then the firm uses whichever input is cheaper. Suppose initially
g(A)τ > w where w is the price of the clean input. Then the clean input is cheaper and the firm’s emission
intensity is zero. If an increase in A results in g(A)τ < w, then the firm switches to exclusively using the
dirty input: the firm’s emission intensity is now positive as are the firm’s total emissions


                                                      47
References

Aichele, Rahel and Gabriel Felbermayr, “Kyoto and the Carbon Footprint of Nations,”
  J. Environ. Econ. Manag., 2012, 63, 336–354.

   and       , “Estimating the Effects of Kyoto on Bilateral Trade Flows Using Matching
  Econometrics,” World Econ., 2013, 36, 303–330.

  and     , “Kyoto and Carbon Leakage: An Empirical Analysis of the Carbon Content of
  Bilateral Trade,” Rev. Econ. Stat., 2015, 97, 104–115.

Antweiler, Werner, Brian R Copeland, and M Scott Taylor, “Is Free Trade Good
  for the Environment?,” Am. Econ. Rev., 2001, 91, 877–908.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local
  Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” Am. Econ. Rev., 2013,
  6, 2121–2168.

Barrows, Geoffrey and Hélène Ollivier, “Emission Intensity and Firm Dynamics: Real-
  location, Product Mix and Technology in India,” Working Paper 245, Grantham Research
  Institute on Climate Change and the Environment 2016.

Batrakova, Svetlana and Ronald B. Davies, “Is There an Environmental Benefit to
  Being an Exporter? Evidence from Firm Level Data,” Rev. World. Econ., 2012, 148 (3),
  449–474.

Becker, Randy and Vernon Henderson, “Effects of Air Quality Regulations on Polluting
  Industries,” J. Polit. Econ, 2000, 108, 379–421.

Bomarbardini, Matilde and Bingjing Li, “Trade, Pollution and Mortality in China,”
  2016. Unpublished manuscript.

Brander, James A. and M Scott Taylor, “Open Access Renewable Resources: Trade
  and Trade Policy in a Two-Country Model,” J. Int. Econ., 1998, 44, 181–209.

                                            48
Broner, Fernando, Paula Bustos, and Vasco Carvalho, “Sources of Comparative
  Advantage in Polluting Industries,” 2015. Unpublished manuscript.

Brunel, Claire, “Pollution Offshoring and Emissions Reductions in EU and US Manufac-
  turing,” Environ. Resour. Econ., 2016.

Brunnermeier, Smita B. and Arik Levinson, “Examining the evidence on environmen-
  tal regulations and industry location,” J. Environ. Dev., 2004, 13, 6–41.

Bustos, Paula, “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on
  the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms,” Am. Econ. Rev., 2011, 101, 304–340.

Cao, Jing, Larry D. Qiu, and Mohan Zhou, “Who Invest More in Advanced Abatement
  Technology: Theory and Evidence,” Can. J. Econ., 2016, 49.

Cherniwchan, Jevan, “Trade Liberalization and the Environment: Evidence from NAFTA
  and U.S. Manufacturing,” 2016. Unpublished manuscript.

  , Brian R Copeland, and M Scott Taylor, “Environmental Regulations and Interna-
  tional Competitiveness: A Review of Recent Evidence,” 2013. Unpublished manuscript.

Chichilnisky, Gracelia, “Global Environment and North-South Trade,” Am. Econ. Rev.,
  1994, 84, 851–874.

Chintrakarn, Pandej and Daniel L. Millimet, “The Environmental Consequences of
  Trade: Evidence from Subnational Trade Flows,” J. Environ. Econ. Manag., 2006, 52,
  430–453.

Cole, Matthew A. and Robert J.R. Elliott, “Determining the Trade-Environment
  Composition Effect: the Role of Capital, Labor, and Environmental Regulations,” J.
  Environ. Econ. Manag., 2003, 46, 363–383.

  ,   , and Toshihiro Okubo, “International Environmental Outsourcing,” Rev. World.
  Econ., 2014, 150, 639–664.

                                            49
Copeland, Brian R, “Trade and the Environment,” in D Bernhofen, R Falvey, D Green-
  away, and U Kreickemeier, eds., Palgrave Handbook of International Trade, UK: Palgrave
  Macmillan, 2011, pp. 423–496.

      and M Scott Taylor, “North-South Trade and the Environment,” Q. J. Econ., 1994,
  109, 755–787.

      and   , “Trade and Transboundary Pollution,” Am. Econ. Rev., 1995, 85, 716–737.

      and   , Trade and the Environment, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.

      and   , “Trade, Growth, and the Environment,” J. Econ. Lit., 2004, 42, 7–71.

Cristea, Anca, David Hummels, Laura Puzzello, and Misak Avetisyan, “Trade and
  the Greenhouse Gas Emissions from International Freight Transport,” J. Environ. Econ.
  Manag., 2013, 65, 153–173.

Cui, Jingbo, “Induced Clean Technology Adoption and International Trade with Hetero-
  geneous Firms,” 2014. Unpublished manuscript.

  , Harvey Lapan, and GianCarlo Moschini, “Are Exporters More Environmentally
  Friendly than Non-Exporters? Theory and Evidence,” Working Paper 12022, Department
  of Economics, Iowa State University 2012.

  ,     , and   , “Productivity, Export, and Environmental Performance: Air Pollutants in
  the United States,” Am. J. Agr. Econ., 2016, 98, 447–467.

Davis, Lucas W and Matt E Kahn, “International Trade in Used Vehicles: The Envi-
  ronmental Consequences of NAFTA,” Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy, 2010, 2, 58–82.

Dean, Judith M. and Mary E. Lovely, “Trade Growth, Product Fragmentation, and
  China’s Environment,” in Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei, eds., China’s Growing
  Role in World Trade, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2010, chapter 11, pp. 429–
  469.

                                              50
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage
  Inequality,” Am. Econ. Rev., 1996, 86, 240–245.

Forslid, Rikard, Toshihiro Okubo, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe, “Why are Firms
  the Export Cleaner? International Trade, Abatment, and Environmental Emissions,”
  2015. Unpublished manuscript.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, “Reallocation, Firm Turnover,
  and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?,” Am. Econ. Rev., 2008, 98,
  394–425.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Andrew K. Rose, “Is Trade Good or Bad for the Environment?
  Sorting Out the Causality,” Rev. Econ. Stat., 2005, 87, 85–91.

Gillingham, Kenneth, David Rapson, and Gernot Wagner, “The Rebound Effect
  and Energy Efficiency Policy,” Rev. Environ. Econ. Policy, 2016, 10, 68–88.

Girma, Sourafel, Aoife Hanley, and Felix Tintelnot, “Exporting and the Environment:
  A New Look with Microdata,” Working Paper 1423, Kiel Institute for the World Economy
  2008.

Grether, Jean-Marie, Nicole A Mathys, and Jaime de Melo, “Scale, Technique and
  Composition Effects in Manufacturing SO2 Emissions,” Environ. Resour. Econ., 2009, 43,
  257–274.

Grossman, Gene and Alan Krueger, “Environmental Impacts of a North American
  Free Trade Agreement,” in Peter M. Garber, ed., The U.S. Mexico Free Trade Agreement,
  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993, pp. 13–56.

Hanna, Rema, “US Environmental Regulation and FDI: Evidence from a Panel of US-
  Based Multinational Firms,” Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy, 2010, 2, 158–189.




                                            51
Harrison, Ann and Margaret McMillan, “Offshoring Jobs? Multinationals and US
  Manufacturing Employment,” Rev. Econ. Stat., 2011, 93, 857–875.

Holladay, J. Scott, “Exporters and the Environment,” Can. J. Econ., 2016.

Jaffe, Adam B., Steven R. Peterson, Paul R. Portney, and Robert N. Stavins,
  “Environmental Regulation and the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: What Does
  the Evidence Tell Us?,” J. Econ. Lit., 1995, 33, 132–163.

Kellenberg, Derek, “An Empirical Investigation of the Pollution Haven Effect with Strate-
  gic Environment and Trade Policy,” J. Int. Econ., 2009, 78, 242–255.

Konishi, Yoshifumi and Nori Tarui, “Emissions Trading, Firm Heterogeneity, and Intra-
  Industry Reallocations in the Long Run,” J. Assoc. Environ. Resour. Econ., 2015, 2, 1–42.

Kreickemeier, Udo and Philipp Richter, “Trade and the Environment: The Role of
  Firm Heterogeneity,” Rev. Int. Econ., 2014, 22, 209–225.

Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
  Control for Unobservables,” Rev. Econ. Stud., 2003, 70, 317–341.

Levinson, Arik, “Technology, International Trade and Pollution From US Manufacturing,”
  Am. Econ. Rev., 2009, 99, 2177–2192.

  , “Offshoring Pollution: Is the US Increasingly Importing Polluting Goods?,” Rev. Envi-
  ron. Econ. Policy, 2010, 4, 63–83.

  , “A Direct Estimate of the Technique Effect: Changes in the Pollution Intensity of US
  Manufacturing 1990-2008,” J. Assoc. Environ. Resour. Econ., 2015, 2, 43–56.

   and M Scott Taylor, “Unmasking the Pollution Haven Effect,” Int. Econ. Rev., 2008,
  49, 223–254.




                                            52
Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Trefler, “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-level
  Productivity... For Some Plants.,” Q. J. Econ., 2010, 125, 1051–1099.

Managi, Shunsuke, Akira Hibiki, and Tetsuya Tsurumi, “Does Trade Openness
  Improve Environmental Quality?,” J. Environ. Econ. Manag., 2009, 58, 346–363.

Martin, Leslie A, “Energy Efficiency Gains from Trade: Greenhouse Gas Emissions and
  India’s Manufacturing Sector,” 2012. Unpublished manuscript.

McAusland, Carol, “Trade, Politics, and the Environment: Tailpipe vs. Smokestack,” J.
  Environ. Econ. Manag., 2008, 55, 52–71.

   and Daniel L. Millimet, “Do National Border Matter? Intranational Trade, Interna-
  tional Trade, and the Environment,” J. Environ. Econ. Manag., 2013, 65, 411–437.

Melitz, Marc, “The Impact of Trade on Aggregate Industry Productivity and Intra-
  Industry Reallocations,” Econometrica, 2003, 71, 1695–1725.

   and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, “Market Size, Trade and Productivity.,” Rev. Econ.
  Stud., 2008, 75, 295–316.

Ravetti, Chiara and Richard E Baldwin, “Emissions, Exporters and Heterogeneity:
  Asymmetric Trade Policy and Firms’ Selection,” Working Paper CTEI-2014-2, CTEI 2014.

Romalis, John, “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade,” Am. Econ.
  Rev., 2004, 94, 67–97.

Shapiro, Joeseph S., “Trade Costs, CO2 and the Environment,” Am. Econ. J. Econ.
  Policy, 2016.

   and Reed Walker, “Why is Pollution from U.S. Manufacturing Declining? The Roles
  of Trade, Regulation, Productivity, and Preferences,” Working Paper 20879, NBER 2015.




                                            53
Taylor, M Scott, “Unbundling the Pollution Haven Hypothesis,” Adv. Econ. Anal. Policy,
  2005, 3.

Yeaple, Stephen R, “Firm Heterogeneity, Central Locations, and the Structure of Foreign
  Direct Investment,” in Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin, and Thierry Verdier, eds., The
  Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
  2008, chapter 7, pp. 200–230.

Yokoo, Hidefumi, “Heterogeneous firms, Porter hypothesis and trade.,” 2009. Unpublished
  manuscript.




                                          54
