                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            LONGITUDINAL ANALYSIS
                              OF STRIKE ACTIVITY




                                 David Card




                           Working Paper No. 2263




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 May 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2263
                                               May 1987




                 Longitudinal Analysis of Strike Activity




                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper presents evidence on two aspects of strike activity

associated with the renegotiation of union contracts: the effects of

contract characteristics on dispute probabilities; and the effects of

lagged strike outcomes on the incidence and duration of subsequent

disputes. The empirical results show that strike probabilities are

higher following a longer contract, and lower in limited reopening

situations. Strike probabilities are also higher in summer and fall

than in winter and spring. Finally, strike probabilities are signif i—

cantly affected by lagged strike outcomes. Relative to a peaceful

settlement, strike probabilities are 10 percentage points higher

following a strike of two weeks or less, and 5 to 7 percentage points

lower following a longer dispute.




                                               David Card
                                               Department of Economics
                                               Princeton University
                                               Princeton, NJ 08544
                 Longitudinal Analysis of Strike Activity



I.   Introduction

     The growing availability of data on collective bargaining settle-

ments in the union sector has generated widespread interest In the

empirical analysis of strikes.L" In contrast to earlier studies based

on the aggregate number of strikes, recent studies have shifted atten-

tion to the micro—level determinants of strike outcomes.Li' This paper

focuses on the time-series variation in bargaining-pair-specific strike

outcomes. Evidence is presented from a panel of collective bargaining

agreements on two sources of variation: changes in the characteristics

of the collective bargaining agreement that affect subsequent strike

outcomes; and the effects of lagged strike outcomes on the incidence and

duration of subsequent disputes.

     The first part of the paper addresses the question of whether

bargaining parties can vary the probability of future work stoppages by

their choice of contract characteristics. I concentrate on three

aspects of the preceding contract: the expiration month of the

contract; the duration of the contract; and the provision of a limited

reopening clause, which restricts subsequent negotiations to a small

number of issues (usually wages). The empirical analysis shows that

strike probabilities are higher following a long contract, and lower in

limited reopening situations. Strike probabilities are also higher

following expirations in summer and fall, relative to winter and spring.

     The second part of the paper addresses the question of whether

strike probabilities and durations are affected by preceding strike
                                  —2—


outcomes. Contrary to the findings of previous researchers, there is

no evidence of state-dependence in strike incidence.—' The absence of

simple state-dependence, however, is the product of two competing

effects: an increase in strike probabilities following a strike of less

than 14 days duration; and a decrease in strike probabilities following

a longer work stoppage. In contrast to the effects of lagged strike

outcomes on subsequent strike probabilities, the effects on subsequent

durations are small and imprecisely measured.


II. Data Description

     The data in this study represent strike outcomes for contract nego-

tiations of 253 bargaining pairs during the period from 1955 to 1979.

Contract terms and strike information were originally collected from the

Bureau of Labor Statistic's Current Wage Developments (CWD) by Wayne

Vroman.—" Vroinan's data set contains information on some 300 collec-

tive bargaining situations covering 1,000 or more workers. For purposes

of this paper, however, I have focused on bargaining pairs with complete

information on at least seven consecutive agreements. The resulting

sample contains 2,543 contracts, or an average of ten contracts per

bargaining pair.

     Table 1 presents a cross—tabulation of the data by industry. With

the exception of contracts for seven bargaining pairs in transportation,

communications, and public utilities, the contracts are drawn from the

manufacturing sector. The coverage within two-digit manufacturing

industries is irregular, and reflects Vroman's original interest in
                                    -3-


"pattern" bargaining and wage determination. The data set contains

single—employer contracts covering multiple establishments (such as the

Autoworkers' agreements with General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler),

multiple-employer agreements (such as the Distillery Workers' agreements

with the Winery Employers Association of California), and single—

establishment agreements (such as the Machinist's agreements with Morse

Chain). The average number of workers covered by each contract is

13,000.

     The contract sample is "unbalanced" in the sense that there are

different numbers of contracts for each bargaining pair. Contracts in

the textile industry, for example, tend to be short. As a result, there

are an average of 14 contracts per bargaining pair from this Industry

over the 24-year sample period. Most contracts in the transportation

equipment industry, on the other hand, run for three years. As a

result, there are approximately eight contracts for each bargaining pair

in the sample from this industry.

     In addition to fixed—duration noncontingent contracts, the sample

contains a variety of alternative contract forms, Including

fixed-duration contracts with contingent cost-of-living wage adjustment

formulas (approximately 25 percent of the sample), contracts with sche-

duled wage—reopening provisions (approximately 7.5 percent of the

sample), and contracts with contingent wage reopening provisions

(approximately 1 percent of the sample). Since wage—reopenings place

the parties at risk of a strike, I have defined each reopening as a new

contract. The impact of repener clauses on strike probabilities is
                                  —4—


analyzed in the next section.

     Even in the absence of explicit reopening provisions, most long

term labor contracts can be reopened at any time with the mutual consent

of the parties, and many contracts are automatically extended past their

scheduled expiration date unless one party or the other files a formal

notice of intent to terminate the contract and put the pair at risk of

strike.7— Approximately one percent of contracts in the sample were

reopened earlier than three months before their scheduled expiration

date, and another six percent ran more than three months past their

scheduled expiration date before a new contract was reached or a strike

was declared. While these facts introduce some ambiguity into the

notion of a contract expiration date, I have adopted the convention of

dating expirations by the earlier of the expiration date of the pre-

ceding contract and the actual renegotiation date of the next contract,

as reported in Current Wage Developments.

     The third and fourth columns of Table 1 contain information on the

probability and mean duration of strikes by industry. For most of the

contracts in the sample the source of strike information is the contract

listing in Current Wage Developments.J For contract expirations after

1970, however, strike information is also available from an exhaustive

listing of major strikes assembled by Sheena McConnell and Joseph

Tracy.11 McConnell and Tracy's data include local—issue strikes asso-

ciated with the ratification of multi-establishment master contracts, as

well as more widespread disputes. For comparability with the CWD def i—

nition of contract strikes, however, I restricted attention to disputes
                                  —5—


involving at least 70 percent of workers covered by each contract.11"

The McConnell-Tracy strike listings contribute an additional 29 strikes

to the 114 strikes reported in Vroman's data for contracts negotiated

after January 1970. These figures suggest that some 20 percent of

strikes associated with contract renegotiations are missing from the CWD

listings. The added strikes are shorter than the strikes in CWD (27

versus 48 days) but are more-or-less evenly distributed over time and

across industries. Assuming that 20 percent of actual strikes are ran-

domly missing from the CWD listing prior to 1970, the true probability

of strikes In the data set is 14.1 percent.

     For purposes of a longitudinal analysis, it Is convenient to work

with a fixed number of contract expirations per bargaining pair. To

this end, I have extracted a balanced sample of contracts based on the

six most recent negotiations for each bargaining pair. Strike probabi-

lities and durations for this sample of 1,518 contracts are presented in

the right-hand columns of Table 1. The pattern of strike probabilities

and durations across industries is similar between the total sample and

the balanced subsample, although strike probabilities are somewhat

higher in the subsample. This reflects the fact that the subsample con—

tains relatively fewer contracts from the 1950's and early 1960's, when

strike probabilities were relatively low. By the same token, under-

reporting of strikes is less significant in the subsample, since

relatively fewer of the contract expirations In the subsample occurred

before 1970 (39.7 percent versus 63.2 percent). Assuming that 20 per-

cent of strikes prior to 1970 are unreported, the true probability of
                                   —6-


strikes in the balanced sample is 17.8 percent.

     The simple averages In Table 1 show considerable variation across

industries in both the probability and duration of strikes. Strikes

are more likely in durable than nondurable manufacturing, and are most

frequent in the rubber and non-electrical machinery industrles)-V

There is a weak positive rank-order correlation across industries bet-

ween strike probabilities and the conditional duration of strikes (.21)

although the correlation falls to zero If the apparel industry is

ignored. The longest strikes are In lumber and wood products, primary

metals, and fabricated metals, while the shortest strikes are in

apparel., petroleum refining, and Instruments.

     Some additional insight into the distribution of strike lengths is

provided by Table 2, which gives the weekly settlement rates for 244

strikes drawn from the balanced sample of contract expirations. Over 95

percent of these strikes are settled in 20 weeks or less. The average

weekly settlement rate during the first 20 weeks is 13.8 percent. With

only two exceptions, the individual weekly settlement rates are within

two standard errors of the overall average: the test statistic for the

hypothesis of a constant settlement hazard has a probability value of

about six percent. It should be noted, however, that the number of

strikes after only a few weeks is relatively small. Recent studies by

Kennan (1980. 1985) and Harrison and Stewart (1986), using much larger

sample sizes, conclude that strike settlement rates tend to decrease

with the duration of the strike. While there is no evidence of this

phenomenon in Table 2, It is difficult to draw firm conclusions because
                                  —7—


of the relatively small sample size.

     The tabulation of strike probabilities by 5—year interval in Table

1 shows considerable time-series variation in aggregate and industry—

specific strike propensities. Figure 1 presents average annual strike

probabilities for 1961—1979 from thebalanced subsample of 1,518

contracts. Actual probabilities and strike durations by year are

recorded in Appendix Table 1. The figure shows both the probability of

strikes associated with contract expirations in each year, and an

adjusted probability that controls for the industry composition of

contract expirations. These adjusted probabilities represent estimated

year effects from a linear probability model that includes two-digit

industry controls. Both series show relatively low strike probabilities

in the early 1960's, followed by sharply higher strike probabilities

from 1965 to 1970, and lower but widely—varying strike probabilities

throughout the 1970's. Since the focus of this paper is on the longitu-

dinal structure of strike activity, in the empirical analysis reported

below I control for time-varying aggregate strike propensities with a

series of year-effects. Experiments with both ordinary and fixed—effect

probability models suggest that the time-varying component of strike

activity is well represented by a simple four-step function, with steps

at 1965, 1971, and 1975. In particular, this function captures the

relatively low strike probabilities observed in the early 1960's, and

the relatively high strike probabilities from 1965 to l970.!1


III. The Effects of Contract Characteristics on Strike Incidence

     In this section I analyze the effects of three characteristics of
                                  -8-


collective bargaining agreements on the probability of strikes: the

seasonal timing of contract expirations; the provision for a limited

contract reopening; and the length of time between successive nego-

tiations. Estimation of the effects of contract characteristics on the

probability of strikes is complicated by the nonrandom incidence of

these characteristics across industries and bargaining pairs. The fact

that strike probabilities are relatively low among contracts that expire

in December, for example, does not imply that a bargaining pair who tra-

ditionally negotiate in June could reduce the probability of a work

stoppage by scheduling their negotiations in December. To control for

unobserved heterogeneity in strike propensities across bargaining pairs,

I use three alternative estimation strategies. The first strategy is to

model heterogeneity across industries using a series of two—digit

industry effects. The second estimation strategy is a conditional

logistic regression-—the direct analogue of a fixed effects estimator

for logistic probability models. The third strategy is a first-

differenced version of the linear probability model. In all cases, the

empirical analysis accounts for random under-reporting of strikes among

expirations prior to 1970.

     a. Seasonality of Expirations

     It is widely acknowledged that there is a strong seasonal pattern

in measures of aggregate strike activity.14'   Only recently, however,

has it been possible to decompose this pattern of seasonality into the

seasonal component of expirations, and the seasonal component of strike

probabilities.'     Evidence in Gramm (1987, Table 3) based on a large
                                     —9—


sample of manufacturing and nonmanufacturing contracts suggests that

monthly strike probabilities vary widely. Her data analysis does not

address the question of whether this seasonal variation is due to the

monthly composition of contract expirations, however, or to an intrinsic

seasonal effect. Indeed, the year—to--year variation in relative monthly

strike probabilities in Gramm's data suggests that compositional effects

may be an important component of seasonal variation in strike

probabilities

        In an effort to isolate intrinsic seasonal variation in strike pro-

babilities, Table 3 presents estimated month effects from several models

that control for the composition of expirations. For reference, the

first two columns of the Table report the fraction of expirations in

each month and the associated raw strike probabilities. Column (3) of

Table 3 reports estimated month effects from a benchmark logistic

regression model with no controls for heterogeneity. In order to incor—

porate the assumption that 20 percent of strikes associated with expira-

tions before 1970 are unreported, I assume that the probability of an

observed strike is


             (1 —
(1) pit             .2Dit) jt

where         is the predicted probability of a strike in the tth nego—

tiation for the i' pair in the absence of any under-reporting, and

Dit is an indicator variable for expirations prior to January 1970.

The probability of a dispute in the absence of under-reporting is given

by the usual logistic regression formula


(2) 1ogit(p) log(p/(l —                = xit
                                     -10—


where Xit represents a vector of month effects, with the normalization

that the effect for January Is zero.

        The estimates In column (3) show significantly different strike

probabilities depending on the expiration month of the preceding

contract. The likelihood—ratio test associated with the hypothesis that

strike probabilities are constant across months is reported in the last

row of the table, and is highly significant.

        The fourth column of Table 3 introduces two-digit industry controls

and a four—step function of time as additional covariates of strike

activity.11" Comparing the estimates in the third and fourth columns of

the table, there are only small differences between the estimated month

effects. These results suggest that the monthly pattern of strike

probabilities is not simply an artifact of the industry distribution of

contract expirations. In fact, the monthly pattern of strike probabili-

ties is very similar with and without industry controls.

        The fifth column of Table 3 contains estimated month effects from a

conditional logit model of strike incidence.' This model permits a

separate fixed effect for each bargaining pair in the data set.

Specifically, the probability of a strike for the ith bargaining pair

at the tth negotiation is assumed to be given by•


(3) logit(p) = a1      +
                           x1

where         represents a vector of year and month effects and a1

represents a fixed pair-effect. As a consequence of the functional form

of the logistic probability model, the pair-effects are eliminated by
                                  —11—


considering the likelihood of the sequence of strike indicators for the

1th bargaining pair   (y.1 y p... Y16)      conditional on the

total number of strikes observed for the pair in the sample. Since the

number of strikes is a sufficient statistic for the pair—effect in the

logistic probability model, conditioning eliminates the pair-effect from

the likelihood, while permitting estimation of the coefficients asso-

ciated with the time-varying determinants of strike probabilit1es.1/

     Unfortunately the addition of the simple under—reporting model

described by equation (I) to the strike probability model (3) leads to a

probability model for observed strike outcomes that no longer satisfies

the necessary conditions for the conditional logit model. The fixed—

effects specification can be combined with an approximation to the

under—reporting model, however, that leads to a workable conditional

likelihood.1 I have therefore used this approximate correction for

under—reporting of strikes prior to 1970 to compute the estimates in

column (5) of Table 3. These estimates are less precise than the con-

ventional logit estimates in column (4), and indicate a somewhat dif-

ferent seasonal pattern. The conditional logit estimates, in fact,

suggest that the monthly effects can be divided Into just two 'seasons":

a low strike probability season from December to May, and a high strike

probability season from June to November. The likelihood ratio test for

the hypothesis that strike probabilities are constant from December to

May, and from June to November, has a marginal significance level of .38.

The estimated month effect for June—November in this simple two—season

model is .96, with a standard error of .28. Assuming an average strike
                                               —12—


probability of 15 percent, this implies a 12 percentage point difference

In strike probabilities between expirations in summer and fall, on one

hand, and winter and spring, on the other

      The conditional logit estimation scheme relies very heavily on the

functional form of the logistic distribution function. As a check on

the results in column (5), consider an alternative linear-probability

specification


            =
(4)             ai   +



where, as before, a1 represents a permanent pair-effect and xjt
represents a vector of year and month effects. Although this specifica-

tion suffers from the objection that the predicted probabilities can lie

outside the unit Interval, it is particularly convenient for handling

fixed effects, since (ignoring under—reporting) it implies the linear

regression equation


        Ayjt =   Axit        +
                                 it
where            =       —              represents the change in strike outcomes bet-
                                 Y111
ween the (t_l)8t and                tth negotiation, Ax1 =    xit —   x_   repre-

sents the vector of differences in the covariates, and                   can be

interpreted as a residual. This flrst-differenced linear probability

model can also be combined very easily with the under-reporting model

of equation (l).' The results of this combined model are presented in

column (6) of Table 2. To make the estimates comparable with the esti-

mated coefficients of the logistic regression models, the month-effects

and their standard errors have been multiplied by a factor of
                                        -13-


((1 -        , where       represents the sample average strike probabi-

lity. Assuming         .145 ,   the   normalizing factor in column (6) is 8.0.

     The estimated month effects from the linear probability model are

generally similar to the estimates from the conditional logit model,

although the point estimates for March, May, August and December differ

somewhat between the two specifications. A test that the month effects

from the linear probability specification are constant from December to

May and from June to November has a marginal significance level of .37

(virtually identical to the significance level of the test on the con-

ditional logit coefficients). Assuming a two—season model, the linear

probability specification implies a 15 percentage point increase in the

probability of strikes between June and November relative to expirations

in December—May, with a standard error of .05.

     Both the conditional logit and flrst—differenced linear probability

specifications therefore indicate that strike probabilities are signifi-

cantly higher in summer and fall relative to expirations between

December and May. Since both specifications control for bargaining—

pair specific heterogeneity, these results suggest that contract nego-

tiators can vary the likelihood of subsequent work stoppages by varying

the expiration dates of their contracts. There is, on the other hand,

no evidence that the duration of strikes varies by the expiration date

of the previous contract." These findings raise an interesting

puzzle: Why do negotiators schedule expirations in high strike probabi-

lity months? The interpretation of strikes as unproductive accidents

(Reder and Neumann (1980), Addison and Siebert (1981)) implies that
                                  -14—


bargainers should schedule negotiations when the expected costs due to

work stoppages are lowest. Assuming that marginal strike costs do not

vary by season, the results in Table 3 clearly reject this interpreta-

tion. More detailed evidence on the seasonal variation In strike

costs, however, is obviously required for a definitive test.

     b. Reopeners and Contract Duration

     Table 4 presents estimates of the effects of two additional

contract characteristics on strike probabilities: the length of time

since the last negotiation; and the provision for a limited contract

reopening. As is the case for the expiration month, both of these

characteristics are determined in the preceding contract negotiation.

Time since the last negotiation is simply the duration of the preceding

contract. A limited reopening, on the other hand, is a provision of the

previous contract that restricts negotiations at a future date to a spe-

cific set of contract issues, with the understanding that other aspects

of the collective agreement are to remain unchanged.' Evidence that

either of these characteristics affect strike probabilities again

suggests that the bargaining parties can control the likelihood of sub-

sequent disputes, and raises the question of how the parties choose

among the menu of contract alternatives.

     The estimates in Table 4 are obtained from models that exclude

seasonal effects, although as a practical matter the estimates are not

much different when seasonal effects are included, since the distribu-

tion of reopening provisions and contract lengths is more—or-less inde-

pendent of expiration month. The first row of the table presents the
                                  -15—


estimated coefficient of a dummy variable for a limited reopening.1

The second row presents the estimated coefficient of the duration (in

months) of the previous contract. In cases where new contract or a

strike was reached prior to the expiration date of the preceding

contract, the duration of the previous contract is defined as the period

of time between its effective date and the date of the next contract or

strike.

     The first column of the table contains the estimated effects of

these two variables with no heterogeneity controls. The estimates show

that strike probabilities are significantly lower in reopening

situations, and significantly higher following the expiration of a

longer contract.afi" The second column introduces two—digit industry

controls and a step-function of time Into the logistic regression. The

estimated effect of a limited reopening is unchanged, while the effect

of previous contract duration is reduced slightly. Finally, the two

right-hand columns of Table 4 present alternative fixed-effects

estimators of the impact of reopening provisions and contract length on

strike probabilities. The estimated contract length effects are similar

to the estimates with industry-level controls, while the estimated

effects of reopening provisions are smaller, particularly in the first-

differenced linear probability specification. The point estimates imply

that strike probabilities are 9—11 percent lower in reopening

situations, and about six percent higher for negotiations following a

three-year, as compared to a two-year contract.-''

     These results suggest two conclusions. First, the commitment to
                                  -16—


limited negotiations implied by a reopener clause actually reduces the

probability of disputes. Second, increases in contract length, while

reducing the number of opportunities for disputes, lead to a higher

probability of disputes in each negotiation. in fact, the estimates in

Table 4 suggest that the expected number of disputes per period of time

is approximately constant, whether bargaining occurs at one—two-- or

three-year intervals .

     The finding that expected strike losses per year are independent of

contract length yields some support for the "accident" interpretation of

strikes. On the margin, there is apparently no advantage to shortening

or lengthening contract duration in order to avoid costly work stop-

pages. The findings that strike probabilities increase with contract

duration and decrease in reopener situations are also roughly consistent

with the notion that strike probabilities increase with the degree of

uncertainty associated with the bargainers' information about each

other. Complex multiple—issue negotiations require detailed information

on the parties' tradeoffs between alternative forms of compensation.

Single—issue negotiations over wages, on the other hand, are closer to a

zero-sum bargaining game. This characterization suggests that disputes

arising out of imperfect information are less likely to occur in typical

reopening situations. By the same token, it may be reasonable to assume

that the parties' information about each other decays with the length of

time since their most recent contract negotiations. The positive rela-

tion between contract length and strike probabilities is therefore con-

sistent with increasing uncertainty associated with less frequent

negotiations.
                                  —17--



IV. The Longitudinal Structure of Strike Activity

     a. Models of Strike Incidence

     This section presents and analyzes the pattern of strike incidence

over time within bargaining pairs. Using information on six contract

negotiations for each bargaining pair, I first test the hypothesis that

strike probabilities are related to previous strike incidence. Contrary

to the findings of Mauro (1982) and Schnell and Gramin (1987), there is

no evidence of either positive or negative state dependence in strike

incidence, controlling for heterogeneity in underlying strike propen—

sities. The absence of state dependence in strike incidence, however,

masks an important dependence of strike probabilities on the duration of

lagged strike outcomes. Specifically, I find that strike probabilities

are significantly increased by a relatively short strike in the preceding

negotiation, and significantly reduced by a relatively long strike in

the preceding negotiation.

     Some simple evidence on the extent of state—dependence In strike

incidence is presented in Table 5. This table presents a frequency

distribution of the alternative strike histories represented in the

sample of six negotiations for each of the 253 bargaining pairs,

together with the predicted frequencies generated by two simple models

of strike incidence. The first column of the Table describes the rele-

vant strike history: the strike history "000000", for example, repre—

sents the occurrence of no strikes in six negotiations. The next column

gives the number of bargaining pairs with each history. For simplicity,

I have not displayed the actual distributions of bargaining pairs among
                                  -18—


histories with three or four strikes in six negotiations. Since strikes

are relatively rare events, the number of pairs in the individual cells

with more than three strikes is typically one or zero. There are no

pairs with five strikes in six negotiations, and only one pair (the

Autoworkers and Allis Chalmers) with six strikes.

     The third and fourth columns of Table 5 present the predicted num-

bers of bargaining pairs with each strike history (or group of

histories) from two alternative models: an ordinary logistic regression

model of strike incidence with industry and year effects; and a con-

ditional logit model with year effects.V Both of these models are

estimated under the assumption of no state-dependence in strike inci-

dence. A comparison of the predicted frequencies under these simple

models to the actual frequencies of the alternative strike histories

therefore provides a simple test for the presence of state-dependence.

     A comparison of the actual cell frequencies to the predicted fre—

quencies generated by the ordinary logit model with year and industry

effects suggests that the model does a relatively good of predicting the

various alternatives. The absolute t—statistics for the difference

between the predicted and actual cell frequencies are presented in

parentheses beside each predicted cell frequency, and an overall

goodness—of-fit statistic is presented in the last row of the table."

Apart from the cells with no strikes and six strikes, and the "000011'

cell, the individual t—statistics are relatively small. There is very

little evidence that the model systematically over- or under-predicts

cells associated with significant state-dependence effects. For
                                      -19—


example, negative state dependence (as reported by Mauro (1982) and

Schnell and Gramm   (1987))   would show up in this table as significant

over—prediction of cells with two consecutive strikes. The results in

rows 9-13, on the other hand, show a tendency to underpredict these

cells, at least among histories with two strikes in six negotiations.

     A similar conclusion emerges from an examination of the goodness—

of—fit of the conditional logit model. By construction, the conditional

logit model fits the number of observations with each strike total

exactly. Looking at the individual strike histories, the only signi-

ficant outlier under the conditonal logit specification is the "000011"

history: otherwise, the goodness—of—fit to the individual cells and the

overall table are acceptable by conventional standards.J.' Again, the

fit of the model does not Indicate any significant state-dependence in

strike incidence.

     A close inspection of the individual strike histories, however,

suggests that the absence of state dependence in strike incidence is the

product of two offsetting effects: a tendency for increased strike

probabilities following relatively short disputes; and a tendency for

reduced strike probabilities following relatively long disputes. Some

simple evidence is presented In Table 6, which describes the probability

and duration of strikes conditional on the length of the preceding

strike. The first row of the table reveals a sharp difference between

the effects of shorter strikes and longer strikes on the probability of

subsequent disputes. In contrast to this finding, a simple model of

state-dependence implies that the probability of a subsequent dispute
                                            -20-


depends only on the occurrence of a strike, and not on its length.

Despite the variation in strike probabilities by lagged strike length,

however, the mean strike durations in the second row of Table 6 show no

significant variation by lagged strike length.

        In order to investigate the apparent dependence of strike proba-

bilities on lagged strike outcomes, a statistical model is required that

permits both unobserved heterogeneity in strike propensities and poten-

tial state—dependence in consecutive strike outcomes. A convenient

model is a random-effects logit specification



(5) logit (p) = a1           +
                                 Xjt   +
                                            '5k   t—i '

where    p represents the probability of a strike at the tth nego-

tiation for the th bargaining pair in the absence of under—reporting,

Xit represents a vector of time—effects,                         is an indicator for a

strike in the kth duration class in the preceding negotiation, and

a1 represents a randomly distributed individual effect. A simple model

for the distribution of the random—effects is a point-mass distribution

with a small number of mass_points.V The mass—points and associated

probabilities, together with the parameters                          •
                                                                         â2 ,...}   can be

estimated jointly by conventional maximum likelihood techniques,

treating the pre—sample strike outcomes as fixed.'

        Estimation results for this random—effects specification are

reported in Table 7.—" For reference, the first column of the table

presents the results of the model with no allowance for lagged strike
                                     —21—


effects. The goodness-of—fit statistic reported in the last row of the

table indicates that the random-effects model with a simple two-point

distribution of effects generates a relatively good fit to the table of

strike incidence histories. Relative to a conventional logit model with

two—digit industry effects, for example, the model has 14 fewer para-

meters but generates a slightly better fit to the table of strike

histories. The addition of an extra mass point to the distribution of

random effects yields an Insignificant improvement in the log—likelihood

(from -637.2 to —636.3) and only a slight improvement in the goodness—

of—fit to the table of strike histories.

    The second column of the table adds a single parameter for the

change in the log—odds of a strike following a strike in the previous

negotiation. This specification corresponds to a conventional model of

state-dependence. As the results in Table 5 suggest, there is no strong

evidence of state—dependence. The point estimate of the lagged strike

effect is actually positive, consistent with the finding in Table 5 that

consecutive strike outcomes are slightly underpredicted by models with

no allowance for state-dependence.

    The models in columns (3)—(6) allow for differential effects of

lagged strikes on future strike probabilities, depending on the duration

of the earlier dispute. As suggested by Table 6, a simple two-outcome

model that distinguishes between 1-14 day strikes, on one hand, and 15

day or longer strikes, on the other, is adequate to describe the data.

Whereas strikes of less than two weeks duration (some 30 percent of all

strikes) significantly increase the probability of a subsequent dispute,
                                    —22—


longer strikes actually reduce the probability of a subsequent dispute.

As a check that these results are not biased by imperfect heterogeneity

controls, the model in column (6) of Table 7 introduces a set of grouped

industry effects.     In order to reduce the number of parameters in the

model, two—digit industries were grouped according to their estimated

effects in a conventional logit model of strike lncidence. The

results with the grouped industry variables further strengthen the

conclusion that lagged strike outcomes affect current strike probabili-

ties, with shorter strikes increasing the likelihood of future disputes,

and longer strikes reducing the likelihood of future disputes.

     b. Models of Strike Incidence and Duration

     In view of the impact of strike duration on subsequent strike out-

comes, this section presents a more detailed analysis of the duration

and incidence of strikes over time within bargaining pairs. The

analysis is based on a model that describes strike outcomes in terms of only

three possibilities: no strike; a strike for less than two weeks; and a

strike for longer than two weeks. While this simple three-outcome model

of strike activity is obviously incomplete, the results of the last sec-

tion suggest that the distinction between short and long strikes is very

useful in longitudinal models of strike incidence. The three—outcome

case is therefore a natural starting point for studying the joint

determination of strike incidence and duration over time.

     In order to describe the distribution of bargaining outcomes

between no strikes, short strikes, and long strikes, consider a pair of

indicator variables         and ZIt , where       = 1   if a strike occurs

in the tth negotiation for the 1th bargaining pair, and 0 other—
                                                      -23-

wise,    and Zit =         1       if the strike lasts for longer than two weeks, and

o otherwise. Let                            and q represent the probability of a strike

and the conditional probability of a long strike, respectively, ignoring

under-reporting of strikes. Suppose that


(5a)     logit                 =
                                   Gj   +
                                            Xlt   +
                                                      6llt—l   —
                                                                   z1t...1)   +
                                                                                  62 Zit_l


(5b)     logit                 =        ÷ x1      +
                                                      l1t-1    —
                                                                   Zlt_l)     +
                                                                                  2 Zjtl
where     a1 and                   are individual effects and Xit is a vector of

control variates (for example, year and/or industry effects). Finally,

assume that y and z1. are independent, conditional on a1 y1

Xjt ,   itl      ,   and       Zit_l
                                                  The parameters

effect of a short or long strike in negotiation t-l on the probability
                                                                              and 2 measure the


of a strike in negotiation t ."                         The parameters P1 and p2 measure

similar effects on the probability of a strike continuing for more than

two weeks.

        Given values for cz and 6 , and pre-sample strike outcomes,
equations (5a) and (5b) can be used to calculate the likelihood of an

observed sequence of strike outcomes over time. The two equations

describe a first-order Markov model of transitions between three alter-

native states: no strikes; strikes of less than 14 days; and strikes of

more than 14 days. Following the approach in the previous section, r

treat the joint distribution of a1 and 6 as a discrete distribution

with a small number (2 or 3) of mass points. I also condition the esti-

mation and inference on the observed strike outcomes for each bargaining
                                  —24—


pair in the immediate pre-sample period.

     Table 8 presents estimation results for the trinomial outcome model

of strikes implied by equations (5a) and (5b). The first column of the

Table presents estimates based on a two mass—point bivariate distribu-

tion of individual effects. Apart from individual effects, the only

covariates of strike activity are a step—function of time. For simpli-

city, the time effects in equations (5a) (the incidence equation) and

(5b) (the conditional duration equation) are restricted to be propor-

tional: e =     .   The estimated proportionality constant    is

reported in the fifth row of the table.

     The estimated effects of previous work stoppages on the probability

of a strike are presented in the first two rows of the table. The point

estimates are very similar to the estimates in Table 7, with about the

same level of precision. The estimated effects of short and long stri-

kes in the preceding contract on the conditional probability of a long

strike in the current negotiation are reported in the third and fourth

rows of Table 8. The point estimates suggest that a long strike is more

likely if there was a long strike in the previous contract, and less

likely of the previous contract settle peacefully, although the

estimates are relatively imprecise.

     The second column of the table presents estimation results for a

three mass—point model of the distribution of individual effects.

Overall, the results are very similar to the two mass-point specifica-

tion, and the likelihood of the sample is not significantly improved.

     The hypothesis that lagged strikes do not affect the probability of
                                  -25—


short or long strikes is addressed in the third column of the table.

Comparing the likelihood and parameter estimates to those in the second

column, there is very little evidence against the hypothesis. While

lagged strike activity apparently influences the probability of sub-

sequent strikes, the probability of continuing a strike beyond two weeks

is not much affected by previous strike outcomes. Some caution is

nevertheless required in interpreting these results, since the number of

strikes in the data set is small, and strike duration Is apparently a

noisy phenomenon.' A larger data set is probably required to fully

analyze the determinants of strike duration, and particularly the

effects of lagged duration on current strike durations.V

     The fourth column of the table presents estimates for a two mass—

point specification that includes grouped industry effects as well as

time covariates in equations (5a) and (Sb). Here I have restricted the

time effects and industry effects to be proportional in the two

equations, but I have allowed different factors of proportionality for

the two types of effects. While the time effects are significant in the

duration equation, the industry effects, which play a strong role in the

strike probability equation, have very little effect on duration. As

in Table 7, the addition of grouped industry effects increases the abso-

lute value of the estimated effect of a longer strike in the preceding

negotiation. Overall, the estimates for the incidence equation imply

that strike probabilities increase 10—12 percentage points following a

relatively short strike, and decrease 6-9 percentage points following a

longer work stoppage. The estimates for the duration equation, while
                                  -26-


relatively imprecise, indicate that previous strike outcomes do not

effect the relative likelihood of short or long disputes.4'

     These findings are consistent with a very simple dynamic model in

which the probability of strikes depends positively on a state variable

whose value is unaffected by short strikes but is significantly reduced

by the occurrence of a long dispute.4V In such a model, the occurrence

of a short strike signals a high level of the state variable, and an

increased probability of further strikes. The occurrence of a long

strike, on the other hand, reduces the probability of further strikes by

reducing the level of the state variable. There are a variety of

interpretations of the state variable in such a model: as an index of

union members' wealth for example; or alternatively, as a general index

of worker discontent. In the absence of more complete information,

however, it is impossible to distinguish between these various

interpretations.

     The pattern of state dependence in strike probabilities also bears

an interesting relation to the literature on judging winners and losers

of strikes. Studies from a number of different countries and time

periods have concluded that unions are more likely to win short strikes

than long ones.4--" If the impression of union victory is related to the

union's willingness to engage in subsequent work stoppages, then this

pattern of wins and losses by strike duration is consistent with the

pattern of state dependence observed in Tables 7 and 8.


V. Conclusions

     This paper has present evidence on two aspects of strike activity
                                  —27—


associated with the renegotiation of union contracts: the effects of

endogenously—determined contract characteristics on the probability

of disputes; and the effects of lagged strike outcomes on future strike

incidence and duration. Although the evidence is based on a relatively

small sample of bargaining pairs drawn mainly from the manufacturing

sector, the findings suggest a number of conclusions and avenues for

further research.

     First, strike probabilities are significantly affected by contract

characteristics determined in earlier negotiations. Strikes are more

likely following a longer contract than a shorter one, and are less

likely in limited reopening situations. Strike probabilities are also

affected by the expiration month of the preceding contract, with expira-

tions in summer and fall leading to an increased likelihood of disputes.

The effects of contract duration and reopening provisions are poten-

tially consistent with the hypothesis that strike probabilities increase

with increases In the bargainer's uncertainty about each other.

Uncertainty may be expected to increase with the length of time between

negotiations and decrease when bargaining is restricted to a smaller

number of issues. The effect of the monthly timing of negotiations is

less easily explained. Judging by the duration of disputes, marginal

strike costs are not much different in summer and fall than in winter

and spring. A simple model of negotiator behavior based on the

hypothesis that the parties try to minimize expected losses due to work

stoppages cannot readily explain the predominance of scheduled expira-

tions in high strike probability months.
                                  -28-


     Second, strike probabilities are significantly affected by pre-

ceding strike outcomes. Relative to strike probabilities after a peace-

ful settlement of the most recent contract negotiation, strike

probabilities are 10 percentage points higher if the contract was

settled after a l—to-l4 day strike, and 5—7 percentage points lower if

the contract was settled after a longer work stoppage. The effects of

previous strike outcomes on subsequent strike durations are less preci-

sely estimated and are not significantly different between negotiations

that ended peacefully and those that ended in shorter or longer strikes.

     This pattern of state dependence Is not consistent with the simple

model of learning proposed by Schnell and Gramm (l987).1 Rather, it

suggests that any dynamic model of strike propensities must carefully

distinguish between the effects of relatively short strikes, on one

hand, and longer strikes, on the other. It also suggests that one

should distinguish between disputes of various lengths in investigating

the effects of strikes on other aspects of the collective bargaining

agreement, including wage outcomes.
                                   —29—

                                Footnotes

      *1 am grateful to Wayne Vroman for making available his contract

 data, and to Sheena McConnell and Joe Tracy for access to their data on

 strikes. Thanks to John Abowd, Rebecca Blank, George Jakubson, and

Robert Topel for comments on earlier drafts.
      1/
        Recent studies include papers by Gramm (1986, 1987), Gunderson,

Kervin, and Reid (1986), McConnell (1986), Schnell and Gramm (1987),

Tracy (1986, 1987), and S. Vroman (1986). Earlier studies include

Farber (1978), Mauro (1982), and Swidinsky and Vanderkamp (1982). Much

of the recent empirical and theoretical literature on strikes is sum-

marized by Kennan (1986).

     L"Among the aggregate studies are papers by Ashenfelter and

Johnson (1969), Pencavel (1970), Kaufman (1982) and Abbott (1984).

     _h/Mauro (1982) and Schnell and Gramm (1987) both report evidence

that strike probabilities are reduced following a strike in the previous

negotiation.

           am grateful to Wayne Vroman for making this data available.

A further description of the sample is presented in W. Vroman (1982).
     5/The
     —                      .    . .
           nonmanufacturing bargaining pairs are: Class I Railroads

and the Railroad Engineers; Class I Railroads and the Brotherhood of

Railroad and Airline Clerks; Trucking Employers Incorporated and the

Teamsters (National Master Freight Agreement); New York Shipping

Association and the Longshoremen; Pacific Maritime Association and the

Longshoremen; United Airlines and the Machinists; and ATT (Longlines

Division) and the Communication Workers.

           reopening clause states that the parties will open an ongoing

agreement for purposes of renegotiating a limited number of Contract
                                  —30—


issues (often only wages): see the Bureau of National Affairs (1986,

section 36.2). Most reopener clauses in the sample specify a fixed date

for reopening. A small number specify reopening contingent on a speci-

fic event (for example, discontinuation of wage and price controls; wage

adjustments in contracts at other firms; inflation rates above a certain

maximum).

            the Bureau of National Affairs (1986, section 36.2). A

small number of contracts in the sample from the textile industry spe-

cify an indefinite contract duration, although these contracts all

reopened at regular 12 or 24 month intervals.

            interesting issue for further research is the question of

when and why the parties continue to operate under the terms of the old

contract.

     The original source of the strike information in CWD is the

contract report filed by firms at the request of the BLS, in connection

with their ongoing analysis of wage changes in contracts with 1,000 or

more workers. For contracts negotiated between 1960 and 1970 I checked

the CWD strike information against contract information reported in the

Monthly Labor Review's monthly summary of recent developments in

industrial relations. I found only three examples of strikes reported

in the Review that were not recorded In CWD.

     -"McConnell and Tracy's strike listings were assembled from three

sources: a weekly BLS in-house newsletter entitled "Industrial

Relations Facts"; a BLS data tape listing strikes recorded from

published newspaper reports; and a Bureau of National Affairs' data tape
                                  -31—


listing strikes from published media and other sources. The Bureau of

National Affairs' data is only available after 1970: for this reason,

McConnell and Tracy began their merged strike listings in that year. A

further description of their data is provided by McConnell (1986).

     •111The precise definition of a strike in Current Wage Developments

is unclear.   It is clear, however, that the BLS does not report local-

issue strikes in CWD. The question of whether local-issue strikes

should be treated differently from more general disputes in an important

issue for further research.

     --Industry average strike probabilities from larger samples of

agreements are presented by McConnell (1986) and Gramm (1987).

McConnell's data includes 4,592 agreements in the manufacturing sector

from the period 1970-81. Granun's data includes 3,812 agreements from

the period 1971-80. The correlation coefficients between the industry

strike probabilities in the fifth column of Table 1 and those presented

by McConnell and Gramm are .91 and .73 respectively.

     -Susan Vroman (1986) has investigated the effects of a variety of

macroeconomic variables on the probability of strikes in this data set.

Her results suggest that unemployment rates, past inflation rates, and

wage and price controls all effect the probability of strikes. She does

not, however, compare the explanatory power of her probit regressions to

regressions with unrestricted year effects. The likelihood ratio test

statistic of the four-step time function against an unrestricted speci—

ficatiori of the year effects in a logistic regression that includes

2—digit industry effects has a probability value of 16 percent.
                                   —32—


    -"Kennan (1986, Section 11) provides a brief summary of the evi-

dence on seasonality, starting with the study by Yoder (1938).

    -"Aggregate measures of strike incidence or duration include

intra-contract strikes. Evidence reported by Flaherty (1983) shows that

these strikes also have a seasonal pattern.

    1'For example, the rank-order correlation between monthly strike

probabilities in two consecutive years in Gramm's data is typically less

than .25, and is in many cases negative.

              main effect of the adjustment for unreported strikes is to

change the estimated year effects in the specification for p*jt ,   the
probability of strikes in the absence of under-reporting. Comparing

estimated logistic regression models that include industry effects and

time-period effects with and without the correction of under-reporting

prior to 1970, the year effects for time periods before 1970 are .20 to

.25 higher in the corrected model. The industry effects are very simi-

lar between specifications.

     —
     18/This
          .          . described in
               model is
                                 .           .
                                    Chamberlain (1980), who also provides

references to earlier work.

     -Note that bargaining pairs who never strike, or who strike in

every negotiation, do not contribute to the conditional likelihood.
                                              -33—



        "Specifically, I consider the approximate formula for the proba-

bility of an observed strike:


                       +         -
                e
                           x1$       )lDit

                l+e
                             +
                                 Xj - yD1t
where y = .256      is chosen to approximate the behavior of the true model

at the sample mean strike probability. This model is clearly amenable

to a conditional likelihood formulation.             The approximation is also

relatively precise, at least for values of the individual effects that

give rise to predicted strike probabilities between 2 and 30 percent.

        VThe combined linear-probability and under—reporting model

Implies that the probability of an observed strike is

              = (1 —
                           .2D1t) (a +       x1t)
where Dt is an indicator for expirations prior to 1970. A suitable

regression equation for observed strike outcomes is


            yit
          ________         - __________
                                yit-l     = x.
          1 — . 2D.t          1 —
                                  .2Djt_j    it
                                                     +
                                                         it
where    it is a residual with expected value equal to 0 .            Note that

it is conditionally heteroskedastic. The standard errors for the dif—

ferenced linear probability model are therefore estimated by the White

(1980) procedure.

        'The mean and median duration for strikes associated with expira-

tions between December and May are 45.3 and 28, respectively. The mean

and median duration for strikes associated with expirations between June

and November are 45.4 and 28, respectively.
                                     -34—


    'In an effort to check if seasonality in strike probabilities

varies significantly by region, I fit separate first-differenced linear

probability models of strike incidence to 61 bargaining pairs in

Southern and Western states and 99 pairs in Northern states (the

remaining bargaining situations are multi—state). Neither subsample

rejected a two-season model based on December-May and June-November.

The estimated increase in the probability of strikes for expiration in

June-November was 13 percentage points for the Northern pairs, and 23

percentage points for the Southern-Western pairs, with standard errors

of 8 percent and 9 percent, respectively.

    "According to the Bureau of National Affairs (1986, Section

36.2), most reopening provisions are limited to wages, fringe benefits,

and cost—of-living wage adjustments. The courts have ruled that a

reopening agreement limited to "wages" does not preclude negotiation

over "compensation" more broadly defined. See Meltzer (1977),

pp. 712—718.

           have counted as "reopenings" only those negotiations that are

Identified as reopening in the preceding contract, and whose reopening

date is specified in the preceding contract. By this definition, the

data set contains 91 reopeners (6 percent of contract negotiations),

mostly In textile, apparel, and chemical Industries.

               probability of strikes among reopenings is two percent.

Strike probabilities by the duration of the preceding contract are as

follows: less than 18 months——7.ll percent; 18 to 29 inonths—--9.93 per-

cent; 30 to 41 months—-20.91 percent; and 42 months and longer—-29.73

percent.
                                     -35-




          have also estimated the effect of previous contract length by

grouping contracts into one-year (less than 18 months), two-year (18 to

29 months), three—year (30 to 41 months) and longer (over 42 months)

contracts. Relative to a one-year contract, the estimated effects and

associated standard errors from a differenced linear probability model

are: two-year contract -.01 (.03); three-year contract .06 (.03); four-

year or longer contract .26 (.09).

     "For example, the average probability of strikes among two-year

(i.e., 19-32 month) contracts is approximately 10 percent. The expected

number of disputes per year on a two-year bargaining cycle is therefore

.05. The estimates in Table 4 suggest that the probabilities of strikes

in one— and three-year bargaining cycles are 4 and 16 percent, respec-

tively. These probabilities imply .04 and .053 expected disputes per

year, bargaining annually and triennially. Mean strike duration

following a one-year contract is slightly shorter than mean strike dura-

tion following two- or three—year contracts: 32.5 versus 45.6 and 46.8

days, respectively.

    'The models incorporate the corrections for under—reporting of

strikes prior to 1970 discussed in the preceding section.
    30/The
    —             . .                                .      .
           t—statistics and the overall goodness—of—fit statistic are

not corrected for the estimation of the industry and year effects in the

logit model. A suitable correction is suggested by Heckman (1984) (see

also Moore (1977). The impact of this correction on the individual t-

statistics in column (3) of Table 5 is trivial. The overall goodness—
                                       -36-


of—fit statistic, however, increases to 83.55 (with a probability value

of .04) when this correction is applied. The derivation of the

corrected and uncorrected goodness—of-fit statistics is described in an

earlier version of this paper (Card (1986)).

             eight bargaining pairs with the "000011" strike history are

apparently unrelated (i.e., are drawn from different industries and dif-

ferent time periods).

            similar model was proposed by Card and Sullivan (1987) as a

description of individual employment probabilities.

     "Ignoring under-reporting, the probability that the 1tti pair

has a sequence of strike indicators (y1 , y2        ,...   y6)   ,   conditional   on

the strike outcome in the pre-sample negotiation, is


        J               y                     l-y
                   ()       (1    pit (ak))
       k=lt

where pt(G) is the probability of a dispute conditional on the indi-

vidual effect, a1 2 ••           aj   are the mass—points of the distribution

function of a1 , and             are the associated probability weights. In

principle, conditioning the estimation on the distribution of the pre—

sample strike outcomes introduces a bias in the estimation of the para-

meters -- see Heckman (1981). In other work using strike outcomes for

Canadian contracts (Card (1987)), however, I have experimented with

alternative methods of handling the initial conditions and found rela-

tively small differences between them.

              likelihood of observed strike outcomes is corrected for 20

percent random under—reporting of strikes prior to 1970. No correction
                                     —37—


is made for the effect of under—reporting on the distribution of the

lagged strike outcome indicators.

     "The four groups are a low strike—probability group (apparel,
lumber and wood), a moderate strike-probability group (primary metals,

fabricated metals, electrical machinery, transportation equipment), a

high strike—probability group (rubber, non-electrical machinery), and a

base group (all other industries).

     -The assumption of independence between            y and z1 is not
particularly restrictive if the distribution of the individual effects

    and          is flexible.


     VIn the event of a short strike in (t—l)            ,
                                                                     = 1   and

Zit_l = 0   ,   so   iogit(p) is increased by 81 .           In   the event of a long

strike in t—l              and z1_1 =   1   ,   so   logit(p) is increased by



     'For example, the R2 in a regression equation for log strike

duration that includes two-digit industry effects and time variables Is

about 20 percent. The industry effects in such an equation are jointly

significant at only about the 10 percent level.

     "The number of consecutive strikes in the data set Is relatively

low: 58 (distributed among 42 bargaining pairs).

    "This is consistent with results from a simple cross-sectional

logit model of short and long strike durations. In such a model, none

of the industry effects are individually significant, and the probabi-

lity value of the test for the hypothesis that the Industry effects are
                                   -38—


jointly equal to zero is .12.

    4-1"Some additional evidence on the weak relation between lagged

strike outcomes and strike durations is provided by the pattern of

average strike durations by the number of strikes in six negotiations.

These average durations are 52 days for one strike; 40 days for two

strikes; 45 days for three strikes; 56 days for four strikes; and 16

days for six strikes.

    'suppose for example that the occurrence of a strike is governed

by a latent variable t =        + ut   ,   where    w represents the state

variable and Ut represents an error term. Suppose further that Wt

follows a first—order process wt = Wt_l       —
                                                   ct_l   +
                                                              vt   ,   where       Ct

measures the effect of a dispute on the state variable and Vt is

another error term. Finally, suppose that costs are measured by strike

length and that strike duration is a random variable equal to 1 with

probability q and k (0 < k < 1) with probability 1 - q                         .     Under

suitable assumptions this model generates a steady—state transition

matrix in which lagged short strikes increase the probability of future

strikes and lagged long strikes reduce the probability of future

strikes.

     4'This literature is reviewed by Kennan (1986), pp. 1113—1114.

     For example, H. Moore (1911, p. 119) presents contingency tables

of the union success rate against strike duration for disputes in

Germany (from 1899 to 1905) and France (from 1890 to 1905). Both tables

show declining union success rates with the length of the strike.

           have also found a similar pattern of state dependence among

strike outcomes for a sample of over 2,200 collective bargaining agreements

from Canada (Card 1987).
                                   -39--



                                References



Abbott, Michael. "Specification Tests of Quarterly Econometric Models

     of Aggregate Strike Frequency in Canada." In R. Ehrenberg, ed.

     Research in Labor Economics 6 (1984): 177-250.

Ashenfelter, Orley and George Johnson. "Bargaining Theory, Trade Unions

     and Industrial Strike Activity." American Economic Review 59

     (March 1969): 35—49.

Bureau of National Affairs. Collective Bargaining and Negotiations

     Contract Clause Finder, Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National

     Affairs, 1986.

Card, David. "Longitudinal Analysis of Strike Activity." Working

     Paper Number 213. Princeton, NJ: Industrial Relations Section,

     Princeton University, August 1986.

__________    "An Empirical Study of Strikes and Wages." Working Paper

     Number 221, Princeton, NJ: Industrial Relations Section,

     Princeton University, May 1987.

___________ and Daniel Sullivan. "Measuring the Effect of Subsidized

     Training Programs on Movements In and Out of Employment." Working

     Paper Number 2173. Cambridge, MA: The National Bureau of Economic

     Research, February 1987.

Chamberlain. Gary. "Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data."

     Review of Economic Studies 47 (January 1980): 225-238.
                                       —40-


Farber, Henry S. "Bargaining Theory, Wage Outcomes, and the Occurence

     of Strikes: An Econometric Analysis." American Economic Review 68

     (June 1978): 261—71

Flaherty, Sean. "Contract Status and the Economic Determinants of

     Strike Activity." Industrial Relations 22 (Winter 1983): 20—33.

Gramm, Cynthia. "The Determinants of Strike Incidence and Severity."

     Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39 (April 1986): 361-76.

____________    "New Measures of the Propensity to Strike During Contract

     Negotiations, 1971-1980. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 40

     (April 1987): 406—417.

Guunderson, Morley, John Kervin and Frank Reid. "Logit Estimates of

     Strike Incidence from Canadian Contract Data." Journal of Labor

     Economics 4 (April 1986): 257—76.

Harrison, Alan and Mark Stewart. "Conditional Strike—Settlement

     Probabilities and the Cost of a Strike." Unpublished manuscript.

     Hamilton, Ontario: McMaster University, May 1986.

Heckman, James. "The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of

     Initial Conditions in Estimating a Discrete—Time-Discrete Data

     Stochastic Process." In C. Manski and D. McFadden, eds.

     Structural Analysis of Discrete Data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

     1981.

_____________    "The    X2 Goodness—of—Fit Statistic for Models with

     Parameters Estimated from Microdata." Econometrica 52 (November

     1984): 1543—47.

Kaufman, Bruce. "The Determinants of Strikes in the United States,
                                    —41—



     1900—1977."    Industrial and Labor Relations Review 5 (October

     1982): 473-90.

Kennan, John. "Pareto Optimality and the Economics of Strike Duration."

     Journal of Labor Research 1 (Spring 1980): 77-94.

____________       "The Duration of Contract Disputes In U.S. Manufacturing."

     Journal of Econometrics 28 (AprIl 1985): 5—28.

____________       "The Economics of Strikes." In Orley Ashenfelter and

     Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics., Amsterdam:

     North Holland, 1986.

Mauro, Martin. "Strikes as a Result of Imperfect Information."

     Industrial and Labor Relations Review 35 (July 1982): 522-538.

McConnell, Sheena. "Cyclical Fluctuations in Strike Activity."

     Unpublished manuscript. Princeton, NJ: Industrial Relations

     Section, Princeton University, October 1986.

Meltzer, Bernard. Labor Law: Cases, Materials, and Problems (Second

     Edition). Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1977.

Moore, David. "Generalized Inverses, Wald's Method and the

     Construction of Chi-Squared Tests of Fit." Journal of the

     American Statistical Society 72 (March 1977): 131—137.

Moore, Henry L. Laws of Wages. New York: Macmillan, 1911.

Pencavel, John. "An Investigation into Industrial Strike Activity in

     Britain." Economica 37 (August 1970): 239-56.

Reder, Melvin and George Neumann. "Conflict and Contract: The Case of

     Strikes." Journal of Political Economy 88 (October 1980):

     867—886.
                                —42-


Schnell, John and Cynthia Gramm. "Learning by Striking: Estimate of

     the Teatotaler Effect." Journal of Labor Economics 5 (April 1987):

     221—241.

Siebert, W. Stanley and John Addison. "Are Strikes Accidental?"

     Economic Journal 91 (June 1981): 389—404.

Tracy, Joseph. "An Investigation into the Determinants of U.S. Strike

     Activity." American Economic Review 76 (June 1986): 423—36.

_____________   "An Empirical Test of an Asymmetric Information Model of

     Strikes." Journal of Labor Economics 5 (April 1987): 149-173.

Vroman, Wayne. "Union Contracts and Money Wage Changes in U.S.

     Manufacturing Industries." Quarterly Journal of Economics

     (November 1982): 571—94.

Vroman, Susan. "Strike Activity and Unexpected Inflation." Unpublished

     manuscript. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University, June 1986.

White, Halbert. "A Heteroskedasticity-ConsiStent Covariance Matrix

     Estimator and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity." Econometrica

     48 (May 1980): 817—38.

Yoder, Dale. "Seasonality in Strikes." Journal of the American

     Statistical Association 23 (December 1938): 687-693.
                                                     Figure 1
                       ANNUAL STRIKE PROBABILITIES  ACTUAL AND ADJUSTED



    :30




    20


F
9
0
8
8
r
L
r

T
I
                                1'




     10
                           If




      0
                                                        1969      1971    1973      1.975   1977   1979
          1.961.    1963             1965   1.967

                                                             TEAR

                   5T9I1E FRO6A8LLTE5                   p pa ACTUAL              e—e-4 ADJUSTED
                                                                    Table 1

                                                  Strike Characteristics By Industry



                                           All  Avitabtt Contracts                     Last 6 Cantricts tar Each Pair
                             Nu.ber                 5triki      Strike              Strike Probability (Percent)             Strike
          Industry           Pairs                         y   Diration                                                     Duration
                                      Contracts
                                                 Prab't
                                                   ercint)      (Days)    Overall   1959—U    1965—69    970—74    975—79    (Dp,)

                                                     8.3         31.0       10.3      0.0       17.2      12.0      6.9       34.2
 1. Food and 8svesaes         20         205


                              3          24          12.5       27.0        16.7      0.0       75.0       0.0      0.0       27.0
2. Tobacco


 3. Textile      Mills        13         185         4.9         20.2        7.7      0.0       11.1      15.8       2.6      13.8



                              13         118         1.7         7.0         2.6      0.0        3.9       4.6      0.0        7.0
4. Apparel


 5. Luiber and                            88         a.a         79.7        3.7      0.0        5.6       5.9       0.0      59.0



6.    Furniture               S           41        14.6         15.3       20.0      0.0       14.3      50.0      0.0       15.3



 7. Paper                     19         22?         6.1         62.3        7.9      0.0       6.1        4.7      15.1      58.8


8.    Printing                 6          48         8.3         36.3        8.3      0.0       15.4       0.0      12.5      43.0

 9.   Che.ica!s               21         242        10.3         56.9       14.3      0.0       20.0      19.6       7.5      U.4

10. Petrleu.                   4          56        10.7         17.3        0.0      0.0        0.0       0.0       0.0



11. Rubber                     7          73        27.4         56.6       40.5     16.7       35.7      58.3      40.0      59.8


12. Leather                    5          45         0.0          ———        0.0      0.0        0.0       0.0       0.0

13.   Glass                   22         215         8.8         42.7       12.1      0.0       24.6       7.5       9.4      40.7

14. Priuary Metals            17         165        19.4         89.3       18.6     10.0       24.1      18.8      19.1      92.3


15.   Fabricated    Metals    14         131        19.9         76.5       25.0     29.4       28.6      28.0      14.3      40.9



14.   Machinvy                14         126        29.8         33.1       38.1     21.4       40.0      62.9      41.2      25.3
       (nan—electrical)
17. Electrical                24         203        16.8         U.?        20.8      9.7       22.5      23.9      25.9      48.6
       Machi ooi'

15. Trp,port.tisn             24         200        20.5         42.3       24.3     14.3       32.5      16.3      33.3      42.1
      tquipuent

19.   Instru.ents              4          54         3.7         12.5        8.3      0.0       20.0       8.3       0.0      12.5


20.   Mlscellaneeui            2          27         0.0          —          0.0      0.0        0.0       0.0       0.0
        Menutactur       n
21. Tranipertatin              7          70        18.5         32.1       23.4     33.3       16.7      12.5      45.5      35.7
        and   Utilities

22. All industries           253        2543        12.6         49.4       16.1     10.0       20.8      16.3      13.9      45.7



Mote:         Data source ii described in text. Strikes include strikes tro. Current                               Wage
               Dev.lop.ents and strikes added frog McConnell-Tracy strike listings.
                        Table 2

    Empirical Hazard Rate of Strike Settlement'


            Number of     Fraction      1-Ratio for
  Week       Ongoing      Settled     Test of Constant
             Strikes      in Week         Hazardb/

    1         244         0.127          -0.50
    2         213         0.197           2.50
    3         171         0.181           1.64
    4         140         0.136          —0.09
                                  •

    5         121         0.165           0.87
    6         101         0.069          -2.00
    7          94         0.117          —0.59
    8          83         0.169           0.81
    9          69         0.159           0.52
   10          58         0.086          -1.14
   11          53         0.189           1.07
   12          43         0.070          —1.30
   13          40         0.275           2.51
   14          29         0.069          —1.08
   15          27         0.111          —0.41
   16          24         0.042          —1.37
   17          23         0.130          —0.11
   18          20         0.200           0.80
   19          16         0.125          —0.15
   20          14         0.143           0.05



Notes: 1Calculated from 244 strikes from last six
          contracts for each bargaining pair. After
          20 weeks there were 12 strikes in progress.

         T—ratio for the hypothesis that the weekly
           hazard rate is equal to the average hazard
           rate over the first 20 weeks (13.8 percent).
           The chi-squared test that all 20 hazard
           rates are equal is 29.58 with a marginal
          significance level of 5.8 percent.
                                                  Table 3

                                   Seasonal Effects on Strike Incidence



                                      Actual       Ordinary Logitb/'      Conditional  First Differenced
                                      Strike    No Industry Industry        Logit/     Linear Probability
                        Percent
                                                             and Year        with            with
                          of        Probability or Year
                                                 Effects     Effects      Year Effects   Year Effects4'
                       Contracts     (Percent)
                                                    (3)         (4)            (5)             (6)
                          (1)           (2)

                                       9.2        0.0          0.0            0.0             0.0
January                   8.5
                                                   (———)       (———)          (———)           (———)

                                                    .79        1.09            .09             .15
February                  5.5          18.1
                                                   (.36)       (.73)          (.63)           (.98)

                                                   1.24        1.85            .65             .18
March                     6.9          24.8
                                                   (.32)       (.50)          (.61)          (1.02)

                                        8.7        -.03        —.02           —.39            -.71
April                     7.6
                                                   (.04)       (.14)          (.67)           (.88)

                                        7.7        -.19        —.01           —.00            —.75
May                      10.3
                                                   (.36)       (.57)          (.67)           (.84)


                                       11.8         .30         .70            .65             .57
June                     15.6
                                                   (.30)       (.50)          (.61)           (.71)

                         13.4          21.7        1.07        1.08           1.07            1.54
July
                                                   (.28)       (.39)          (.58)           (.77)

                                       22.4        1.10        1.07           2.03            1.40
August                    5.6
                                                   (.34)       (.37)           (.73)           (.90)


                          7.9          15.0         .61         .48           1.08            1.05
September
                                                   (.34)       (.42)           (.66)           (.86)

                                       22.2        1.10          .95            .76             .24
October                  11.0
                                                   (.29)       (.35)           (.57)           (.92)

                                       26.0        1.30        1.51            1.09             .91
November                  6.3
                                                   (.33)       (.45)           (.59)           (.99)

                          3.5           1.9       -1.65       -1.53            -.83            -.16
December
                                                  (1.02)       (.82)          (1.18)           (.84)


Exclusion Test!"           ——-          ---       59.52       53.62           22.80          21.97
                                                   (.00)       (.00)           (.02)           (.02)
 (probability value)


Notes:      !"Based on last six contracts for each bargaining pair. Sample size is 1518.

            "Estimated month effects from logit regression with and without controls for two—digit
              industry and time periods.

            "Estimated month effects fro• conditional logit regression with approximate correction for
              unreported strikes prior to 1970. See text.

            "Normalized estimated month effects from first—differenced linear probability model.
              Standard errors and exclusion test statistic are corrected for heteroskedasticitY. The
              estimates represent the actual estimates multiplied by 8, and are directly comparable with
              the estimates obtained from the logit specifications.

            "Likelihood ratio test for exclusion of month effects.    The test statistic has 11 degrees
              of freedom. For the linear probability model, the test statistic is a Wald test that the
              month effects are all zero.
                                               Table   4
                          Effects of Reopener Status and Previous
                           Contract Duration on Strike Incidence
                                (standard errors in parenthesis)
                         Ordinary Logit                                First-Differenced
                                                   Conditional Logit        Linear
                      No Industry Industry
                                                         with
                       or Year     and Year                            Probability with
                                                     Year Effects        Year Effects__—
                       Effects     Effects
1.   Reopener          —1.68         —1.70                 -1.43            —.69
                        (.73)         (.92)                 (.76)           (.28)
2.   Previous            .052          .043                  .043            .039
     Contract           (.009         (.010)                (.013)          (.012)
     Duration
     (Months)
Note:   Models with year effects include a four-step time function.     See notes to Table   3.
                                        Table 5

                Actual and Predicted Strike Histories:
                   Last   Six rnn1,.rts fny eath Pair
                                                      Predicted Number
                          Actual                  (absolute t_statistics)L'
      Strike
                          Number              Ordinary Logit
      History             Pairs               with Industry         Conditional
                                                 Effects               Logit

No Strik
                                                                    118                -—
1. 000000                  118                 105.8 (3.07)                   (



ke
2.    100000                  12                10.7         .43     8.1 (1.49)
3.    010000                   8                13.3 (1.56)          9.9 ( .66)
4.    001000                  17                17.3    ( .09)      15.6 (             .42)
5.    000100                   9                13.9    (1.41)      10.8 (             .59)
6.    000010                   9                12.0    ( .95)      10.20 (            .41)
7.    000001                  ii                13.4    ( .81)      11.49 (            .41)
                                                                    66.0 (             -—
8.    Total 6 cases           66                80.7    (2.20)

2 Strikes
 9.   110000                   1                 2.17 (.82)          1.6      (        .49)
10.   011000                   5                 3.6 ( .80)          3.1 (1.11)
11.   001100                   3                 4.2 ( .61)          4.3    .66)
                                                                              (


12.   000110                   2                 2.9 ( .53)          2.6 ( .39)
13.   000011                   8                 2.7 (3.34)          2.4 (3.69)
14.   101000                   2                 2.8 ( .48)          2.2 ( .11)
15.   010100                   1                 2.8 (1.08)          2.3 ( .88)
16.   001010                   2                 3.5 ( .84)          3.4 ( .81)
17.   000101                   2                 3.2 ( .71)          3.0       (       .60)
18.   100100                   3                 2.2   .52)
                                                         (           1.7 (1.04)
19.   010010                   1                 2.5 ( .95)          2.0       (       .75)
20.   001001                   4                 4.0 ( .02)          3.9       (       .03)
21.   100010                   0                 2.0    (1.43)       1.5 (1.23)
22.   010001                   2                 2.8    ( .47)       2.3 ( .21)
23.    100001                  2                 2.2    ( .15)       1.6 ( .28)
                                                                                       ——
24. Total 15 cases            38                43.4    (1.06)       38        (



3   Strikes
                                                                                       ——
25.    Total 20 cases         24                 17.1 (2.06)         24           (



4   Strikes
                                                                                       ——
26.    Total 15 cases          6                  5.0    (   .49)     6           (

5   Strikes
                                                                                        ——
27.     Total 6 cases              0               .9 (1.05)              0        (



6 Strikes
                                                                                        ——
                                                   .1     (3.21)          1        (
28. 111111                         1.




29. Goodness—of—f it for table                          74.47                 49.35
     uncorrected for parameter                                                     (.75)
        estimation"                       .



        (probability value)


Notes: "Predicted number represents the expected number of
          pairs with a given history, conditional on the esti-
          mated parameters. The number in parentheses repre-
          sents the absolute t—statistic associated with the
          test that the predicted and actual number of pairs are
          equal. T-statistics are not corrected for parameter
                estimation.

            "Goodness-of-fit statistic for the overall table (64
              elements) treating the estimated parameters as known
                constants.
                                                         Table 6

                    Probabiiityof      Strikes      Conditional on Preceding Strike Outcome




                                                             Previous Strike Outcome     -




                               No           1-7 Day      8-14 Day   15-28 Day    29-42 Day    43 Day or Longer
                     _____   Strike         Strike        Strike      Strike      Strike           Strike ______


1.   Probability               13.9           40.0         47.5         24.4           18.5        19.0
      of Strike

2.   Mean Strike Duration      47.3           41.2         37.0         47.5           33.4        39.8


3.   Number of Contracts      1291             35           40           41             27          84
     (percent of sample)     (85.05)         (2.31)       (2.64)       (2.70)      (1.78)         (5.53)


Note:    Sample cross--tabulation     of   strike outcomes by previous strike outcome.
                                                   Table 7
             Estimates of the Effect of Preceding Strike Activity on Strike Probabilities:
                                         Random Effects Logit   Model'
                                   (standard errors in parentheses)
                                    No                          Lagged Strike Effect               ____
                                  Lagged         One        Two        Three      Three        Two
                                  Strike       Duration   Duration    Duration   Duration    Duration
                                  Effect        Class     Classes     Classes    Classes     Classes'
                                   (1)                        (3)__L4i_.___(1L_
Duration of Previous Strike:
1.   0—7 day strike                0.0           .13          1.02        .84       1.02         .94
                                  (———)         (.23)         (.33)      (.47)      (.33)       (.33)
2.   8—14 day strike               0.0           .13          1.02       1.18       1.02         .94
                                                (---)         (---)      (.46)      (----)      (---)
                                                                                                - .82
3.   15-60 day strike              0.0           .13         —.40        —.41       —.47
                                                (——-)         (.28)      (.29)      (.33)       (.39)
4.   61 day or longer strike       0.0           .13          -.40       —.41       -.28        -.82
                                  N---)         (---)         (—--)      N--)       (.42)       (----)
5.   Log Likelihood             —637.21      —637.06      -629.79     -629.65    —629.71     -598.26
6.   Goodness-of—fit for          60.07        62.77         59.76      58.31      59.28       56.93
     Strike Outcome Table          (.58)        (.48)         (.59)      (.64)      (.61)       (.72)
     (probability value)
Notes:   "A1l models include a four-step time function and a two-point distribution of bargaining--
           pair effects.
         "Mode1 includes four grouped industry effects.
         'Goodness—of-fit to 64—element table of strike incidence outcomes.        The statistic does
           not account for estimation of the parameters in the model.
                                      Table 8
             Trinomial Outcome Model of Strike Probability and Duration
                           (standard errors in parentheses)


                                                Random Effects Logit     Mode1
                                                                             2 Mass
                                     2 Mass       3 Mass       3 Mass      Points and
                                     Points       Points       Points      4 Industry
                                                                            Effectsb/

Effect of Previous Strike on
  Strike Probability:

1. 0—14 day strike                     1.08        1.04         1.11          1.01
                                       (.36)       (.34)         (.35)        (.35)

2.   15 day or longer strike           —.44        —.51         —.49          —.69
                                       (.29)       (.29)         (.29)        (.30)

Effect of Previous Strike on
  Probability of Long Strike:

3. 0—14 day strike                      .13         .17           .00            .00
                                       (.46)       (.48)         (———)        (—.——)




4.   15 day or longer strike            .44         .37           .00            .00
                                       (.58)       (.57)         (———)        (———)

5. Relative time—effect on             1.49        1.53          1.60         1.45
    probability of long strike         (.58)       (.57)         (.61)        (.53)

6. Log Likelihood                   -771.34     -771.03       -771.34      —749.92

7. Goodness—of-fit for                56.17       55.68         55.21        55.85
    strike outcome table/
     (probability value)


Notes: 'A1l models include a four-step time function normalized to have a unit
          effect on the probability of a strike. The coefficient in row 5 gives the
          relative effect of this time function on the probability of a strike
          longer than 14 days.

         'Model includes four grouped industry effects in probability of strike and
           probability of long strike equations. The industry effects are restricted
           to enter proportionately in the two equations. The estimated relative
           effect of the industry variables in the duration equation is .17 (with a
           standard error of .18).

         Goodness-of—fit to 64 element table of strike incidence outcomes. The
           statistic does not account for estimation of the parameters in the model.
                                       Appendix Table 1

              Strike Characteristics by Year: Sample of Six Contracts for Each Pair


                                    Strike Probability (Percejjj   Average   Percent of
                        Number
                                                  Adusted for       Strike     Strikes
       Year               of
                                     Unadjusted    Industry.       Duration Longer than
                       Contracts                          .

                                                  Composition
                                                              a/     Days     2 Weeks

1960 and earlier          10            30.0          23.2           52.7        100.0

1961                      26            15.4           6.8           11.0        25.0

1962                      42             7.1           2.6           21.0        33.3

1963                      40             2.5           0.9           35.0       100.0

1964                      71            11.3           7.6           20.1        50.0

1965                      86            18.6          17.0           20.5        43.8

1966                      65            13.9          15.9           23.0        55.5

1967                      92            26.1          24.5           79.3        75.0

1968                      92            25;0          23.7          47.0         86.9

1969                      79            17.7          19.3          38.4         78.7

1970                      92            23.9          23.6          64.1         86.4

1971                     111            12.6          11.9          38.9         71.4

1972                      68            11.8          14.9          23.6         25.0

1973                     104            13.5          14.0          26.6         57.1

1974                     135            18.5          19.3          31.7         64.0

1975                      81             8.6          11.9          68.4         57.1

1976                      95            17.9          18.6          52.7         76.5

1977                     126            15.1          15.3          63.2        100.0

1978                      66            16.7          19.8          50.0         72.0

1979                      37             5.4           8.3          57.5         50.0


Note: 'Estimated year effects from linear probability model that also includes two-
         digit industry effects.
