                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE ROLE OF INFORMATION AND CASH TRANSFERS ON EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT:
                            EVIDENCE FROM NEPAL

                                           Michael Levere
                                          Gayatri Acharya
                                         Prashant Bharadwaj

                                         Working Paper 22640
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w22640


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 2016




    Thanks to Karthik Muralidharan, Jasmine Rajbhandary, Tara Shrestha, Kanchan Tamang, Bishnu
    Thapa, Venkatesh Sundararaman, and Karishma Wasti. This project would not have been
    possible without support from the Government of Nepal's Poverty Alleviation Fund and the
    Ministry of Local Development and Federal Affairs. We are grateful for funding from the
    Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund (SIEF). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
    and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or of the
    World Bank Group.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
    peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
    official NBER publications.

    © 2016 by Michael Levere, Gayatri Acharya, and Prashant Bharadwaj. All rights reserved. Short
    sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
    provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Information and Cash Transfers on Early Childhood Development: Evidence
from Nepal
Michael Levere, Gayatri Acharya, and Prashant Bharadwaj
NBER Working Paper No. 22640
September 2016
JEL No. I15

                                         ABSTRACT

While substantial progress has been made in combating malnutrition at a global level, chronic
maternal and child malnutrition remains a serious problem in many parts of the developing world.
In this paper, using a randomized control trial design in Nepal, we evaluate a program that
provided information on best practices regarding child care and cash to families in extremely
poor areas with pregnant mothers and/or children below the age of 2. We find significant and
sizable impacts of the information plus cash intervention on maternal knowledge, behavior, child
development, and nutrition. The size of these impacts along some measures of knowledge and
development are significantly different from the information only intervention group suggesting a
potential role for providing a short term cash safety net along with information to tackle the
problem of malnutrition.


Michael Levere                                   Prashant Bharadwaj
Mathematica Policy Research                      Department of Economics
P.O. Box 2393                                    University of California, San Diego
Princeton, NJ 08543-2393                         9500 Gilman Drive #0508
mlevere@mathematica-mpr.com                      La Jolla, CA 92093
                                                 and NBER
Gayatri Acharya                                  prbharadwaj@ucsd.edu
The World Bank Group
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
gacharya@worldbank.org
1   Introduction

Health and human capital are important drivers of economic growth, and research
from multiple disciplines has shown that health during infancy is critical in deter-
mining how children develop throughout their lives. Malnutrition is a key obstacle
to achieving appropriate levels of early childhood development. While substantial
progress has been made in combating malnutrition at a global level, chronic ma-
ternal and child malnutrition remains a serious problem in parts of the developing
world. Even within developing countries, the rural poor disproportionately bear
the burden of child malnutrition (World Development Report 2008). A key task for
researchers and policy makers alike is to examine the reasons behind malnutrition
in rural areas.

Two important causes of malnutrition are a lack of information and a lack of in-
come. Unlike other childhood diseases, malnutrition is a “silent killer” - symptoms
are not obvious until it is often too late to reverse stunting or its other deleteri-
ous consequences (UNICEF 2011). Therefore, providing parents and/or pregnant
mothers information on best practices regarding nutrition and maternal health is-
sues can lead to significant reductions in malnutrition. The second relevant cause
is a lack of income. Even if parents know the right ways to care for a child, they
might lack the resources to engage in these best practices. For example, young
children need diets that are higher in nutritional content than adult diets (Dewey,
2013). However, income constraints might prevent the parents from engaging in
these activities. In this paper, we evaluate a program that provided information
on best practices regarding child care and cash to families in extremely poor areas
with pregnant mothers and/or children below the age of 2.

The context of our study is Nepal, where maternal and child malnutrition re-
mains a serious problem. Nepal has one of the highest malnutrition, stunting
and wasting rates for children under the age of 5. According to the Nepal Living
Standard Survey 2010/11, 46.7 percent of children under the age of 5 are stunted,
15.1 percent are wasted, and 36.3 percent are underweight. Moreover, pregnant
mothers have sub-optimal weight gain during pregnancy. The consequences are
significant and long-term, ranging from increased neonatal mortality and mor-
bidity to irreversible adverse physical and cognitive outcomes that harm health,
productivity and economic growth (Pelletier, Frongillo Jr, Schroeder, and Habicht,
1995; Strupp and Levitsky, 1995; Alderman, Hoddinott, and Kinsey, 2006). The
economic costs of malnutrition are very high – an estimated 2-3 percent of GDP


                                         2
(US$250 to US$375 million) is lost every year in Nepal due to vitamin and mineral
deficiencies alone (USAID 2014). While Nepal has made considerable progress in
reducing maternal and child mortality, it has a long way to go in tackling mal-
nutrition. Promotional campaigns aimed to raise awareness on the importance
of balanced diet, proper sanitation and hygiene, breastfeeding, and other health
matters have only produced mixed results, especially in the context of food inse-
cure populations (Bhutta et al., 2008). While the lack of income may be a reason
for households’ inability to address malnutrition, it is unclear whether it is the
lack of money or the behavior associated with cultural and social practices that
have helped perpetuate malnutrition for so long in Nepal.

Using a randomized control trial design in rural areas in Nepal, we evaluate the
effects of two different treatments on child development outcomes. One treatment
arm was provided information on best practices regarding nutrition and child
care for children below the age of two, and a second treatment arm received
the same information and in addition, a conditional cash transfer. To receive
the cash transfer, a woman simply had to attend the regular group meeting. A
transfer of NPR 700 (USD 7) per month, equivalent to 8-20% of median monthly
household income, was given over a period of five months. Given the short time
frame of the cash treatment and the simple conditionality, this cash transfer can
be viewed as a short term safety net. Information sessions started earlier and
took place for nine months, and were identical across the treatment arms with
and without a cash transfer. Importantly, our work utilized existing health and
financial infrastructures (such as community health volunteers and group meetings
organized by the Nepal Poverty Alleviation Fund) allowing for overall lower costs,
easier replication, and potential scale up.

We find significant and sizable impacts on maternal knowledge regarding best
practices of childcare in our treatment groups. Our information plus cash treat-
ment group, for example, saw increases of nearly 1 standard deviation in maternal
knowledge relative to the control group; knowledge in the information only group
also significantly increased relative to the control, but by significantly less than
the information plus cash group (about half the size).

Given improvements in knowledge, we then look to see if women are changing
behaviors and incorporating the new knowledge into their daily lives. Households
in the information and cash treatment group consumed approximately 100 more
calories per person per day. They also improved various maternal behaviors such
as breast feeding, vitamin A take up, prenatal check ups, etc. The effects on

                                         3
behavioral changes observed in the information only group were not significantly
different even though their knowledge gains were half as large. This is surprising
since one might have expected that cash would be more important in affecting
behavior, such as increased regular feeding for young children, than in building
new knowledge.

Given that women did implement behavioral changes, we then study child out-
comes to see if the improvements in behaviors are passed on to children. In the
information plus cash group we find that child cognitive development, as measured
by the Ages and Stages Questionnaire, improves by 0.1 SD. This is statistically
significant and different from the essentially zero improvement in the information
only group. While we find no increases in child anthropometrics in the treatment
groups, we find significant anthropometric improvements among the older siblings
of the treated children (these siblings were between 25-36 months at baseline) in
the information plus cash intervention group. Hence, the intervention, and es-
pecially the provision of cash as a short term safety net, seems to have resulted
in a marked improvement in maternal knowledge about best practices, maternal
behaviors, child development, and nutrition.

This paper is related to existing research in epidemiology and economics focusing
on the role of information campaigns and cash transfers to improve health out-
comes (see Bhutta et al. (2013) for a review on interventions related to maternal
undernutrition and Lagarde, Haines, and Palmer (2007) and Fiszbein, Schady, and
Ferreira (2009) for a review on conditional cash transfers and take up of health
interventions). Our results are a robust contribution to the literature specifically
focusing the connection between social safety nets, nutrition, and early childhood
development, which has shown inconclusive links (Ruel, Alderman, and Maternal
and Child Nutrition Study Group, 2013). We also link our findings with the vast
literature in medicine and economics which has identified the in utero phase and
the first 2 years of life as the most critical in terms of determining future outcomes
related to human capital (see Almond and Currie (2011) for a review). Therefore,
measures aimed at tackling nutritional deficiencies in children must necessarily
focus on this “critical window of opportunity” (popularly referred to as the first
1000 days of life). Our paper builds on this literature by focusing on the extent to
which a shorter-term intervention can significantly impact outcomes. Our study
is also notable for its focus on maternal knowledge improvements as a result of
the information campaigns. Finally, the population we study in Nepal are an ex-
tremely poor and marginalized subset of the overall population. Improving early


                                          4
childhood health among the poorest of the poor in a post conflict setting such as
Nepal is an important policy goal and this paper provides crucial evidence towards
this.

Our paper is most closely related to the recent work by Macours, Schady, and
Vakis (2012), who study the impacts of cash transfers to households in Nicaragua
under the Atencion a Crisis program on child development. They find that cash
transfers improve overall child development and that the positive effects of the
program last long after the transfers stop. This suggests that transfers can lead
to long lasting changes in behavior. Our paper can directly test the value added
of cash over and above information; we add an explicit information based inter-
vention to a basic cash component, while the Atencion a Crisis program seems to
have included a large number of programs as part of its treatment (including infor-
mational sessions). Importantly, we explicitly measure maternal knowledge about
best practices regarding child care; hence, a key contribution here is whether ma-
ternal knowledge improves as a result of the intervention and whether knowledge
is better put into practice when cash is additionally given.


2       Experimental Design

2.1     Randomization

The intervention was implemented in four food insecure districts in Nepal (4 of 75
districts nationwide), through a Community Challenge Fund (CCF) administered
by the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development.1 The CCF specifically
targeted high risk communities within Community Organizations (COs) supported
by the Nepal Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF). PAF is a program created by the
Government of Nepal that seeks to improve outcomes in poor, marginalized com-
munities by community driven development. COs supported by PAF are designed
to hold monthly meetings, facilitated by a local Social Mobilizer (SM), that bring
together people from the community. PAF supports community infrastructure and
income generating activities for poor and socially vulnerable households. These
four districts supported by the CCF cover Nepal’s diverse geography, from flat
lying agricultural based areas to more mountainous regions.2
    1
     Under a Social Safety Nets Project financed by the World Bank.
    2
     The four districts are Sarlahi, Rautahat, Sindhuli, and Ramechaap. Sarlahi and Rautahat
are in the terai, a low lying region that consists of marshy grasslands at the foot of the Himalayas.
Sindhuli and Ramechaap are in the hills.

                                                 5
The intervention consists of two treatment groups – one which receives informa-
tion only, and one which receives information plus cash – and a control group.
We implement a stratified randomized cluster design; within each district, we ran-
domly assign each Village Development Committee3 (VDC) to one of the three
treatments. Henceforth, we will refer to VDC’s as counties and COs as villages for
ease of interpretation.4 Within a county, we randomly select up to four villages
(out of about 30 villages within a county) to be in our sample. Every village
in a county receives the same treatment status. The total sample contains 184
counties across the four districts, with a total of 591 villages. Within a village,
every household where a woman was either pregnant or had a child aged 2 years
or under at baseline was surveyed and invited to participate in the intervention.
Figure 1 shows the administrative levels and where randomization occurred.

The county is chosen as the unit of randomization for two primary reasons. First,
randomizing at the village level would have led to potential for spillovers based
on geographic proximity; counties are large enough units geographically that it is
unlikely that a member of a village in a control county would be able to attend
or even know of the information treatment occurring in a village of a neighboring
county. Second, Social Mobilizers (SMs), who led the information sessions, are
responsible for all villages within a county, including non-experimental villages.
Asking an SM who had undergone training for the information arm of the inter-
vention to withhold that information in some of her meetings would have both
been unethical and led to a higher likelihood of contamination.5

Due to differential attrition in the first endline survey wave, discussed in greater
detail in section 3, our primary analysis will only focus on the 139 counties that
were part of the second endline survey wave, 45 of which are control counties, 48
of which are information only counties, and 46 of which are information plus cash
counties. Table 1 shows the baseline means for all families, with the number in
   3
       The VDC is an administrative unit below the district, and is similar to a municipality or
county.
     4
       VDC’s are quite similar to counties in that both are administrative regions at a larger
geographic entity than a village but a smaller geographic entity than a state. The CO and
village comparison is slightly less apt. A Community Organization is created by PAF and is the
specific group within a village that meets once a month. It is not itself an administrative unit.
However, for the purposes of interpretation, this distinction is not important.
     5
       Indeed, in discussions with local SM’s, some noted that they found the information so
helpful and valuable that they planned to implement it in all of the villages that they worked
in. This reflects the potential benefits from scaling the intervention, in that there are economies
of scale in having an SM implement the information in all 30 villages she is responsible for,
as opposed to the maximum of 4 that took place in the evaluation. It additionally shows the
importance of randomizing at the county level to minimize spillovers.

                                                6
parentheses indicating the p-value for a test of equality of means between that
experimental treatment arm and the control group. The groups are statistically
indistinguishable across all variables.6 The table also indicates the relative lack
of economic development among our sample – about one third of women never
attended school, almost half of newborn infants were fed something other than
breastmilk within three days of birth, and there are exceptionally high levels of
malnutrition as evidenced by high rates of underweight, stunting, and wasting.


2.2   The Intervention

We explore the importance of two primary barriers to achieving full nutrition –
lack of information and lack of money. In order to address the lack of information,
we added a module to the regular monthly PAF meeting focusing on maternal
health and infant nutrition issues, led by local SMs and Female Community Health
Volunteers (FCHVs), henceforth referred to collectively as local health workers.

To ensure that local health workers had appropriate levels of knowledge themselves
to lead the information sessions, each local health worker underwent a weeklong
training session that taught participants both the technical health issues and ef-
fective methods to engage local women and encourage behavioral change. The
training sessions both taught the material to health workers and provided the
opportunity for them to practice how they would lead their own meeting. All
materials, such as cards and handouts to be used in the actual meetings, were
provided and used during the training sessions.

Crucially, as part of the regular PAF meetings and basic health issues, local women
were already familiar with their local health workers who led the intervention.
Using the pre-existing social capital developed through local health workers builds
on the premise that existing capacity and institutional structures should be used
to deliver impacts efficiently without needing to create new pathways to deliver
the information and cash incentive treatments. Women were also presumably
more likely to internalize and act upon new knowledge acquired as part of the
intervention due to prior trusting relationships with local health workers.

The information session was added on to the end of the standard monthly meeting
that already took place as part of PAF. The content of the information sessions
promoted infant health and appropriate levels of development. This entailed some
   6
     Appendix table A1 shows the analogous baseline balance table, but for the remaining 45
counties that were interviewed in the first endline survey wave.

                                            7
focus on nutrition for mothers in utero and best practices during pregancy, as well
as practices with infants regarding breastfeeding, care when sick, and supplemental
feeding when older. In the meeting, the health worker used cards portraying the
issue at hand to lead a group wide discussion. For example, one card was a drawing
of a woman breastfeeding, where the discussion might then revolve around issues
related to frequency depending on age of the child, proper attachment, and ways
to try to solve issues such as not creating enough milk. The overall curriculum
was developed by Helen Keller International, based on World Health Organization
standards.

The cash transfer was set at NPR 700 per month (approximately $7 USD), which
represents about 8-20% of median monthly income in our four districts. This figure
is approximately in line with standard CCT’s (Fiszbein, Schady, and Ferreira,
2009). The transfer was distributed at the regular village meeting, meaning that
there was a conditionality on the cash transfer that can additionally be viewed as
an incentive to take up the information treatment. The transfer was “labeled” as
for use on the child. Given that the conditionality is on simply going to collect
the money, not on any type of behavior, as is standard in conditional cash transfer
programs, and that the transfer was only distributed for five months, this should
not be viewed as a standard CCT program. Rather, the cash provided a short
term safety net, spurring the critical question of whether a shorter, cost effective
intervention can have similar improvements in child outcomes as would a more
elaborate, prolonged CCT program.


3   Data

To estimate the impacts of the intervention, we gathered detailed data on eligible
households in each experimental village. A household was deemed eligible if there
was a woman present who was either pregnant or had a child younger than two
years old. Baseline data collection occurred in August-October 2013, prior to
the start of the intervention. In order to better measure effects of how the cash
was used, and because effects of cash have been shown to fade very quickly after
the cash is no longer being distributed (Baird, McIntosh, and Ozler, 2016), we
conducted a midline and endline survey. One fourth of counties were randomly
assigned to be surveyed at midline in August-September 2014, with the remaining
three-fourths surveyed at endline in November-December 2014.



                                         8
A total of 4,228 women and 3,695 children under two years old were surveyed
at baseline. Of these, 3,152 women and 2,783 children were in the counties sur-
veyed at endline, which will be primarily used in the analysis. After attrition and
trimming outliers, the primary sample consists of 2,338 women and 1,953 children.

The baseline, midline, and endline surveys were nearly identical, and each in-
cluded three separate modules to measure information on the household, the eli-
gible mother, and the eligible infant. The household component of the survey was
intended to be answered by either the household head or eligible mother, and mea-
sured a household’s composition, assets, annual income, monthly expenditures,
and daily food intake. The mother then answered questions about herself and her
children, which measured her knowledge of maternal health and nutritional best
practices and her actual behaviors with her youngest child while pregnant and
breastfeeding. The survey concluded with anthropometric measurements of the
child and a measure of cognitive development as measured by the Ages and Stages
Questionnaire (ASQ).

The ASQ is a screening mechanism that asks a mother if her child can perform
a specific task in one of five skill categories – communication, gross motor, fine
motor, problem solving, and personal social. These questions are age specific, and
can be asked of children ranging from 1-60 months old.7 Each of the five modules
consists of six yes or no questions. For example, one of the gross motor questions
for children ages 11-12 months old is “When you hold one hand just to balance
your baby, does she take several steps forward?” The raw score on each module
is simply the number of “yes” answers. For ease of interpretation, within each
age cohort, we standardize an individual’s score so that the total population has
a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1 on each module.

In the first survey wave, there was statistically significant differential attrition
across treatment groups, with only 8% of women interviewed at baseline in the
info plus cash group not found at endline, and 15% of the control group not found
at endline. These data were collected during the final two months of the inter-
vention to capture the contemporaneous effects of the cash transfer on household
expenditures, given that these effects might quickly fade after the cash transfer
stopped. However, conditionality of the cash transfer (needing to attend the meet-
ing) may have led some individuals from the cash group to be found who would
not have been in the absence of the cash transfer, which may bias results. Ap-
    7
      The age intervals of the questions are 2 months for children under 2 years old, 3 months for
children from 2-3 years old, and then 6 months for children over 3 years old.

                                                9
pendix Table A2 shows that these individuals who remain have significantly lower
monthly expenditures at baseline.

The primary analysis therefore focuses on the endline survey, conducted entirely
after the intervention ended in November-December 2014. Table 2 shows there
was no statistically significant difference in attrition, nor any selective attrition
by particular characteristics. The raw levels of attrition, similar to the control
group from the midline survey, indicate that the difference observed in the first
wave was driven by particularly low attrition in the cash group. This is consistent
with the conditionality of the cash transfer driving the low level of attrition. The
2,855 households interviewed at baseline that were interviewed again at endline
will make up our main sample.

At endline, we also interviewed new households with a newly pregnant woman
or infant born since baseline. This was done primarily to measure the spillovers
associated with the information intervention, given that these women would not
have been eligible for the cash intervention,8 but may have elected to participate
in the information sessions.

The baseline data indicate that the women and households in our sample are
particularly disadvantaged. More than 70% of women interviewed never attended
any type of formal school, and about the same number are illiterate. This is
somewhat different from data from the 2011 Nepal DHS, where only 44% of women
in rural areas who would be considered eligible (by nature of being pregnant or
having a child under 24 months old) never attended any school, and only 38%
are illiterate. PAF in general targets especially poor areas with little economic
development, and this likely explains the difference between women in our sample
and women in rural areas from the nationally representative DHS survey.

The level of knowledge among eligible women at baseline indicates that there is
substantial room for improvement from the information intervention. Only about
half of women indicated that a newborn infant should be fed breast milk exclu-
sively for exactly six months, and about half answered that a pregnant woman
should eat more food compared to before getting pregnant. Out of the total re-
spondents, 40% responded that a baby should be breastfed more than usual during
an episode of diarrhea, and 40% knew that a recently delivered woman should be-
gin vitamin A supplementation within 45 days of delivery. This relative lack of

    8
      Newly eligible women were not eligible for the cash transfer given that this may have led
to the perverse incentive to increase fertility.

                                              10
knowledge on several crucial health issues means that the information component
of the intervention has the potential for large gains, which could hopefully lead to
improved developmental outcomes.


4   Empirical Strategy

Because we randomly assign counties to each of the two treatment arms and con-
trol group, women and children should have comparable outcomes at baseline, and
should be expected to continue to have comparable outcomes in the absence of any
intervention. Table 1 showed the three groups were all statistically indistinguish-
able at baseline. Thus, any differences after the intervention can be attributed to
be the causal effect of the intervention itself. Such an estimating equation is given
by:
                     yi = α + β1 INFOi + β2 CASHi + γXi + εi

yi refers to an outcome for person i, where the individual could be the mother
or her child. The coefficient β1 captures the causal impact of the information
only treatment, and β2 captures the causal impact of the information plus cash
treatment. We also use an F-test to test for a statistical difference between the
information only and information plus cash groups.

We should not need to include any controls in Xi because the groups are compara-
ble at baseline. However, in order to improve precision of our estimates, we include
basic control variables that depend on if the outcome variable is for the house-
hold, mother, or child, such as household composition, age, mother’s schooling,
and child’s baseline height and weight. We estimate specifications both using no
controls and using basic controls, and the results are similar. Due to the increase
in precision, we report the specifications that include basic controls.

In estimating the effects on a child’s cognitive development, we add an enumerator
fixed effect. The answer to these screening questions reflects the mother’s subjec-
tive assessment of if a child can or cannot do something. The mother may be
more or less willing to answer these questions honestly depending on the rapport
established between the enumerator and the woman. Therefore, we use an enu-




                                         11
merator fixed effect so that any effects we find are entirely identified by variation
in treatment status for each individual enumerator.9

We also use item response theory to estimate an “ability” parameter for each of
the five cognitive screening modules as well as an overall ability parameter for
cognitive development. Some of the questions reveal more information about a
child’s true ability, and so item response theory is a way of giving additional
weight to questions that are particularly informative. However, the results using
these methods and using the standardized score on each module yield very similar
results, so for simplicity we report only the latter method.

Because we analyze many outcomes, it is likely that some will be statistically sig-
nificant purely by chance. In order to deal with multiple hypotheses, we construct
indices to aggregate many outcomes into a single index measure. For women’s
knowledge, we score a mother’s answers to 10 separate questions as right or wrong,
and then sum up the total score on this 10-question “test”. For all other areas, we
follow the methods in Anderson (2008) and used in Attanasio, Oppedisano, and
Vera-Hernández (2015).10 First, we pick variables that are closely related. For
example, we construct a behavior index that aggregates all of the measures of a
woman’s behavior during pregnancy and with a newborn infant into one measure.
We then normalize each of the variables to have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one, redefine all variables to have a positive interpretation,11 and then
take a weighted average of the normalized outcomes. The weights are taken from
the variance covariance matrix of all the outcomes considered, with higher weight
placed on items that contain unique information and lower weight placed on those
that are highly correlated with other variables in the index.




   9
      Given potential measurement issues with small infants, we also tested if including a similar
enumerator fixed effect changed our anthropometric results. However, it did not. We only report
the results on anthropometrics not including the enumerator fixed effect.
   10
      We also construct a knowledge index using the same ten variables using the Anderson (2008)
method that is used for other key outcomes. The results are similar. For ease of interpretation,
we report the simple sum of the knowledge index in the text and in tables, though the results
with the alternative index are available upon request.
   11
      For example, one question we ask is “In the first three days after delivery, was your child
given anything to drink other than breastmilk?”. We change this outcome to be counted as if a
child is fed only breastmilk within 3 days of delivery.

                                               12
5    Results

Table 3 presents results on the effectiveness of the information intervention. Col-
umn 5 shows an index of knowledge, which is the sum of the number of correct
answers to 10 questions regarding maternal health and nutritional issues. The
index is our preferred measure of knowledge because it deals with the fact that we
study many outcomes, and without any type of correction we will be likely to find
some statistically significant improvements purely by statistical chance. Levels of
knowledge in the control group are still low at endline, as there has been essentially
no change from the baseline level of the knowledge index. Women in both the in-
formation only and information plus cash group do significantly better at endline,
suggesting that the information sessions led to improved knowledge. Women in
the information plus cash intervention on average answer 1 additional question
correctly, which is an improvement of 17% above the control group mean, and
is also significantly higher than women in the information only group. Columns
1-3 in table 3 present three of the individual items which make up the index, and
column 4 shows the number of beneficial food items that a mother lists when given
an open ended question on what a child should eat. All are consistent with the
information intervention improving knowledge, particularly so for women in the
information plus cash group.

It is somewhat surprising that women who participate in the same session on infor-
mation experience different gains in knowledge. It is possible that women who also
receive cash are more invested in the sessions as they believe cash is important to
making some of the behavioral changes, such as appropriate supplemental feeding
for young children. Alternatively, it is possible that women in the information plus
cash group simply participate more in the information sessions, especially since
receiving the cash transfer was conditional on attending the meeting. Column 4 of
table 4 shows that women in the information session are significantly more likely
to have attended a village meeting in the last month than women in both the
control group and the information only group. Note that this is only suggestive
evidence as the previous month the question refers to takes place after the inter-
vention.12 Column 1 of table 4 shows that expenditures in the past month were
not significantly higher in the information plus cash group, though in column 3 we

   12
      Additionally, at the midline survey, when the question refers to a month during which the
intervention is taking place, there is no statistical difference in attendance across treatment
groups. However, issues of attrition during the midline survey mean that this finding is not
completely reliable.

                                              13
see that there is higher caloric intake in the past 24 hours among the information
plus cash group. However, it is unclear if this is a reallocation of income to have
increased expenditure on food and less expenditure elsewhere or an increase in
particularly high-caloric foods given the knowledge gained from the information
aspect of the intervention. Either way, we cannot rule out that the cash transfer
simply acts as an incentive to take up the information side of the intervention,
which is important in interpreting the meaning of the results.

Table 5 shows the impacts of the intervention on behavioral practices, only in-
cluding women who had a new child since the baseline survey, including first time
mothers. Our preferred outcome is the behavioral index in column 8, which ag-
gregates the first six outcomes in the table into one summary variable. There
is a statistically significant increase in “good” behavioral practices for women in
the information plus cash group, despite the sample size being much smaller. The
women thus seem to act upon the increased knowledge and actually change behav-
iors. Children in treatment groups are also fed more diverse diets in the treatment
groups as is shown in column 7 – among all children aged six months and older,
children ate from more food groups13 , though the difference is only significant from
the control group in the information only group. A similar pattern emerges when
considering an increased likelihood of eating protein, which is the food group most
important for better health and growth in young children.

Given the increases in knowledge and changes in behavior, it is important to see
if these improvements are passed down to children in better overall outcomes. Ta-
ble 6 shows cognitive outcomes and table 7 shows anthropometric outcomes for
children who were aged two years or younger at baseline. There is a statistically
significant improvement in the cognitive development of children in the informa-
tion plus cash group, relative both to the control group and the information only
group, even after controlling for enumerator fixed effects. The increase of about
0.1 standard deviations in the cognitive index, shown in column 6, is in line with
the gains found in Macours, Schady, and Vakis (2012). These gains are mostly
driven by improvements in gross motor and fine motor skills (in columns 2 and 3),
which are skills likely to be particularly hindered by malnutrition (Engle, Black,
Behrman, De Mello, Gertler, Kapiriri, Martorell, Young, Group, et al., 2007).
However, table 7 shows that there are no significant improvements in anthropo-
metrics. This is somewhat surprising given the results of prior interventions, which

   13
      The food groups considered are dairy, grains, vitamin A rich vegetables, other vegetables,
eggs, proteins, and nuts.

                                              14
have tended to find the strongest gains to alleviating malnutrition in reduced lev-
els of stunting (e.g., Fernald, Gertler, and Neufeld (2009); Rivera, Sotres-Alvarez,
Habicht, Shamah, and Villalpando (2004); Maluccio and Flores (2005)).

Tables 8 and 9 show the same outcomes as tables 6 and 7, but only include
new children born to women in households where the woman was interviewed
at baseline. These are presumably the children most likely to be influenced by
the changes in behavior shown in table 5, which only focused on the mothers
with new children. There are no indications of any improvements in cognitive or
anthropometric measures for these youngest children.

If complying with suggested best practices, such as exclusively breastfeeding a
child for six months, one particular outcome that should improve among the
youngest children is a reduction in rates of diarrhea. This would occur both be-
cause of increased nutrients from drinking breastmilk and from reduced likelihood
of contamination from dirty water. For new children born since the baseline in
both of the treatment groups, there is a substantial, albeit insiginficant reduction,
in the likelihood of having diarrhea, as shown in column 8 of table 9. Though the
reduction is only between 1 and 2 percentage points, this is a 15-25% lowering of
the likelihood of having diarrhea over the 6.9 percent of children in the control
group who had diarrhea in the past thirty days. This suggests that the treatments
may have improved child outcomes, and perhaps some of the broader insignificant
results are due to the short time window in which we observe the children. Since
the intervention only took place over nine months, it may not have been enough
time to sufficiently capture the gains, but by following up in the future we may
be able to more accurately measure improvements in child outcomes if they have
indeed improved.

This analysis has focused only on participants in the endline survey. The midline
survey results are left to an appendix because of issues with attrition discussed in
section 3. However, we follow the procedure in Lee (2009) to estimate upper and
lower bounds to correct for the sample selection issues stemming from attrition.
Table A3 estimates the upper and lower bounds on the treatment effects for the
indices reported in the main tables. Estimates are reported separately for the
information only versus control group and the information plus cash versus control
group. The bounds for the most part cannot rule out the findings from the endline,
which implies that the two survey waves can be consistent with each other.14
   14
      Specific tables that mimic the exact main results for the midline survey waves are available
on request, but are left out to save space.

                                               15
The cash transfer is “labeled” as being targeted at the youngest child, but a parent
could allocate the additional cash to another child in the household. Though much
of the information is specific to infants, issues like nutritional diversity apply to
all children. Table 10 shows the anthropometric outcomes of older siblings. These
are the siblings of children in tables 6 and 7 who were aged 25-36 months at
baseline, and are thus not technically eligible for the intervention. Despite having
a very small sample, we see that siblings in information plus cash households
have much better overall anthropometric outcomes, as seen by the anthropometric
index in column 8.15 These improvements are driven by a lower likelihood of being
underweight, and a lower likelihood of being sick in the past 30 days.

Finally, table 11 considers heterogeneous treatment effects by a child’s gender.
The outcomes presented are the cognitive and anthropometric indices for the el-
igible child and the anthropometric index for older siblings, initially shown in
the final columns of tables 6, 7, and 10, respectively. Cognitive improvements in
the overall population are predominantly driven by boys. Boys cognitive scores
on the ASQ increase of 0.13 standard deviations, which is significant at the 5%
level, while girls scores only increase 0.04 standard deviations, which is insignif-
icant. Anthropometric estimates for the eligible children remain imprecise, as in
the main results. Anthropometric gains for the siblings of eligible children are
also driven by male children, as shown in column 3. Taken together, these results
suggest differential levels of investment in male and female children following the
intervention. Nothing in the intervention implied such investments would be rel-
atively more productive, so these results suggest a gender bias with a preference
for greater investment in male children.


6        Mechanisms

The overall theory of change presented so far has demonstrated that the informa-
tion sessions improved knowledge, particularly in the cash group; gains in knowl-

    15
      There are some small differences at baseline between siblings in each of the three treatment
groups. For example, the mothers of siblings in the control group are significantly more likely to
have attended school than the mothers of the siblings in both treatment groups; this difference
was insignificant though in the same direction for the full sample. However, these differences
likely work against finding a positive difference in outcomes at endline since on average a mother
having attended school is correlated with better child outcomes. The balance table for this
subsample of older siblings is available on request. Additionally, we look at the importance of
birth order of these older siblings, but the general balance across treatment types means that
controlling for birth order makes little difference.

                                               16
edge lead to changes in behavioral practices; and behavioral improvements in turn
spur child development. In this section, we further probe each aspect of this chain
to demonstrate the link between knowledge and behavior, and to posit why there
may be a lack of results on anthropometrics.

Many of the questions about knowledge translate directly into practices that we
surveyed the women about.16 For example, one knowledge item asks a mother
how long she should exclusively breastfeed her newborn infant. The associated
practice assesses how long she actually exclusively breastfed her newborn infant.
We can assess if knowledge of the issue corresponds with actually implementing
it.

Table 12 presents the results of running 7 such simple regressions, each taking a
measurable action, and regressing if knowledge of the item was associated with
having done it. This regression does not incorporate treatment status in any way,
but rather is suggestive by providing the correlation between knowing something
and the likelihood of practicing that behavior. As in table 5, we focus on the subset
of women who had a new child after the baseline survey so that the behavioral
practice questions correspond to when new knowledge may have especially been
acted upon.

Column 3 indicates one of the strongest correlations between knowledge and be-
havior. Among women who know that the first milk should be given to the baby,
there is a 27 percentage point increase in first breastfeeding the baby within one
hour of birth. This is a 110% increase over the 24 percent of women who first
breastfeed their baby within one hour despite not knowing that the first milk
should be given to the baby. Though not causal, there is a clear correlation be-
tween knowledge and action. The other columns indicate similar patterns.

The correct timing on the practices seems to be especially important. Column 5
shows that there is a 30 percentage point (or 177%) increase in taking iron tablets
for the suggested amount of time if a woman knows the correct recommendation. If
we rather assess the correlation between this knowledge and taking iron tablets at
all, the increase is still significant, but the magnitude is much smaller; knowledge
of the correct timing to take iron tablets is associated with a 14 percentage point


   16
      A knowledge item that does not directly correspond to an action is if a pregnant woman
should eat more, less, or the same as before she became pregnant. Asking a woman about
her eating practices while pregnant would be too broad of a question without using definitive
numbers. This would more likely produce inaccurate responses so we did not ask such a question.

                                              17
(or 18%) increase in the likelihood of ever taking iron tablets during pregnancy.
This provides further suggestive evidence that knowledge directly leads to action.

Behavior changes should then lead to improvements in child outcomes; these prac-
tices are WHO suggestions precisely because they are scientifically shown to im-
prove outcomes. However, our results on this front are somewhat mixed. We do
see cognitive gains among children aged between 0 and 2 years old at baseline.
There are no corresponding changes in anthropometrics, and no gains whatsoever
among children newly born since baseline.

There are several potential explanations for this phenomenon. Time has been too
short to accurately measure any differences. The information sessions lasted for
nine months, and the cash transfer was only provided for five months. Addition-
ally, by measuring children immediately following the completion of the interven-
tion, there may not have been enough time for the behavioral changes to be fully
reflected in the child’s outcomes.

Another potential explanation is that the general level of poverty may be so high
that even making behavioral changes might not be able to overcome the bar-
rier associated with achieving proper development. For example, if households
cannot access clean drinking water or mothers experience severe micronutrient
deficiencies, the adverse effects of these prevailing conditions may be such that
even improvements to the targeted practices might not do anything. As sugges-
tive evidence, we find a clear correlation between having a toilet and access to
good drinking water on general anthropometric outcomes. Analyzing the results
by heterogeneity along these variables yields little difference in the impact of the
treatments on child outcomes.17


7        Conclusion

In this paper, we evaluate the effects of providing information on best practices
regarding nutrition and child care for children below the age of two, and the same
information component with a conditional cash transfer on early childhood devel-
opment outcomes using a randomized control trial in Nepal. We find that there
were significant increases in knowledge for women in both the information and in-
formation plus cash groups, though the increase in knowledge was approximately


    17
         These two sets of regressions are not reported, but are available on request from the authors.

                                                    18
twice as large in the group that also received the cash transfer. Both groups experi-
enced similar improvements in maternal health and early childhood best practices,
indicating that the intervention was successful at not just increasing knowledge
but also creating behavioral change. However, only children in the information
plus cash group experienced improved childhood development, with cumulative
child development as measured by the Ages and Stages Questionnaire improving
by 0.1 standard deviations. Hence, the intervention, and especially the provision
of cash seems to have resulted in a marked improvement in maternal knowledge
about best practices, maternal behaviors, child development, and nutrition.

It is of note that we see significant improvements in child outcomes in the in-
formation plus cash group despite the temporary nature of the short term safety
net provided by the cash transfer; this suggests that short-run interventions can
have longer-term outcomes. The design of the intervention also builds on existing
investments in training and community participation and should be another fac-
tor of interest for policy makers. This is especially important when policymakers
consider the types of practical, cost-effective tools at their disposal for fighting
malnutrition.

One puzzle presented by our results is why cognitive and anthropometric outcomes
would differ for children in the information plus cash group relative to children
in the information only group given that changes in behaviors were statistically
indistinguishable. Future studies should more carefully identify the precise mech-
anism and type of behavioral change that affects child outcomes. For example,
how a mother divides her time between work, caring, and playing with the child
might be important. Another factor to consider is the physical and mental health
of parents. Effects also likely differ by a child’s age, but we do not have enough
power to precisely estimate effect sizes in small age bins.

Moving forward, it would also be useful to study the role of the individual health
workers, and how their effectiveness as leaders and prior relationships with com-
munity members impacted the information intervention. One thing that makes
the information intervention unique is its use of local Social Mobilizers and Fe-
male Community Health Volunteers, who were already familiar to the community.
Using these existing systems likely improved the effectiveness of the intervention
given that women would be more likely to implement behavioral changes when
taught by someone they trusted in a cultural context they understood, rather
than someone unfamiliar simply teaching something as the “best” way of doing it.
The local health workers are particularly important when considering scaling up

                                         19
this experiment given that they were only asked to add the information to at most
four of the approximately thirty villages in which they operate. Thus, if factors
like the communication skills, knowledge, gender, or any observable characteristic
of the local health worker play an important role in the effectiveness of the infor-
mation component of the intervention, any positive effects would be even more
pronounced when scaled up. It would be imperative to understand this, and make
future decisions about where to best focus resources based on this. We leave such
a study to future work.




                                        20
References

Alderman, H., J. Hoddinott, and B. Kinsey (2006): “Long term conse-
 quences of early childhood malnutrition,” Oxford economic papers, 58(3), 450–
 474.

Almond, D., and J. Currie (2011): “Killing me softly: The fetal origins hy-
 pothesis,” The journal of economic perspectives: a journal of the American
 Economic Association, 25(3), 153.

Anderson, M. L. (2008): “Multiple inference and gender differences in the
 effects of early intervention: A reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool,
 and Early Training Projects,” Journal of the American statistical Association,
 103(484).

Attanasio, O. P., V. Oppedisano, and M. Vera-Hernández (2015):
 “Should Cash Transfers Be Conditional? Conditionality, Preventive Care, and
 Health Outcomes,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(2), 35–
 52.

Baird, S., C. McIntosh, and B. Ozler (2016): “When the Money Runs Out:
 Evaluatin the Longer-Term Impacts of a Two Year Cash Transer Program,” UC
 San Diego Working Paper.

Bhutta, Z. A., et al. (2008): “What works? Interventions for maternal and
 child undernutrition and survival,” The Lancet, 371(9610), 417–440.

         (2013): “Evidence-based interventions for improvement of maternal and
  child nutrition: what can be done and at what cost?,” The Lancet, 382(9890),
  452–477.

Dewey, K. G. (2013): “The challenge of meeting nutrient needs of infants and
 young children during the period of complementary feeding: an evolutionary
 perspective,” The Journal of nutrition, 143(12), 2050–2054.

Engle, P. L., M. M. Black, J. R. Behrman, M. C. De Mello, P. J.
 Gertler, L. Kapiriri, R. Martorell, M. E. Young, I. C. D. S. Group,
 et al. (2007): “Strategies to avoid the loss of developmental potential in more
 than 200 million children in the developing world,” The lancet, 369(9557), 229–
 242.




                                        21
Fernald, L. C., P. J. Gertler, and L. M. Neufeld (2009): “10-year ef-
 fect of Oportunidades, Mexico’s conditional cash transfer programme, on child
 growth, cognition, language, and behaviour: a longitudinal follow-up study,”
 The Lancet, 374(9706), 1997–2005.

Fiszbein, A., N. R. Schady, and F. H. Ferreira (2009): Conditional cash
  transfers: reducing present and future poverty. World Bank Publications.

Lagarde, M., A. Haines, and N. Palmer (2007): “Conditional cash transfers
  for improving uptake of health interventions in low-and middle-income countries:
  a systematic review,” Jama, 298(16), 1900–1910.

Lee, D. S. (2009): “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp
  Bounds on Treatment Effects,” The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1071–
  1102.

Macours, K., N. Schady, and R. Vakis (2012): “Cash transfers, behavioral
 changes, and cognitive development in early childhood: Evidence from a ran-
 domized experiment,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2),
 247–273.

Maluccio, J., and R. Flores (2005): Impact evaluation of a conditional cash
 transfer program: The Nicaraguan Red de Protección Social. Intl Food Policy
 Res Inst.

Pelletier, D. L., E. A. Frongillo Jr, D. G. Schroeder, and J.-P.
 Habicht (1995): “The effects of malnutrition on child mortality in developing
 countries.,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 73(4), 443.

Rivera, J. A., D. Sotres-Alvarez, J.-P. Habicht, T. Shamah, and
  S. Villalpando (2004): “Impact of the Mexican program for education,
  health, and nutrition (Progresa) on rates of growth and anemia in infants and
  young children: a randomized effectiveness study,” Jama, 291(21), 2563–2570.

Ruel, M. T., H. Alderman, and Maternal and Child Nutrition Study
 Group (2013): “Nutrition-sensitive interventions and programmes: how can
 they help to accelerate progress in improving maternal and child nutrition?,”
 The Lancet, 382(9891), 536–551.

Strupp, B. J., and D. A. Levitsky (1995): “Enduring cognitive effects of
  early malnutrition: a theoretical reappraisal,” The Journal of nutrition, 125(8),
  2221S.


                                        22
Eligibility Criteria Pre-Zebley
        Figure 1: Randomization and Sample Selection Protocol


                  Districts (4 of 75 na-
                    tionally selected)


                   Counties (All within          Note:     Random assignment,
                   4 districts selected)                   stratified by district


              Villages (Up to 4 of about 30
              within each county selected)


               Households (All with eligible     Note:      Has child  2 years
                woman in village selected)                   old or is pregnant




                                  23
                       Table 1: Baseline Balance

                                        Control    Info Only     Info + Cash
 Mother Age                              25.68       26.07           26.05
                                                     (0.42)         (0.48)
 Mother Attended School                     0.32      0.27           0.25
                                                     (0.26)         (0.12)
 Knowledge Index                            5.16      5.23           4.89
                                                     (0.81)         (0.29)
 Fed non-breastmilk w-in 3 days             0.48      0.42            0.43
                                                     (0.49)         (0.55)
 Child Age                                  1.07      1.04           1.04
                                                     (0.32)         (0.33)
 Child Underweight                          0.34      0.32           0.34
                                                     (0.53)         (0.98)
 Child Stunted                              0.40      0.41           0.39
                                                     (0.79)         (0.73)
 Child Wasted                               0.24      0.20           0.25
                                                     (0.25)         (0.96)
 Number Household Members                   8.03      7.87           7.69
                                                     (0.46)         (0.11)
 Household Head Male                        0.76      0.77           0.75
                                                     (0.79)         (0.78)
 Has Electricity                            0.69      0.63           0.68
                                                     (0.41)         (0.88)
 Stone Roofing Material                     0.66      0.66           0.66
                                                     (0.90)         (0.90)
 Annual Income                          118377      108236          121841
                                                     (0.26)         (0.70)
 Monthly Expenditures                       7226      7273           6474
                                                     (0.96)         (0.33)
 Note: Each row presents the mean within each treatment group. The val-
ues in parentheses in columns (2) and (3) represent the p-value for a test of
equality of means between that group and the control group, clustering stan-
dard errors at the VDC level. The sample sizes are 973 eligible women/859
eligible children in 903 eligible households in the control group; 1,032 eligible
women/909 eligible children in 982 eligible households in the info only group;
and 1,022 eligible women/900 eligible children in 970 eligible households in the
info plus cash group.




                                       24
                           Table 2: Attrition

                                       Control     Info Only    Info + Cash
 Level of Attrition
 Women Attrition                           0.168    0.172          0.155
                                                    (0.83)         (0.50)
 Child Attrition                           0.163    0.176          0.151
                                                    (0.53)         (0.55)
 Characteristics of Non-Attriters
 Mother Age                                25.86     26.50          26.35
                                                    (0.26)         (0.40)
 Mother Attended School                    0.31       0.26           0.23
                                                    (0.28)         (0.09)
 Knowledge Index                           5.14      5.24            4.87
                                                    (0.70)         (0.31)
 Fed non-breastmilk w-in 3 days            0.49       0.43           0.45
                                                    (0.47)         (0.60)
 Child Age                                 1.08       1.04           1.05
                                                    (0.20)         (0.31)
 Child Underweight                         0.36       0.32           0.35
                                                    (0.32)         (0.84)
 Child Stunted                             0.41       0.41           0.39
                                                    (0.93)         (0.62)
 Child Wasted                              0.25       0.21           0.25
                                                    (0.32)         (0.90)
 Number Household Members                  8.21       8.00           7.85
                                                    (0.41)         (0.14)
 Household Head Male                       0.76       0.77           0.75
                                                    (0.84)         (0.84)
 Has Electricity                           0.70       0.63           0.69
                                                    (0.39)         (0.95)
 Stone Roofing Material                    0.67       0.66           0.69
                                                    (0.98)         (0.73)
 Annual Income                          118398      105922         121175
                                                    (0.19)         (0.77)
 Monthly Expenditures                      7245      7091           6553
                                                    (0.87)         (0.38)
 Note: The top two rows present the share of women and children that were
interviewed at baseline not found at endline. In the second half of the table,
each row presents the mean within each treatment group for those who did
not attrit. The values in parentheses in columns (2) and (3) represent the p-
value for a test of equality of means between that group and the control group,
clustering standard errors at the VDC level.




                                      25
                                                Table 3: Woman Knowledge

                              (1)                 (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)
                        Breastfeed For         Eat More           Breastfeed More     Number of Food Items       Knowledge
                        Excl. 6 Months     During Pregnancy          Diarrhea          Mentioned for Kids          Index

      Info Only              0.044                0.066               0.152***                 0.350*              0.526**
                             (0.043)              (0.050)              (0.050)                 (0.180)              (0.207)
      Info + Cash          0.131***              0.109**               0.089*                 0.459***             0.924***
                             (0.040)              (0.050)              (0.048)                 (0.174)              (0.216)
      Difference            0.087**               0.043                -0.063                   0.109               0.398*




26
      Control Mean           0.571                0.608                 0.437                   4.159               5.330

      Observations           2,338                2,338                 2,338                   2,338               2,338
      R2                     0.028                0.021                 0.042                   0.038               0.085
      Note: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is an indicator variable signifying if the woman responded affirmatively
     that the item was true. For example, a question asked “In your opinion, for how long should a newborn infant be given
     nothing but breastmilk?”, with options of less than, more than, or exactly equal to 6 months. The dependent variable in
     column (1) is the share of respondents answering exactly 6 months. The knowledge index in column (5) is the number
     of questions answered correctly out of 10 general knowledge questions, including those in columns (1)-(3). Basic controls
     includes dummies for age cohorts of the female respondent, as well as individual level controls (if the woman ever went to
     school, and baseline weight and height) and household level controls (age and gender of household head, and number of
     household members).
                               Table 4: Household Characteristics

                             (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)               (5)
                           Monthly         Annual      Calories        Attend         Has/Expects
                         Expenditures      Income     Per Person     CO Meeting        New Child

      Info Only              -0.032         -0.058       50.725          0.024            -0.046
                             (0.095)       (0.067)      (53.415)         (0.049)          (0.030)
      Info + Cash            -0.045         0.044       98.796*         0.111**           -0.015
                             (0.107)       (0.069)      (53.092)         (0.049)          (0.036)
      Difference             -0.014         0.102        48.071          0.087*            0.031




27
      Control Mean           8.407         11.434      2208.527          0.358             0.441

      Observations           2,249          2,249        2,249           2,338             2,338
      R2                     0.102          0.092        0.025           0.108             0.062
      Note: Income and expenditures are in logs. Basic controls includes the number of household
     members for columns (1)-(3) and dummies for age of the female respondent for columns (4)-(5),
     household level controls (age and gender of household head, number of household members) in
     all columns, as well as asset indicators for electricity, a stone roof, and a separate kitchen for
     columns (1)-(3), and the female respondent’s weight, height, and if she ever attended school
     in columns (4)-(5).
                                          Table 5: Health Practices with New Child

                           (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)        (8)
                         Number       Vitamin A      Fed Non-       Iron         First      Deworming       Food      Behavior
                            of         Within        Breastmilk    Tablets     Breastfed      Pills        Groups      Index
                        Antenatal      42 Days        Within       For 5-6      Within
                          Visits                      3 Days       Months       1 Hour

      Info Only           -0.136         0.085        -0.136**       0.032       0.009         0.027        0.239*      0.038
                          (0.249)       (0.064)        (0.059)      (0.052)     (0.069)        (0.055)      (0.133)     (0.028)
      Info + Cash         0.441*       0.184***       -0.133**     0.133**       0.071         0.065        0.136     0.079***
                          (0.238)       (0.063)        (0.054)      (0.055)     (0.068)        (0.052)      (0.121)     (0.024)
      Difference         0.577**         0.099          0.003       0.100*       0.062         0.038        -0.103      0.041




28
      Control Mean         3.102         0.458          0.343        0.292       0.462         0.725        2.399       0.520

      Observations          678           678            678          678         678           678         1,156        678
      R2                   0.057         0.043          0.044        0.036       0.021         0.030        0.044       0.051
      Note: The sample now consists only of women who had a new child between baseline and endline, including first time
     mothers. The dependent variable refers to her practices both during and after pregnancy. Food groups are the number of
     key food groups (dairy, grains, vitamin A rich vegetables, other vegetables, eggs, meat, and nuts) that the child ate from in
     the past 24 hours. No controls includes only dummies age cohorts of the female respondent. The behavior index is created
     by taking a weighted sum of the first six demeaned variables by using the method described in Anderson (2008). Basic
     controls includes dummies for age cohorts of the female respondent, as well as individual level controls (if the woman ever
     went to school, baseline weight and height) and household level controls (age and gender of household head, and number of
     household members).
                                                       Table 6: Cognitive Scores

                           (1)                 (2)              (3)             (4)                 (5)                 (6)
                       Communication       Gross Motor      Fine Motor    Personal Social     Problem Solving     Cognitive Index

      Info Only              0.046             -0.025          0.049           -0.082              -0.056              -0.006
                             (0.054)           (0.060)        (0.061)          (0.056)             (0.050)             (0.042)
      Info + Cash            0.051             0.120*         0.134**           0.080              -0.031              0.086*
                             (0.054)           (0.063)        (0.062)          (0.068)             (0.052)             (0.044)
      Difference             0.005            0.145**          0.086           0.162**              0.024              0.091**




29
      Control Mean           -0.044            -0.052         -0.066           -0.041               0.019              -0.047

      Observations           1,646             1,646           1,646            1,646               1,646               1,646
      R2                     0.265             0.302           0.362            0.326               0.454               0.415
     Note: All outcomes are expressed in standardized Z-scores for each 6-question module. The cognitive index is created by taking a
     weighted sum of the five demeaned scores by using the method described in Anderson (2008). Basic controls includes dummies for
     gender and age cohorts taking each separate ASQ module, as well as individual level controls (if mother ever went to school and
     baseline weight-for-age and height-for-age Z scores) and household level controls (age and gender of household head, and number
     of household members). Also includes a fixed effect for which enumerator conducted the endline survey.
                                                   Table 7: Anthropometric Measures

                            (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
                        Underweight     Stunted     Wasted     Weight-for-    Height-for-    Weight-for-    Sick Past    Anthropometric
                                                                  Age            Age          Length         30 Days         Index

      Info Only             0.030         0.002      -0.011       -0.018         -0.019        -0.019         0.003           0.003
                           (0.026)       (0.031)    (0.021)      (0.069)        (0.098)        (0.100)       (0.037)          (0.033)
      Info + Cash           -0.010        0.016      -0.019       0.025          -0.176        0.171*        -0.041           0.034
                           (0.026)       (0.032)    (0.021)      (0.063)        (0.107)        (0.101)       (0.032)          (0.032)
      Difference           -0.040*        0.014      -0.008       0.044          -0.157        0.189*        -0.044           0.031




30
      Control Mean          0.324         0.557      0.133        -1.570         -2.167        -0.558         0.397            0.004

      Observations          1,953         1,953      1,953        1,953          1,953          1,953         1,953           1,953
      R2                    0.151         0.132      0.043        0.250          0.178          0.067         0.024           0.127
      Note: The anthropometric index creates an index of the four health indicator variables for if a child is underweight, stunted, wasted,
     or has been sick in the past 30 days by using the method described in Anderson (2008). Basic controls includes dummies for gender
     and age cohorts taking each separate ASQ module, as well as individual level controls (if mother ever went to school and baseline
     weight-for-age and height-for-age Z scores) and household level controls (age and gender of household head, and number of household
     members).
                                      Table 8: Cognitive Scores (New Children In Baseline HH’s)

                            (1)                  (2)            (3)               (4)                (5)                  (6)
                        Communication        Gross Motor    Fine Motor      Personal Social    Problem Solving      Cognitive Index

      Info Only            -0.251***           -0.129*         -0.108           -0.144*              0.010              -0.132**
                             (0.077)           (0.077)         (0.071)          (0.078)             (0.083)              (0.058)
      Info + Cash            -0.067             -0.105         -0.114*           -0.106              0.055               -0.063
                             (0.072)           (0.075)         (0.065)          (0.069)             (0.077)              (0.052)
      Difference            0.185**             0.024          -0.006            0.038               0.045                0.069




31
      Control Mean           -0.035             -0.049         -0.022            0.031               -0.129              -0.045

      Observations             782               782             782              782                 782                  782
      R2                      0.369             0.277           0.412            0.405               0.422                0.512
      Note: All outcomes are expressed in standardized Z-scores for each 6-question module. The cognitive index is created by taking a
     weighted sum of the five demeaned scores by using the method described in Anderson (2008). Includes only new children born since
     the baseline in households eligible for treatment. Basic controls includes dummies for gender and age cohorts taking each separate
     ASQ module, as well as individual level controls (if mother ever went to school and baseline weight-for-age and height-for-age Z
     scores) and household level controls (age and gender of household head, and number of household members). Also includes a fixed
     effect for which enumerator conducted the endline survey.
                                          Table 9: Anthropometric Measures (New Children In Baseline HH’s)

                            (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)               (9)
                        Underweight      Stunted     Wasted     Weight-for-    Height-for-    Weight-for-    Sick Past    Diarrhea Past     Anthropometric
                                                                   Age            Age          Length        30 Days         30 Days            Index

      Info Only             -0.002        0.029     -0.067**       -0.051         -0.241         0.073         -0.076          -0.010             0.083*
                           (0.042)       (0.046)     (0.033)       (0.160)        (0.190)        (0.217)       (0.052)        (0.024)             (0.050)
      Info + Cash           -0.008        0.056      -0.033        -0.052         -0.178         0.034          0.006          -0.018             -0.009
                           (0.041)       (0.042)     (0.038)       (0.149)        (0.193)        (0.220)       (0.047)        (0.020)             (0.050)
      Difference            -0.006        0.027       0.033        -0.001         0.063          -0.038         0.081          -0.008            -0.092*




32
      Control Mean          0.255         0.398       0.185        -0.981         -1.448         -0.003         0.529          0.069              -0.018

      Observations           782           782         782          782            782            782            782            782                782
      R2                    0.056         0.049       0.034        0.080          0.059          0.053          0.029          0.022              0.060
      Note: The anthropometric index creates an index of the four health indicator variables for if a child is underweight, stunted, wasted, or has been sick in
     the past 30 days by using the method described in Anderson (2008).Includes only new children born since the baseline in households eligible for treatment.
     Basic controls includes dummies for gender and age cohorts taking each separate ASQ module, as well as individual level controls (if mother ever went to
     school and baseline weight-for-age and height-for-age Z scores) and household level controls (age and gender of household head, and number of household
     members).
                                 Table 10: Anthropometric Measures (Siblings of Eligible Children)

                            (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)             (7)            (8)
                        Underweight     Stunted     Wasted     Weight-for-    Height-for-   Weight-for-     Sick Past    Anthropometric
                                                                  Age            Age         Length          30 Days         Index

      Info Only           -0.154**       -0.054      -0.044       0.191          0.024          0.256       0.205***          -0.024
                           (0.070)       (0.063)    (0.042)      (0.122)        (0.157)        (0.181)       (0.071)          (0.087)
      Info + Cash         -0.149**       -0.029      -0.037      0.302*          0.060         0.395*        -0.085*          0.158*
                           (0.071)       (0.068)    (0.047)      (0.158)        (0.161)        (0.227)       (0.049)          (0.081)
      Difference            0.006         0.024      0.007        0.111          0.036          0.139       -0.290***        0.182**




33
      Control Mean          0.346         0.577      0.090        -1.551        -2.261         -0.304         0.192            0.002

      Observations           245           245        245          245            245            245           245              245
      R2                    0.246         0.253      0.069        0.356          0.292          0.159         0.129            0.196
      Note: Sample includes siblings of children in eligible households (those included in tables 6 and 7) who were aged between 25 and
     36 months at baseline. The anthropometric index creates an index of the four health indicator variables for if a child is underweight,
     stunted, wasted, or has been sick in the past 30 days by using the method described in Anderson (2008). Basic controls includes
     dummies for gender and age cohorts taking each separate ASQ module, as well as individual level controls (if mother ever went to school
     and baseline weight-for-age and height-for-age Z scores) and household level controls (age and gender of household head, and number
     of household members).
             Table 11: Child Outcome Indices, by Gender

                          (1)                 (2)                 (3)
                      Cognitive        Anthropometric       Anthropometric
                        Index               Index                Index
                   (Eligible Child)    (Eligible Child)     (Older Siblings)
                                  Child Measured is Male

 Info Only               -0.017              -0.009               -0.061
                        (0.054)              (0.038)              (0.130)
 Info + Cash            0.128**               0.018               0.195*
                        (0.064)              (0.084)              (0.108)
 Control Mean            -0.065              -0.009               0.039

 Observations             866                 1,029                114
                                Child Measured is Female

 Info Only               -0.015              0.0001               0.007
                        (0.060)              (0.047)              (0.118)
 Info + Cash             0.041                0.048               0.135
                        (0.053)              (0.049)              (0.110)
 Control Mean            -0.022               0.019               -0.048

 Observations             780                  924                 134
 Note: All outcomes are indices, created by taking a weighted sum of raw
item scores by using the method described in Anderson (2008). Basic controls
includes dummies for gender and age cohorts taking each separate ASQ module,
as well as individual level controls (if mother ever went to school and baseline
weight-for-age and height-for-age Z scores) and household level controls (age
and gender of household head, and number of household members). Column
(1) also includes a fixed effect for which enumerator conducted the endline
survey.




                                      34
                                   Table 12: Connection Between Knowledge and Practice

                          (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)              (7)
                       Antenatal     Exclusive        First           Only         Took Iron        Took          Vitamin A
                        Visits      Breastfeed      Breastfed      Breastmilk      Pills For     De-Worming         W/in
                                    Six Months     w/in 1 hour     w/in 3 days    5-6 months        Pills          45 days

      Knowledge        0.656***       0.094**        0.271***        0.230***       0.303***       0.228***        0.411***
                         (0.163)       (0.039)        (0.064)         (0.056)        (0.035)         (0.034)        (0.035)
      Constant         2.911***       0.531***       0.246***        0.538***       0.171***       0.600***        0.332***




35
                         (0.110)       (0.031)        (0.061)         (0.053)        (0.027)         (0.028)        (0.025)


      Observations        678           678             678            678             678            678             678
      R2                 0.023         0.009           0.025          0.024           0.099          0.061           0.170
      Note: Runs a simple OLS regression between if a woman correctly answers a question in the knowledge portion of the
     survey and her reported practice with her youngest newborn child. For example, column (1) regresses if a woman knows
     the appropriate number of antenatal care visits is 4 on the number of reported antenatal care visits. No control variables
     are used, and the treatment status is not included in any fashion. The sample consists of women who had a new baby since
     the baseline survey, as in table 5.
                 Table A1: Baseline Balance – Midline

                                        Control     Info Only     Info + Cash
 Mother Age                              26.01        25.28           25.94
                                                      (0.39)         (0.95)
 Mother Attended School                     0.26       0.25           0.30
                                                      (0.90)         (0.68)
 Knowledge Index                            5.23       5.27           4.75
                                                      (0.92)         (0.39)
 Fed non-breastmilk w-in 3 days             0.39       0.54            0.40
                                                      (0.26)         (0.94)
 Child Age                                  1.04       1.02           1.02
                                                      (0.68)         (0.72)
 Child Underweight                          0.32       0.38           0.31
                                                      (0.36)         (0.84)
 Child Stunted                              0.40       0.43           0.35
                                                      (0.60)         (0.43)
 Child Wasted                               0.23       0.23           0.28
                                                      (0.92)         (0.41)
 Number Household Members                   7.42       7.84           7.69
                                                      (0.21)         (0.45)
 Household Head Male                        0.80       0.71           0.83
                                                      (0.20)         (0.50)
 Has Electricity                            0.49       0.65           0.65
                                                      (0.26)         (0.29)
 Stone Roofing Material                     0.61       0.65           0.67
                                                      (0.61)         (0.43)
 Annual Income                           105969      107273          106943
                                                      (0.92)         (0.94)
 Monthly Expenditures                       7090       7081           5163
                                                      (0.99)         (0.16)
 Note: Each row presents the mean within each treatment group. The values
in parentheses in columns (2) and (3) represent the p-value for a test of equality
of means between that group and the control group, clustering standard errors
at the VDC level. The sample sizes are 368 eligible women/324 eligible children
in 350 eligible households in the control group; 346 eligible women/279 eligible
children in 324 eligible households in the info only group; and 320 eligible
women/274 eligible children in 302 eligible households in the info plus cash
group.




                                       36
                      Table A2: Attrition – Midline

                                       Control     Info Only    Info + Cash
 Level of Attrition
 Women Attrition                           0.152    0.139          0.081
                                                    (0.52)         (0.00)
 Child Attrition                           0.160    0.129          0.099
                                                    (0.24)         (0.03)
 Characteristics of Non-Attriters
 Mother Age                                26.13     25.32          26.14
                                                    (0.35)         (0.99)
 Mother Attended School                    0.25       0.26           0.30
                                                    (0.91)         (0.58)
 Knowledge Index                           5.23      5.28            4.78
                                                    (0.90)         (0.41)
 Fed non-breastmilk w-in 3 days            0.38       0.53           0.41
                                                    (0.22)         (0.81)
 Child Age                                 1.03       1.01           1.03
                                                    (0.74)         (0.99)
 Child Underweight                         0.31       0.38           0.31
                                                    (0.20)         (0.94)
 Child Stunted                             0.40       0.42           0.36
                                                    (0.69)         (0.48)
 Child Wasted                              0.21       0.24           0.28
                                                    (0.56)         (0.26)
 Number Household Members                  7.48       8.18           7.91
                                                    (0.07)         (0.32)
 Household Head Male                       0.80       0.71           0.83
                                                    (0.19)         (0.60)
 Has Electricity                           0.51       0.64           0.68
                                                    (0.34)         (0.24)
 Stone Roofing Material                    0.60       0.68           0.66
                                                    (0.36)         (0.43)
 Annual Income                          103959      113241         108026
                                                    (0.52)         (0.77)
 Monthly Expenditures                      7018      6972           4897
                                                    (0.97)         (0.08)
 Note: The top two rows present the share of women and children that were
interviewed at baseline not found at endline. In the second half of the table,
each row presents the mean within each treatment group for those who did
not attrit. The values in parentheses in columns (2) and (3) represent the p-
value for a test of equality of means between that group and the control group,
clustering standard errors at the VDC level.




                                      37
                 Table A3: Midline Outcomes, Lee Bounds

                            (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)
                         Knowledge      Behavior    Cognitive    Anthropometric
                           Index         Index       Index           Index
                                          Information Only

 Lower Bound                -0.129       -0.011        0.004           -0.065
                           (0.205)       (0.042)      (0.078)          (0.063)
 Upper Bound                0.048         0.046      0.174**           -0.039
                           (0.220)       (0.042)      (0.087)          (0.065)
 (Endline Estimate)        0.526**        0.038       -0.006           0.003

 Observations                714           201          603             603
                                      Information Plus Cash

 Lower Bound                0.096       0.100***      -0.102           -0.068
                           (0.178)       (0.037)      (0.069)          (0.065)
 Upper Bound              0.694***      0.153***       0.104           0.033
                           (0.183)       (0.038)      (0.071)          (0.067)
 (Endline Estimate)       0.924***      0.079***      0.086*           0.034

 Observations                688           187          598             598
 Note: All outcomes are indices, created by taking a weighted sum of raw item
scores by using the method described in Anderson (2008). The upper and lower
bounds from estimating Lee bounds are reported, using data from the midline survey
and correcting for attrition. No control variables are used in estimating Lee bounds.
The endline estimate can be found in the corresponding table from the main text.




                                         38
