NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY:
THEORY AND TESTS WITH INDUSTRY DATA

Robert E. Hall

Working Paper No. 2264

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1987

I am grateful to Michael Knetter and David Bizer for outstanding assistance
and to numerous colleagues for helpful comments. This research was supported
by the National Science Foundation. The data are available from the author
upon receipt of an IBM—formatted diskette. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2264
May 1987

Investment under Uncertainty:

Theory and Tests with Industry Data

ABSTRACT

Under the assumption of constant returns to scale, there is
a very simple, easily testable condition for optimal investment
under uncertainty. Application of the test requires no
parametric assumptions about technology and no assumptions
about the competitiveness of the output market. The condition
is that the expected marginal revenue product of labor equal
the expected rental price of capital. The condition implies a
certain invariance property for a modified version of Solow's
productivity residual. Tests of the invariance property for
U.S. industry data give very strong rejection in quite a few
industries. The interpretation of rejection is either that the
technology has increasing returns (possibly because of fixed
costs) or that firms systematically over—invest.

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution and
Department of Economics
Stanford University

Stanford, CA 94305

Irtrockjcticn

Since Dale Jorgenson's (1963) pioneering work, Investment theory has

been embedded in the theory of the optimizing firm. The firm acquires

capital as part of a plan to produce output and purchase Inputs so as to
maximize the present discounted value of the firm. However, both
Jorgenson and most of his succesors derived structural investment
functions. Jorgenson's derivation was rot explicitly stochastic and more
recent work has been able to obtain closed-form investment equations only

by making very strong assumptions. The purpose of this paper is to
isolate the essential condition for optimal investment in an explicit
framework of stochastic optimization. The condition Is readily testable
without parametric assumptions about the techrology; the second half of
the paper carries out simple tests with data on U.S. industries. I make
no attempt to derive or estimate a structural investment equation. The
test applied here should precede the development of an investment
equation—only after a test of the type derived here can be passed should
the research go on to the further step of estimating an investment
equation.

The condition I examine is that the marginal revenue product of

capital--the increase in revenue associated with an incremental unit of
capital--be equated in expectation to the service or rental price of capital.
The relevant expectation is one formed at or before the time that capital
can be varied.

The reader may note the parallel in the objectives of this restatement
of investment theory with my earlier work on consumption, Hall (1978).
I

For consumption, I derived a simple first-order corxhtlon that deals with
the most central Issue in consumption, the reaction of a consumer to new
information about irxome. The first-order condition or Euler equation is
readily testable. However, it is not a full statement of all the conditions
for optimal consumption behavior and It does not yield a consumption
fu-iction in closed form. Similarly, the condition derived here for optimal
investment--the equality of the expected marginal revenue product of
capital to the rental price of capital--does not result in a closed-form
investment furxtion under general conditions.
By setting a theory of investment within a formal stochastic
model of the firm, It is possible to deal rigorously with the potentially
important role of Jensen's inequality. For technologies in which the
amoint of capital determines the physical capacity to produce output, one
would anticipate that the level of capacity would bear some relation to the
expected level of output. However, as De Vany aix! Frey (1982) have
noted, a firm may choose to invest in capacity which is frequently
unutilized. But a firm in that situation should still equate the expected
marginal revenue product of capital to Its expected serice cost.
The decision I examine here is the choice of capital stock as part of a
general strategy that determines the level of output as well. The
firm Is viewed as maximizing expected profit given the probability
distribution for future product demand. The optimal capital stock has a
very simple property: The average value of the marginal revenue product
of capital over a span of years should equal the average value of the rental

price of capital.

2

The role of the assumption & constwit retirns to scale
The basic idea of this paper Is that, trxier constant returns to scale, the
actual value of the marginal reverije product of capital, ex post, can be

computed as the residual profit per zlt of capital. No further
assumptions about tecFrxlogy are needed. The only other critical element
of the computation is the removal from profit of the component generated
by the market power of the firm.
The hypothesis of constant returns to scale Is no novelty in this area-past researth on investment has explicitly or Implicitly adopted the
hypothesis in most cases. Any model that concludes In a accelerator
relation--proportionality between output aM capital—rests on constant

returns. Moreover, constant returns provides the easiest argument to
stçport aggregation from the firm to the industry. The theory of
investment irxfer Increasing returns, especially the type of increasing
returns associated with fixed costs, Involves rather different elements
from those generally considered in Investment theory.
The hypothesis tested In this paper is the joint hypothesis of constant
returns aixi optimal choice of capital stock. The method employed does not
permit the separation of the two parts of the joint hypothesis, because the
use of residual profit to measure the realized value of the marginal
revenue product of capital requires constant returns. The strong rejection
of the joint hypothesis means either that the technology has increasing
returns or that firms over-accumulate capital, or both.
My own view Is that both explanations are Important. The joint
hypothesis is rejected because firms have too little profit to square with
the evidence about their market power. The question is, what ecormic

process dissipates the latent profit from market power? I think part of
the answer Is that there are fixed costs of labor, capital, advertising, and
other factors naeded to enter many markets. The other part of the answer
is that market power attracts entry to the point where the capital stock Is
excessive, when judged by the comparison of the expected marginal
revenue product to the rental price of capital. However, the method of this
paper canrxt separate the two.

The strategy
The paper proceeds in the

following way: It characterizes the optimal
capital of an optimizing firm (possibly with market power) under the

assumption of constant returns to scale. Optimality involves the expected
equelity of the marginal revenue product of capital to the rental price of
capital. The realized marginal revenue product and the rental price of
capital will differ by an unpredictable error with mean zero, under
optimal Investment.
The condition just stated makes rc assumption ona way or the other
about competition or market power. Under competition, the realized
marginal product of capital could be measured directly as the realized rate
of profit. In the presere of market power, the measurement of the
marginal revenue product of capital Is trickier. Measured profit contains
an element which is chronically positive, the earnings from the typical
firm's morxpoly position. In addition, profit will contain the stochastic
element with mean zero predicted by investment theory. In order to
4

isolate the latter element, it is necessary to remove the monopoly
element by valuing output at marginal cost rather than price.
If marginal cost were observed directly, then the calculations of
this paper would be elementary. I would calculate the realized marginal
reverue product of capital as the difference between output valued at
marginal cost and actual lrçut costs other than capital. Then I would
compare the realized marginal reverue product to the service price of
capital as perceived earlier when the Investment decision relevant for
thIs year was made. If the realized profit rate was generally lower, I
would reject the joint hypothesis of constant returns and optimal
investment.

Only a noisy measure of marginal cost is available directly from the
data. My earlier work on the relation between price and marginal cost
derived a measure of marginal cost based on changes in cost that occur

from year to year as output changes. The approach I use in this paper
implicitly makes use of the noisy direct measure of marginal cost. I
show that the result of combining the hypothesis of optimal capital
accumulation with my earlier method for measuring marginal cost can be
expressed as an Invariance condition for a certain measure of productivity
growth. Measured productivity will be u±anged in the face of a shift
which alters the levels of employment and output, provided that the shift
has no effect on true productivity growth. In the presence of nonoptimal
investment or increasing returns, on the other hand, measured
productivity will not be invariant. Thus the relation between measured
productivity growth and exogenous instrumental variables can form the
basis for a test of the joint hypothesis.
My earlier work on testing the equality of price and marginal cost also

derived an invarianoe result for productivity. I made use of the
prirxiple that Solow's productivity residual is invariant uxier exogenot
shifts, provided that markets are competitive and the tecfr1ogy has
constant rettrrs to scale. The productivity measure used here is
different; it does not consider the output price and its invarlanoe does not
depend on competition.

Relation to previous work on stochastic investment theory

best-known exposition of investment theory uxier uxertainy is
Lucas and Prescott (1971). A related development appears more recently
in Abel and Blanohard (1986). Lucas and Prescott state the first order
condition for optimal investment as the requirement that the discoL.rlted
expected contribution of capital to next period's value of the firm be equal
to the current cost of acquirir capital. As they note, this simplifies the
problem from the point of view of the firm, but requires a full analysis of
the determination of the value of the firm in general equilibrium. Abel
and Blanohard express the first-order condition in the form that the
present discotnted value of the marginal contribution of current investment
to all futi.re profits be equal to the acquisition cost of capital. In other
words, Abel and Blanohard sthstitute a simple theory of the value of the
firm into Lucas and Prescott's condition.
Both Lucas-Prescott and Abel-Blarxhard, and all writers In the less
formal "qtheor>/' tradition, assure that there are adjustment costs in the
The

investment process. By contrast, my own development adopts the "time to
build" framework as in Kydlarxi and Prescott (1982). An earlier paper of
6

mine (Hall (1977)) explores the relation between the two approaches and
notes their equivalence, in the following sense: Urthr the time-to-build
constraint, there will be an exact relation between the value of the firm
and the rate of Investment of the type derivable from adjustment costs.

My earlier paper also s&ws in detail that the first-order condition
relating the acquisition cost of capital to the present d1scotnted value of
the marginal rever.ie product of capital, as in Abel-Blanchard, is exactly
equivalent to the first-order condition relating the rental price of capital
to the current marginal revenue product of capital, as In this paper. In
essence, the latter can be obtained by taking appropriate differences over
time in the former. There is no conflict between the pre-Jorgenson view
of investment which looks at present disconted values of the profit flows
from an investment and Jorgenson's Idea of relating the current profit
contribution to the current rental price of capital.
In the usual specification of adjustment costs, it is not true that the
expected marginal revenue product of capital Is equated to the expected
rental price of capital, when the expectation is formed some finite period
before the two variables are realized. There is another term, the shadow
price of adjustment. However, that term Is positive half the time and
negative the other half of the time. Hence the proposition Investigated
here, which asserts that the average gap between the marginal revenue
product and the rental price is zero, 1c1ds uxier the adjustment cost
specification as well as uider the time-to-build specification.
I conclude that all formal models of Investment are based on equivalent
notions about the basic first order condition for optimal investment. The
hypothesis tested here—expected equality of marginal revenue product and
rental price of capital—Is essentially a irilversal statement of optimality,
7

provided that the expectation is evaluated over a long time perspective.

1. Theory

A firm uses capital K and labor N to produce output Q. Its production

firction is:
(1.1)

Q = Ft(N,K)

The technology has constant

returns to scale,

so Ft is homogeneous

of

one in N and K.
The firm is uncertain about future demand and future factor prices,
which are influenced by a random variable q. Its revenue function is
R (Q'i)• The firm picks an employment strategy Nt (q . . ,rQ and a
contingent on the observed realizations
investment strategy
of ri. Note that employment can respond to the most recent information
but there is a lag, r, in the response of capacity to new information; r is
the time to build.
The objective of an investment strategy is to maximize the expected
discounted value of profit:
degree

,.

(1.2)

Max E { D [R(Ft(N,Kt),rl) - wtNt - rt K] }

Here Dt

is the discount function, w is the wage, and rt is the service or
rental price of capital. The expectation is conditional upon all
B

information known to the firm at the time it picks the strategy. A fully
optimal strategy will be time-consistent--it will maximize the remaining
future expected discouted profit as of any time period. TF, it is rt
necessary to consider the conditional expectations midway through the
process.
Under perfect competition and constant returns, it is well known that
the investment and employment strategies of the firm have a knife-edge
character. If the expected future price exceeds long-ru marginal cost,
investment and employment will be infinite, whereas if price is expected
to fall sixrt of that level, zero capital and zero labor will be used. At the
point of equality, the scale of the firm is indeterminate. This paper
considers primarily the case where each firm has market power, which is
sufficient to eliminate the knife-edge problem. The basic condition-equality of expected marginal revenue product and rental price of capital-applies to the competitive case as well, but I will not burden the reader
with an analytical apparatus that irciudes that special case.

Optimal capital accumulation wder certairty
Let
(1.3)

Z

=

ÔRÔF

___

the marginal revenue product of capital. Then the first-order condition

for optimal investment is
(1.4)

E(zt-rt) =

0

9

The expectation is conditional on the same information available to the
firm when it cfxioses its strategy. The basic message of this condition is
simple: An investigator wF calculates the excess of the marginal revenue
product of capital over the service price of capital, after the fact, will
find that its average value is zero. If its average value is consistently
negative, the firm is txlding too much capital to be consistent with profit
maximization.
One could find more elaborate characterizations of optimal investment

strategies. For example, the expectation of z- rt conditional on
information available in year t - t stxuld also be zero. However, the
results obtained here rejecting even the simplest characterization are so
strong that there is no good reason to examine other characterizatiors.
The advantage of my procedure is expressed in the following
Proposition .1 (Irrelevance of time to build).

For any value of t, E(z - r) = 0 for all periods in which output is
produced.

Th, the trothlesome issue of lags in the investment process can be
sidestepped by looking only at the average of the marginal revenue product

of capital and rot its correlation with other variables.
The basic condition examined here requires that the expected marginal
revenue product of capital less the rental price of capital, r, equal
zero. Equivalently, the actual value of the same variable should differ
10

from zero by an error, E, with mean zero:
(1.5)

zt-rt

=

Et

invariance of the cost-based productivity resickial

My earlier work--Hall (1987)--derived a method for testing the equality
of price and marginal cost from changes in cost and corresponding
changes in output. The essential idea is expressed in the following
proposition: Under competition, with price equal to marginal cost, the
Solow productivity residual Is invariant uder changes in output and
employment induced by some outside force that affects product demand or
factor supply. On the other hand, with market power and a gap between
price and marginal cost, the Solow residual will rise whenever an outside
force raises output. The logic is simple: The Solow residual uses the
ratio of compensation to the value of output to infer the elasticity of output
with respect to employment. When the price is distorted upward by
market power, the estimate of the elasticity is too low. Hence, the
adjustment In the Solow residual for the change in employment is too
small and the residual rises whenever employment and output rise in
response to an outside stimulus.
This paper derives and uses a similar, but quite distinct invariance
result. The reason that the Solow productivity measwe fails in the

presence of market power is its use of total revenue in the denominator of
the estimate of the elasticity of output with respect to input. An
11

alternative estimate of the elasticity is the ratio of labor compensation to
total cost, where the latter is the sum of compensation and the service
cost of capital, rK. I will demonstrate that the productivity residual
calculated using this estimate of the elasticity retains the invariance
property in the presence of market power. That is, measured productivity
should not rise when an outside force raises output, provided that the
productivity measure uses the cost-based elasticity.
The empirical results will show that most industries do not satisfy the
invariance condition for the cost-based productivity measure. I show that
the failure of the invariance condition could arise from excess capacity or
from increasing returns to scale. Basically the cost-based productivity
residual rises when output rises in response to an exogenous force because
the cost-based elasticity is hardly larger than the revenue-based elasticity.
Although most of the industries seem to be made up of firms with
considerable market power, they are not exceptionally profitable. Their
revenue is only modestly in excess of their costs, including the full
service cost of capital. Hence the behavior of the cost-based residual is
hardly different from the Solow residual; it rises whenever an exogenous
force increases output.
The conclusion Is that there is not nearly enough profit to make the
amoiiit of market power inferred from the behavior of the Solow residual
consistent with constant returns to scale and optimal capacity. The
question is what is absorbing the latent profit generated by the market
power. One of the answers could be excess capacity. Entry stimulated by
the profits associated with market power proceeds to the point that firms
are all operating well below capacity. The other answer is fixed costs.
Fixed costs are a failure of constant retixns to scale and could also
12

empirical findings.
The easiest way to see the major difference between the invariarxe
condition tested In this paper and the or tested in my earlier paper Is that
the output price has a central role in the Solow residual, wfrse Invariance
tests the equality of price and marginal cost. On the other hand, the
output price does not even appear In the calculation of the cost-based
residual. Only the behavior of inputs, output, and costs determine the
movements of the cost-based residual. Hence the cost-based residual Is
appropriate for testing the joint hypothesis of optimal investment and
constant returns, both of which involve the technology and the cfice of
Inputs, but not conditions in the output market.
Derivation & the invarionce ccnditian
The

basic relation derived in my earlier paper can be written as

(1.6)

Aq = in + 9
= on + 0

Here Aq Is the rate of growth of the output/capital ratio, n is the rate
of growth of the labor/capital ratio, 0 is the rate of Hicks-neutral
technical progress, and o Is the share of labor cost, wN, in total cost,
mQ. The relevant concept of cost is marginal cost, m, times total output,
Q. Under constant returns, total cost mQ is just the sn of labor cost,

wN, and capital cost, (r+E)K. Because the latter is Lrobservable, the
there o i eleo *robeervable. Equation 1.6 le exactly tF corc1uion of
13

Solow's (1957) derivation of total factor productivity growth, except that
ha asswned the equality of price and marginal cost and so put p in place of
m in the derxminator of the labor share.
It is a simple matter to calculate a closely related observed share,
y* which Is labor's share In cost when the cost of capital is evaluated ex

are rather than ex post. That is,

,

*—
—

wN

rK+wN

The two shares differ becae of the surprise difference between tha
anticipated cost of capital, rK, and the realized shadow cost of capital,
(r+E)K.

I will be corr.eriied with what I call the cost-based
productivity
residual,
(1.8)

Aqa*An

If this residual could be calculated with u in place of cr, it would obey an
invariance property of the type exploited in my earlier paper. However, a
little algebra sfxws that the cost-based residual has a second term
involving the surprise, e:
(1.9)

Aqa*An

=

9 - (1cr*)An€

a strong year, employment growth An will be positive and will be
positive as well--capital's shadow value will exceed its rental price.
Hence the second term will be negative. In a weak year, both An and E
In

14

will be negative, and the secorxf term will be negative again. Herxe, the
cost-based residual uderstates productivity growth.
The same property that makes the cost-based resdua1 a poor meastre
of productivity growth provides the basis for a good test of the joint
hypothesis of optimal investment and constant returns. Consider an
instrumental variable, say x, that has a stror causal effect on output, but
is t.norrelated with productivity growth, e. The Instrument is stn'e to
be positively correlated with E as well as with n, but Its correlation with

the composite disturbance (1cr*) cn E/r will be close to zero. The
composite disturbance is generally positive in both good and bad times,
whereas the instrument is positive in good times and negative in bad

times. The correlation will be essentially zero. This establishes
Proposlticn 2 (invariance & the cost-based resithial): Under the joint
hypothesis of optimal investment and constant returns to scale, the costbased residual is trcorrelated with an instrumental variable that Is
uncorrelated with the rate of productivity growth.
The cost-based productivity residual is similar to the one proposed by
Solow (1957). However, Solow used labor's share in in total revenue,
a = wN/pQ, as an estimate of the elasticity of' output with respect to
labor Irçut, whereas this measure uses labor's share In cost, o. For a
firm with significant pure profit derived from market power, a is
considerably smaller than cy*. Solow's original form of the residual was
the basis for the measurement of market power In my earlier work.
Equation 1.9 says that the residual based instead on the cost share can
test the joint hypothesis of constant retums and optimal investment. A
15

firm with procyclical Solow productivity has market power. Under
constant returns and optimal Investment, the Solow residual but rt the
cost-based residual will be procyclical. When the productivity measure
based on the cost share Is also procyclical, the joint hypothesis is
refuted. To put it a different way, the switch from the revenue share, a,
to the cost share, cr*, would eliminate the cycle in productivity for a firm
possessing market power with constant returns arid optimal investment.
A firm with market power and increasing returns or excess capacity
would have procyclical productivity by both measures. In this discts1on,
procyclical means that when an exogenos force raises the firm's output,
measured productivity rises as well.
Excess capacity
Now consider a firm that systematically over-invests. Its realized

marginal revenue product of capital will generally be lower than the rental
price of capital. The deviation, E, will m longer be a pure surprise; it
will have a negative mean. As a result of the negative mean, the
composite disturbance in equation 1.9, - (jo*) aM €/r, will be less
negative in good times arid more negative in bad times; it will be
positively correlated with an Instrument. This argument establishes
Proposition 3 (effect of excess capacity): For a firm with systematic
overlrivestment rather than optimal investment, the cost-based residual
will be positively correlated with an instrument, when that Instrument is
itself positively correlated with the firm's output.

16

According to the proposition, one of the possible interpretations of the
finding that the cost-based residual Is positively correlated with an
instrument is that the firm or inckstry generally holds excess capital.
Note that the concept of excess capacity in the proposition is strictly
rooted In the optimizing condition. Excess capacity is defined as a
negative mean of the difference, E, between the actual marginal reverue

product of capital and its target value, the rental price of capital. It is
not based on any comparison of installed capacity to actual output.

Increasing retirns to scale
Now consider a firm with increasing returns. It is easy to show that

equation 1.6, the starting point for the analysis of this paper, becomes
(1.10)

iq = (l+y)uM + yik + 0

.nder

increasing returns. Here y measures the degree of increasing
returns; 1+y is the elasticity of output with respect to equal proportional
increases in all inputs. y is a variable, not necessarily a constant. k
is the rate of growth of the capital stock.
If we calculate the cost-based productivity residual for the firm, we
get:
= 0 + y(oM+k) (1.11)

(1a*)n€

In addition to the composite term related to the surprise in the shadow
value of capital, there is another term involving y. Two amendments must
17

be made to er.re that the cost-based residual properly measres
productivity growth izxfer irxreaslng returns. First, the cost share, a,
uderstates the actual elasticity of output with respect to labor, which is
actually (I+y) a. Herxe the term yaAn appears on the right. Second, the
rate of growth of capital appears separately with coefficient y.
By assumption, the instrument is positively correlated with En. In
addition, it seems likely that It would be positively correlated with k;
times of rising output are also likely to be times of high investment. On
both acccxnts, the correlation between the cost-based residual and the
instrument will be positive. Hence,

Proposition 4 (effect of Increasing retirns): With increasing returns to
scale, the correlation of the cost-based residual and the instrument will be
positive.

A finding of positive correlation could as well be the result of increasing
returns as the result of excess capacity.

2. Econometric method and choice of instrumerts

The invariance proposition tested in this paper is very similar In form
to the one tested in my earlier paper, Hall (1987). The null hypothesis is
refuted by finding a positive correlation between the productivity residual
aix! an exogenous instrument. Econometrically, the simplest way to test

is

for the absence of correlation is to calculate the regression coefficient of
the productivity residual on the instrument and use the t-test for inference.
To be useful as an instrument, a variable must be the cause of
Important movements in the output and employment of an industry, but not
a cause or an effect of shifts in Its productivity. Here I use t.he same
three Instruments as in my earlier work: the rate of growth of military
spending, the rate of chenge of the price of crude oil, and the political
party of the President. All can be shown to be correlated with the output
and employment of at least some of the seven Industries studied here. For
a more extensive defense of their exogeneity with respect to random
productivity shifts, see my earlier paper.

3.

Data and results

Most of the data used In this study are the same as described in my

earlier paper (I-Jail (1987)). These include real value added,
compensation and total hours of work, and the real capital stock. The only
series used here that was rot part of the earlier work Is the rental price
of capital.
Construction of the rental price follows Hall and Jorgenson (1967).
The formula relating the rental price to Its determinants is:
(3.1)

r

krd

(p +

The determinants are:
19

p: The firm's real cost of fxxis, measured as the dividend yield of
the S&P 500 portfolio;
6: The economic rate of deprecIation, 0.127, obtairEd from

Jorgenson and Sullivan (1981), Table 1, p. 179;
k: The effective rate of the investment tax credit, from Jorgenson

and Sullivan, Table 10, p. 194;
d: The present discot.nted value of tax deductions for depreciation,
from Jorgenson and Sullivan, Table 6, pp. 188-189;
r: The statutory corporate tax rate, from Auerbach (1983),
Appendix A;

The deflator for business fixed Investment from the U.S.
National Income and Product Accouits.

p:

Use of the dividend yield as the real cost of finds Is justified by two
considerations: First, the great bulk of Investment Is financed through
equity In the form of retained earnings. Second, the use of a marketdetermined real rate avoids the very substantial problems of deriving an
estimated real rate by subtracting expected inflation from a nominal rate.
The dividend yield Is a good estimate of the real cost of equity fuxis
wherever the path of future dividends is expected to be proportional to the
price of capital goods. For the typical firm, this Is an eminently
reasonable hypothesis. Of course, for firms with low current dividend
payouts and high expected growth, the dividend yield inderstates the real
cost of fuxfs. But these firms are cotnterbalarxed by mature firms wfxsse
payouts are high and whose growth rates are below the rate of inflation.
20

4. Results for 7 U.S. frthstries

Table I shows the basic data for nondurables manufacturing, one of the
seven

industries considered. The first column is the rate of growth of
output per iriit of capital; the second is hours growth per uit of capital,
and the third column is labor's share In total cost. The cost-based
residual in the fourth column is obtained by multiplying hours growth by
the labor share and stbtracting the product from output growth. The last
two coiumr show the values of two instr'urnents--the rate of growth of the
price of crude oil and the rate of growth of military spending. There is a
noticeable negative correlation between each of the instruments and the
growth of output, on the one hand, and the cost-based residual, on the
other hand. Oil price lrxreases in 1957, 1973-75, and 1978 were
associated with low or negative rates of growth of output and measured
productivity residuals. Oil price declines in 1959, 1963-65, and 1972
were cotçled with high output growth and large measured productivity
residuals. For military spending, increases in 1966-67 came at the
same time as low or negative growth rates of output and measured
productivity residuals. Declines in military spending in 1955 and 197173 coincided with high measured productivity growth. The evidence based
on military spending is more mixed; for example, In 1954, a large
decline In military spending was associated with a decline in output but
measured productivity growth was only slightly below normal.
The regressions to carry out formal tests of the invariance of the cost21

Table 1. Data for nondurables
(p.r-cent chang. or percent)

Output
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978

Hours

growth

growth

—1.9
—4.4

-0.6

5.5
0.9

—6.5

2.5

—1.8
—4.8

—2.5
—5.2
—5.2

2.1

—2.0
—2.8
—0.1
—2.5
—2.4
—3.2
—4.2
—5.8

3.9
0.8
—0.3
2.2
2.9
3.7
3.2
—1.5

2.9

—0.1
—1.9
—0.4

4.5

—3.1
—3.4
—7.8

—2.9
—0.9

—5.0
—0.9
—0.9
—7.4
—10.7

2.4
2.9

—2.0
—1.4

.5
0.7
2.3

0.8

Cost—

based
share residual
78.8
1.6
80.0
2.0
81.2
4.0
80.6
2.3
79.6
1.4
80.0
3.0
81.5
5.0
81.3
0.7
81.9
2.5
Labor-

82.9
83.2
83.7
83.4
82.1
81.8
81.9
80.2
78.1
79.3
80.1
79.6
76.8
75.5
76.9
76.0
74.4

3.3
7.1
3.2
1.9
1.2

—1.8

3.4
2.0
1.2
5.2
5.5
7.3
—3.3
0.7
2.9
2.0
0.4

Instrum.nt

Miii—

Di 1

tary

7.0
2.9
0_i
0.5
9.7
0.2
—3.4
0.4
—0.7
0.2

—1.7
—12.3
—11.8
—1.8

0.7
1.1
0.8
4.3
0.9

13.2
12.3

—0.4
—0.4
—0.1

7.7
—0.7

10.2
51.9
14.8

3.2
7.8
9.0

.0

—1.9
—1.6

-0.2

2.6
0.5

—0.9
—4.0
—0.2

1.7

—6.0
—9.1
—8.4

—7.3
—7.8
—4.6
—3.0
—2.7

1.3
1.0

based prodixtlvlty measure in norxlurables are:

iq-

o*&i = .0306 - .115x

(.0045) (.040)

SE: 2.1%

DW: 1.58

Ac7*&i— 0220- 144
—

(:0047)

(075)MIL

SE: 2.3%

OW: 2.01

In both cases, the correlation of the Instrument with output growth is
negative, so the evidence Is inamblguous that an event sixh as an oil price
decline or cut In military spending, which stimulates nondurables sales,
raises the cost-based measure of prodictlvlty. The failure of the
theoretical invariance property is attributable to some failure of its

urxlerlying asswnpuons. My interpretation is that either the assu-nptlon
of optimal Investment or the assumption of constant returns to scale
fails. I will return later to a fuller discussion of the Implications of the
rejection of the invariance proposition.
Tables 2 and 3 present the evidence for all seven industries and for the

oil, military, and political Instruments. The entries in Table 2 are the
marginal significance levels for the 21 tests for invariance. That is, each
number Is the probability that a covarlance at least as positive as the one
actually farxl might have arisen purely by chance. All Industries except
services reject the invariance hypothesis at the 10 percent level and all
except services and flnanoe-insurarce-real estate reject at the 5 percent
23

Table 2. Test statistics for 7 industries and 3 instruments.

Industry

Military
Oil Spending

Party

Services

0.263

0.049

0.025

FIRE

0.071

0.255

0.357

Durables

0.045

0.709

0.100

Nondurables

0.004

0.034

0.389

Trade

0.007

0.240

0.782

Construction

0.007

0.342

0.191

Trans. and utilities

0.015

0.271

0.029

Notes:

The statistics are the marginal significance lvel for a one—tailed

test of the

hypothesis that the covariance of the cost—based residual
and the instrument is positive. The sign of the instrument is
normalized so that its covariarice with output growth is positive.

Table 3.

Results for 7 industries and 3 instruments.

Coefficient,
regression

standard error, and

Services

—0.012
C

FIRE

0.018 )

0.029 1.33
0.020 )
-0.108 2.14
C 0.061 )

Durablee
Nondurables
Trade

—0.115
0.040

—o. 197

0.073 )

utilities —0.076

0.033 )

0.053

2.63

0.0075

2.60

0.024 1.35
0.036 )
—0. 063
2.09

0. 0016

1.34

C

1.52

0.0176

2.28

C 0.0133 )

2.01

—0.0028

1.88

—0.045

2.34

0.0059

2.31

—0.060

1.44

—0 • 0156

1.51

0.062 )

C

0.147 )

C

0.063 )

2.10

0.0043 )

—0.144

0.075 )

2.44

0.0036 )

0.031 )

( 0.114 )

1 • 58

—0.084

Construction

(

for each
Party

Spending

)

C 0.031 )

and

2.40

statistic

Military

Oi 1

Industry

Trans.

Durbin—Watson

0.039

0.0098 )

0.0075 )
(

2.11

0.0174 )

0. 0142

0.0071 )

2.33

level. The oil price is a factor price and a source of demand shifts for
each of the 7 lrxkstrles. On the assumption that neither role should shift
the production ftlon, that Is, that oil price fluctuetlons are uncorrelated
with true productivity growth, I conclude that Invariance fails in the
direction predicted by excess capacity or Increasing returns to scale.
In two Industries, services and norxlurables, fluctuations in military
spending show evidence of failure of the invariance hypothesis in the
direction predicted by excess capacity or increasing returns. All
industries except durables show some evidence of failure in that direction.
The political party of the President is suitable as an Instrument to the
extent that the differences In policies of the two parties create differences
in output growth rates but not in true productivity growth. In fact, real
growth has generally been greater under Democrats that under
Republicans. Under the assumption that the growth was achieved through
differences in monetary and fiscal policy and not through differences in
policies affecting the production function, the political dummy is a good
instrument. I consider this assumption eminently reasonable. The third
column of Table 2 shows that the political dummy gives strong rejection
of Invariance for services and transportation-utilities and somevkiat
weaker rejection for durables. Results for other industries are
Indeterminate mainly because output growth has hardly been different
tzxler the two parties.

26

5. Irterpretatian & rejection of lnvwionce & the cost-based prodictlvity
reslth.aal

As a matter of theory, an optimizing firm with a constant returns
tethiology should obey invar1are—its cost-based productivity measure

should be uorDelated with any outside force that changes output but does
nct change its production f.rction. I have shown earlier that excess
capacity or increasing returns to scale could explain the failure of
invariance in the direction fouid here. With chronic excess capacity, the
firm's costs would be higher than appropriate, so the cost share of labor
would uxierstate the trus elasticity of output with respect to labor input.
Similarly, fixed costs or other failures of constant returns would make the
cost share uxierstate the true elasticity. Then, as a result of the
ivxlerstatement of the elasticity, the cost-based productivity residual would
incorporate too small an adjustment for variations in labor input and the
residual itself would rise every time output rose.
Other conditions could cause the failure of Invariance. These include
i.rimeasured fluctuations in work effort, suboptimal levels of employment
because of monopsony power in the labor market, u-irneasured fluctuations
in capital utilization, and mis-measurement of labor Input.

Labor howding

Before considering the various specification errors in turn, I should

discuss or major phemmenon that has an important role in the story told
27

by the data but is not an alternative explanation of the findings. I refer to
labor hoarding and overhead labor. The following example shows how the
invariance property of the cost-based residual holds in the presence of
overhead labor:
Suppose that the technology is such that the level of employment
required to produce art output Q is XK + 4[Q - K]+. That is, with a capital
stock of K and overhead labor of XK, it is possible to produce up to K units
of output. Additional output requires an Increment of 4' units of labor for
each irtit of output above K. The shadow value of capital is -Xw when
output is below K because the firm could produce just as much output with
lower overhead labor if its capital were lower. The shadow value of
capital is (4' - A)w when Q exceeds K--In that regime, more capital
requires more overhead workers but reduces the requirement for the
Let be the probability that output will
incremental labor described by
exceed K. Then the expected shadow value of capital is (p4' - X)w. At the

optimum capital stock, this equals the service price of capital, r. Hence,
= (r+Aw)/4'w. Suppose that the fluctuations in output are in a small
region above arid below K. The cost share, o, will be close to
wA/(wX+r). Because there is no true productivity change, the actual
change in output, iq, Is a valid instrument itself. Suppose that the capital
stock does not change over time. When output is below K, the change in
employment is zero and the cost-based residual is equal to q. Thus the
relation between the residual arid the instrument has a unit slope. When
output is above K, the change in employment, tN, is 4'Q. The level of
employment is close to XQ, because 0 is only a little over K. Hence the
rate of growth of employment, M, is approximately (4'/X)q. The slope
of the relation between the cost-based residual iq - o*n and iq is
28

(kimeas&red fluctuations in work effort

Of the various specification errors that may have biased the covariance
of the cost-based residual and an lrstrurnent L.çward, the only one that
seems to have the potential to reverse the negative conclusion about
Investment theory with constant returns is the following, considered at
length in the earlier paper: There are unmeasured variations in work
effort that are positively correlated with output. When an outside force
drives up output and employment, measured productivity rises for a reason
unrelated to increasing returns or excess capacity. There is rc question
that the metlxxl of this paper is vulnerable to such measurement errors;
the only question is the numerical importance of the errors.
A number of conslderatiors convince me that unmeasured fluctuations
in effort cannot explain all of the correlation I find between the cost-based
residual and various instruments. First, the magnitude of the fluctuations
would have to be large. Figure 2 of my earlier paper skws that the
effort of the typical worker would have to have been almost 10 percent
above normal for a sustained period in the 1960s, for example. Second,
survey evidence collected from employers by Fay and Medoff (1985)
suggests that effort Is slightly negatively correlated with output, not
strongly positively, as required to give an upward bias In the estimated
mark ratio. Third, the fluctuations in effort needed to rationalize the
observed fluctuations in productivity are inconsistent with the observed
behavior of compensation. Work effort rises so much in a boom that the
wage, corrected for changes In effort, actually falls. I find this
implausible. The only way to rescue the hypothesis of large fluctuations
30

I - a/X. The average slope is 1- + (I - <y*/X). Irertlng the
values for and c,* derived above shows that the average slope is zero.
In the example, It Is true that when the firm Is In the labor-hoarding
regime, when Q is below K, the covariarxe of the cost-based residual and
the lrstrumerit would be strongly positive. However, this is exactly
coLnterbalanced by a nagative covarlance when output Is above K. What if
a firm spent most of its time In the labor-hoarding regime and had output
above K only in times of extreme demand? Isn't this the normal case for
most finns? The arswer Is that such a firm is not satisfying the
condition for optimal investment; it has excess capacity. If It is the
normal condition, It simply proves the point of this paper, that the
evidence suggests that excess capacity or fixed costs are Important.
Labor hoarding and overhead labor are probably Important phenomena in
a number, If not all, of the lndttrles studied in this paper. When a firm
is In a labor-hoarding regime, Its cost-based residual will be positively
correlated with an instrn'nent. In that respect, labor hoarding is an
essential part of the explanation of the findings of this paper. However,
labor hoarding Is not an alteimative explanation to excess capacity or
increasing returns for the failure of the invariance property of the cost-

based residual. A firm with a cortant ret tecfulogy and an optimal
Investment strategy, no matter how ridden with forecasting errors, will
spend enough time In a labor-shortage regime to offset the time spent in
the labor-hoarding regime. As the example shows, the condition for
optimal investment amotrts to stating that the two regimes combir in
such a way as to eliminate any covarlance of the cost-based residual with
an Instr,jrnent.
29

in work effort Is to Invoke the theory of wage smoothing, in which
workers are not paid on a current basis for their labor input, but rather
receive comperation based on the average level of work over an extended
period.

Other labor issues
A basic maintained hypothesis of this paper is that the firm chooses an
optimal level of employment. The derivation of equation 1.6 makes the
assunption that the marginal reverue product of labor is equated to the
wage. An alternative Is that the firm employs too many workers, on the
average. Then the measured elasticity, u*, would exceed the true
elastIcity, o, because the observed wage would overstate the shadow value
of labor. Herxe the covarlarce of the measured cost-based productivity
residual with an 1rtrument would be negative. Excess labor could not
explain the findings of the paper.
By the same token, If the shadow value of labor exceeds the observed
wage most of the time, the findings could be explained. For example, if
the typical firm has strong monopsony power in its labor market, a
failure of the invarlarxe property would occur In the observed direction.
But the conditlone trxler which this could be expected to persist for long

periods are streruots. First, If there is bilateral bargaining with a labor
t.rdon, one would not expect to find a shadow value of labor in excess of the
observed wage. Both parties could be made better off by attracting a
worker from the open market and paying the worker the prevailing union
wage. And if the union has much morxpoly power, It is likely to succeed
in pushing the observed wage above the shadow value, by extracting a kniip31

sum component of comperation as part of an efficient bargain.
Second, the firm has a strong irxentive to overcome its monopsony
position in the labor market by attracting workers from more distant
markets. That is, when it can only get more work from its own local
market by driving i every worker's wage, it will turn to other markets.
What matters is the elasticity of labor stply from the entire labor
market to the one firm in the long rtn. It is hard to believe that this
elasticity is anything less than a very large number for most firms.

Mlsmeastrernent & capital
An important implicit assumption of my work is that capital input is
correctly measured. The measure of capital I use is the amouit of capital
available for use. As long as capital has no pure user cost, it is
reasonable to assume that all capital available is in use. If there Is a
pure user cost--If capital depreciates in use rather than just over time-then the situation is different. There is a capital sLçply decision similar
to the labor st.ply decision and presumably fluctuations In capital input
occur in parallel to fluctuations in output. I should note at the outset that
if capital is out of use because it is redundant--its shadow value is zero-then there is no bias in my procedure. The dangerous case is when capital
has a positive shadow value and there are uimeasured fluctuations in
utilization.
Though it is not possible to dispose of this hypothesis as a complete or
partial explanation of the failure of invariance, it is possible to show that
it calls for rather extreme movements of the true capital stock,
corresponding to substantial pure user costs of capital. Let v be the
32

change In measurement error of capital actually in use. Then the true
relation between q and An, when these are calculated with measured
rather than actual capital, will be:
(5.1)

Aq=uM-(1-cT)Av+O

Suppose that the measurement errors are related to the change In
employment, as they would be if they arose from rmeasured fluctuations
in capital utilization:
(5.2)

= -4)An

Strict complementarity of work hours and capital hours would mean that 4)
has the value of one.
In this setup, the cost-based residual Is
(5.3)

The variable (I - cr)An can be formed (using cr in place of a, which only
adds an innocuous

term) and then the parameter 4) can be estimated by

instrumental variables.
For nondurables, the results of estimation are:

33

= .025 + 2.43
(.003)

(1cr*)n

(.52)

DW: 1.98 SE: .013
Irtrurnent: Change In oil price

-

= .025 + 4.97 (1 (.005)

(3.19)

SE: .028
DW: 2.02
Irtrurnent: Change in military spending

In effect, these estimates interpret the observed correlation of the
irtrurnents with the cost-based productivity residual as arising from
measurement errors in capital utilization. In order to explain the
magnitirie of the correlation, the elasticities of the measirement errors
with respect to the change in labor Input must be implausibly large--aroud
2.5 or 5. The simple model In which capital and labor fluctuate in
proportion, In which Is one, Is rt nearly emugh to explain the findings
of the paper.

34

6. Conclusion
The data strorly refute the combination of two hypotheses: Constant
returns to scale and a capital stock that maximizes expected profit.
Taken at face value, the findings preclude the development of' a structural

investment equation along conventional lines. Since Jorgenson, the
centerpiece of investment equations has been profit-maximizing cfxice of

the capital stock by the firm. But that hypothesis requires the recognition
of sthstantial departures from constant returns to scale, in the direction
of increasing returns. Investment theory then must enter the thicket of
Industry equilibrium with fixed costs or other sources of increasing
returns. No simple relation between output, the rental price of capital,
and the capital stock can be expected to describe the behavior of
Investment. For example, output and the capital stock will expand in
proportion if the expansion Is accompanfied by a proportional expansion in
the number of productive zdts, so that the scale of each unit remains
tnchanged. Capital will grow less than in proportion to output if the
number of tziits remains tiichanged and each achieves a greater scale.

35

Rderences

Ar1rew B. Abel aM Olivier J. Blanthard, "The Present Value of Profits
aM Cyclical Movement In Investment," Eccnarnetrica 54:249-274, March
1986
Alan J. Auerbach, "Corporate Taxation In the United States," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1983, pp. 45 1-505
Arthir De Vany and Gail Frey, "Backlogs and the Value of Excess Capacity

in the Steel Irktry," American Economic Review 72:441-451, June
1982

Jon Fay and James Medoff, 'Labor and Output over the Business Cycle,"
American Economic Review 75:6.38-655, September 1985

Robert E. Hall, "Investment, Interest Rates, and the Effects of
Stabilization Policies," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1977:1,
pp. 61-103
Robert E. Hall, "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent
Income Hypothesis: Theory arxi Evidence," Journal d Political Economy
86:971-988, December 1978
Robert E. Hall, "The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost In U.S.
Industry," Stanford, March 1987
36

Robert E. Hall and Dale W. Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment

Behavior," American Economic Renew 57:39 1-414, Jtne 1967
Dale W. Jorgenson, "Capital Thaory and Investment Behavior," American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 53:247-259, May 1963

Dale W. Jorgenson and Martin A. Sullivan, "Inflation and Corporate Capital

Recovery' In Depreciation, imitation, and the Taxation of income from
Capitol, Charles R. Hulten (ed.) (Washington DC: Urban InstItute) 1981,

pp. 171-237
Vim E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate

Fluctttlons," Eccnometrica 50:1345-1370, November 1982
Robert E. Lucas and Edward C. Prescott, "Investment uider Urxertainty,"
Eccnometrica 39:659-682, 1971.
Robert M. Solow, "Tectnical Change and the Aggregate Production
Firctlon," Review of Economics and StatIstics 39:312-320, Augst 1957

37

