NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY:
EVIDENCE FROM CHINA
Kaiji Chen
Patrick Higgins
Daniel F. Waggoner
Tao Zha
Working Paper 22650
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22650

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

Comments from Marty Eichenbaum, John Leahy, Chris Sims, Harald Uhlig, Gianluca Violante, and
Shang-Jin Wei have helped improve earlier drafts. We thank the discussants Kevin Huang, Bing Li,
and Kang Shi as well as seminar participants at International Monetary Fund, Hong Kong Monetary
Authority, ECB-Tsinghua Conference on China, Chinese University of Hong Kong, and Princeton
University for helpful discussions. This research is supported in part by the National Science Foundation
Grant SES 1558486 through the NBER and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Project
Numbers 71473168, 71473169, and 71633003. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kaiji Chen, Patrick Higgins, Daniel F. Waggoner, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Impacts of Monetary Stimulus on Credit Allocation and the Macroeconomy: Evidence from
China
Kaiji Chen, Patrick Higgins, Daniel F. Waggoner, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 22650
September 2016, Revised December 2019
JEL No. C3,C13,D3,E02,E5
ABSTRACT
We develop a new empirical framework to identify and estimate the effects of monetary stimulus on
the real economy. The framework is applied to the Chinese economy when monetary policy in normal
times was switched to an extraordinarily expansionary regime to combat the impact of the 2008 financial
crisis. We show that this unprecedented monetary stimulus accounted for as high as a 4% increase
of real GDP growth rate by the end of 2009. Monetary transmission to the real economy was through
bank credit allocated disproportionately to financing investment in real estate and heavy industries.
Such an asymmetric credit allocation resulted in the persistently high investment rate and debt-to-GDP
ratio. Our findings provide a broad perspective on a tradeoff between short-run GDP growth and longer-run
accumulated debt in response to large monetary interventions.

Kaiji Chen
Emory University
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
kaiji.chen@emory.edu
Patrick Higgins
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
1000 Peachtree Street, N.E.
Atlanta, GA 30309-4470
patrick.higgins@atl.frb.org

Daniel F. Waggoner
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
1000 Peachtree Street N.E.
Atlanta, Georgia 30309-4470
Daniel.F.Waggoner@atl.frb.org
Tao Zha
Emory University
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
and also NBER
tzha@emory.edu

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY

1

I. Introduction
In the aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis, central banks around the world (Federal
Reserve System, European Central Bank, Bank of Japan, and People’s Bank of China) have
initiated massive monetary stimulus in an attempt to combat the crisis and rescue the
sagging economy. What are the consequences of such an unusual change of monetary policy
on the financial system and the real economy? To answer this important question, one needs
an empirical framework to first identify the change of monetary policy and then assess the
monetary transmission channel through which the policy change affects the real economy.
In this paper we propose such a framework and apply it to the Chinese economy. As China
is now the second largest economy, understanding the effect of monetary stimulus on China’s
macroeconomy provides a general perspective on monetary transmission mechanisms in the
global economy. The complexity of the Chinese economy merits a thorough study that takes
into account China’s institutional facts. Figures 1-3 display several key facets of China’s
macroeconomy. During the global financial crisis, growth of China’s real gross domestic
product (GDP) plummeted from 13.6% in 2007Q2 to 6.4% in 2009Q1 (top left graph of
Figure 1). In November 2008, China’s State Council announced a plan to invest 4 trillion
RMB over the two-year period from 2009Q1 to 2010Q4 in an attempt to stem the sharp
fall of aggregate output. The rectangular box in each graph marks this plan period. This
stimulus plan resulted in a 25% growth rate of M2 supply and a 30% growth rate of bank
loans in 2009 (top right graph of Figure 1). While GDP growth bounced back in 2009Q1 and
peaked at 11.6% in 2010Q1, both investment-to-GDP ratio and loans-to-GDP ratio surged
during the stimulus to 48% and 110% and persisted at high levels long after the stimulus
was over (bottom two graphs of Figure 1).1
A conventional view is that state owned enterprises (SOEs) play a crucial role in the
stimulus because China has long been a planned economy. The data, however, provides
little support for this view. Figure 2 plots the share of SOEs in industrial sales revenue (left
panel) and in aggregate fixed investment (right panel). As both series have experienced a
secular decline, the SOE share was already very low prior to the stimulus, about 30% in
sales revenue and 24% in fixed investment. The stimulus did not reverse the declining trend:
the SOE share in sales revenue decreased to 28% in 2009 and its share in fixed investment
increased by only 1% to 25% in 2009Q2. This evidence indicates that SOEs were not a key
player during the stimulus period.
Rather than relying on SOEs, the Chinese government placed more emphasis on certain
industries for their stimulus plan. These industries include real estate, infrastructure, and
manufacturing industries often labeled by the Chinese government as “heavy industries.”
1In

2009-2010, bank credit accounted for at least 75% of the overall debt-to-GDP ratio.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY

2

Following Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and Zha (2016), we group all these capital-intensive
industries into one sector called “heavy sector” and the remaining industries (e.g., education,
healthcare, and scientific research) into the other called ‘light sector.”2 Since the late 1990s,
the government has viewed most industries in the heavy sector as strategically important
and supported them with preferential credit. As the top left graph of Figure 3 shows, bank
loans for financing investment in the heavy sector (“heavy loans”) as a share of GDP was
7.1% prior to the stimulus, much higher than a level of 1.3% for the light sector (“light
loans”). More important is the asymmetry of credit allocation in the stimulus: the increase
of heavy loans as a percent of GDP (from 7.1% in 2008Q4 to 9.4% in 2009Q4) was three
times as large as that of light loans (from 1.3% to 2.1% for the same period). A majority
of the increase in heavy loans was channeled to real estate, as the ratio of real estate loans
to GDP rose to 4.2% during 2009-2010, which was close to half of the ratio of heavy loans
to GDP (the top right graph of Figure 3). Accordingly, the share in GDP of value-added
output produced by the heavy sector rose sharply during 2009-2010, implying that the GDP
growth under the stimulus was mainly driven by output growth in the heavy sector (bottom
graphs of Figure 3).
The empirical framework in this paper is developed to answer the question of how much
of these observed macroeconomic movements is caused by monetary stimulus—the stimulus
initiated by massive monetary injection. To disentangle how much of monetary stimulus is
attributable to a policy change from the effect of such a change, we base our framework on a
dynamic multivariate system in the context of the structural vector autoregression (SVAR)
literature (Leeper, Sims, and Zha, 1996; Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1999; Uhlig,
2005; Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005). One identified equation in this system
is monetary policy as described by Chen, Ren, and Zha (2017), who argue that China’s
monetary policy is quantity-based with M2 growth as the primary policy instrument. In
particular, M2 growth responds nonlinearly to GDP growth, depending on whether actual
growth is above the government’s target (the normal state) or below the target (the shortfall
state). We therefore embed this endogenous-switching monetary policy equation in our multivariate system, which allows us to trace out the dynamic effects on multiple macroeconomic
variables of monetary stimulus.
Within such a framework, China’s monetary stimulus is a result of monetary policy switching to a much more aggressive regime to combat the fall of GDP growth below its official
target. As it turned out, the Chinese government’s 4-trillion stimulus plan was not even
close to its actual action. Most of the monetary injection occurred in 2009. M2 increased
by 4.2 trillion in 2009Q1 alone and by a total of 11.5 trillion during the 2009Q1-Q3 period.

2See

Appendix A for the detailed classification of heavy and light sectors.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY

3

These three crucial quarters of massive monetary injections observed in the data match the
period identified by our empirical model as a switch in monetary policy regime.
Estimating such an endogenous switching model involves both identification and computational strategies. As a key methodological contribution, we show that the dynamic impacts
on the real economy of such a monetary policy switch are uniquely determined in our multivariate framework without any restrictions on equations other than the monetary policy
equation. Sims and Zha (2006) propose a regime-switching SVAR approach to analyzing
how a shift in monetary policy regime affects the real economy. There are two major shortcomings in their approach. First, regime switching is assumed to be exogenous. Second,
they impose identifying restrictions on all the other equations in addition to the monetary
policy equation. One persistent criticism is that such restrictions are often too strong to be
credible for many applications. Our framework makes important advancements in these two
dimensions. That is, monetary policy regime is endogenously determined; and there are no
restrictions on all the equations other than the monetary policy equation, which avoids what
Sims (1980) calls “incredible restrictions.”3
To assess the dynamic impacts on the real economy of this regime change in monetary
policy requires taking two steps sequentially. First, we need to compute the impulse responses
in each state of the economy. The impulse responses to a monetary policy shock in each
state describe the mechanism of monetary transmission. We estimate the model for both
normal and shortfall states and obtain several stylized facts about the dynamic effects of
monetary policy on key macroeconomic variables. Among these stylized facts, we highlight
three sets of general results.
(1) Monetary policy is more important in the shortfall state than in normal times. The
monetary policy shock contributes to as high as 45% of the GDP fluctuation in the
shortfall state, in contrast to only one fifth in the normal state.
(2) Monetary policy has asymmetric effects on bank credit allocation. In response to a
monetary policy shock, more credit is allocated to financing investment in the heavy
sector than in the light sector for both normal and shortfall states. The asymmetry
of credit allocation is exacerbated in the shortfall state.
(3) Asymmetric credit allocation to the heavy sector plays a critical role in promoting
growth of investment over that of consumption. And growth of heavy GDP is a
driving force of GDP growth in the whole economy.
These results form the basis for our quantitative assessment of the impacts of monetary
stimulus. The mechanism is the same whether the effects are triggered by an exogenous
shock or by an endogenous switch. But assessing the effects of an endogenous switch in
3Our

new approach advances the existing SVAR literature in which the system is customarily identified

by strong assumptions such as Choleski or sign restrictions.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY

4

monetary policy regime requires additional analysis because they are nonlinear and depend
on the initial condition. In the second step, we compute the nonlinear effects of switching
from one state to the other. We choose the 2009 monetary stimulus event as a natural
experiment and prove that our multivariate framework is suitable for analyzing the effects
of a shift in monetary policy regime by disentangling policy change from its effect.
Within this framework we study a counterfactual economy in which monetary policy had
not switched to a new regime so that M2 growth had remained at 15% instead of shooting
up to 25% in 2009Q1-Q3. Comparing the counterfactual and actual economies, we find that
this unprecedented expansion of M2 growth boosted annual GDP growth by as high as 4%
by the end of 2009, which accounted for 85% of the annual growth rate of GDP between
2008Q4 and 2009Q4.
Such an impressive effect on GDP growth was mainly through bank loans allocated more to
financing investment in the heavy sector than in the light sector. In particular, the increase
of bank credit to real estate attributable to the monetary stimulus accounted for more than
half of the increase of the credit allocated to the heavy sector. We find that while the effect
of the 2009 monetary stimulus on GDP growth was short lived (about two years), its effects
on investment-to-GDP and debt-to-GDP ratios were much more persistent and lasted for
a longer period. These findings signify two problems facing today’s China: overinvestment
in industries with excess capacity, such as real estate, and rapidly growing debt. Equally
important is their broad implication that an extraordinary monetary stimulus can generate
an intertemporal tradeoff between short-run GDP growth and longer-run indebtedness.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the collection and construction of time series data and develops a new estimation method. Section III presents the
main estimation results about the monetary transmission mechanism. Section IV quantifies
the dynamic impacts of the 2009 monetary stimulus on credit allocation and the macroeconomy. Section V concludes.
II. Data and empirical framework
In this section we discuss the quarterly time series constructed for the subsequent empirical
analysis and propose a new econometric methodology
II.1. Data. The sample period for estimation is from 1999Q1 to 2016Q2, including the initial
four lags in our dynamic system. This is a period in which the PBC has made M2 growth
an explicit policy instrument and the PBC’s official Monetary Policy Reports (MPRs) have
been made available to the public since 2001Q1.4 The sample length for our quarterly data is
4The

only official release of how the PBC conducts monetary policy each quarter is a published quarterly

MPR. The first publication of MPR was issued in 2001Q1. Opinions expressed in the monetary policy
committee (MPC)’s meetings are recorded in the form of “meeting minutes.” The minutes, if approved by

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY

5

over 17 years, comparable to the sample length often used for studying U.S. monetary policy
during its inflation-targeting period of 16 years prior to the 2008 financial crisis (1992-2007).
When assessing how a change in monetary policy regime is transmitted to the real economy,
it is necessary to control for other macroeconomic variables than M2 stock. Our benchmark
model consists of 11 variables with the following 10 variables besides M2 supply: GDP,
consumer price index (CPI), the excess reserve ratio (EER), the actual reserve ratio (ARR),
total bank loans, short-term (ST) bank loans, the 7-day repo rate (Repo), the bank lending
rate (LR), the bank deposit rate (DR), and foreign exchange reserves (FXR).5 We denote
these variables by yt , an n × 1 vector with n = 10 for the benchmark model. As in the SVAR
literature, we express all the variables in natural log except for interest rates and ratio
variables, which are expressed in level as a fraction. We follow Bianchi and Bigio (2014)
and include both EER and ARR in the system to isolate the effect on EER by controlling
for ARR. Similarly, we control for LR and DR to isolate the effect on the market interest
rate Repo. These variables would be potentially important for the monetary transmission
mechanism. In later sections we examine whether the interest rate channel is important by
removing the interest rates from our benchmark specification.
One may question the quality of China’s official macroeconomic data, especially the GDP
and CPI series. For example, Nakamura, Steinsson, and Liu (2016) argue that the official
CPI data underestimate the volatility of CPI inflation since 1995.6 Despite the unsettled
debates on this issue, the official CPI series is the headline price series the PBC and other
central government units have routinely relied on when making monetary policy decisions.
For this reason we need to use the official series to estimate the monetary policy equation. A
similar argument applies to the GDP series. One should not abandon the official GDP figures
because they are precisely the most important series targeted by the central government for
formulating monetary policy.7

more than two thirds of the MPC members, are attached as an annex to the PBC’s proposal on money
supply, interest rates, exchange rates, and other monetary variables. The proposal is then sent to the State
Council for approval. Once approved, the MPR provides an executive summary of the state of the economy
along with additional descriptions of how the PBC adjusts its monetary policy actions, mainly M2 growth
rates, in response to the state of the economy.
5See

Appendix A for a detailed description of the data.
we would like to use their series to verify the robustness of our results, but unfortunately their

6Ideally

series is only available at annual frequency. Nonetheless, their CPI series is likely to make the CPI response
to a monetary policy shock stronger.
7In a recent paper, Nie (2016) argues that “official GDP figures remain a useful and valid measure of
Chinese economic growth.” There is widespread suspicion that the GDP growth rates published by the
National Bureau of Statistics of China have overstated actual growth in China, especially for the last several
years. New research by Clark, Pinkovskiy, and Sala-i-Martin (2017), however, argue that China’s GDP

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY

6

Four additional quarterly time series are constructed for this paper: heavy GDP, light
GDP, heavy loans, and light loans. We collect industry level data on value added and newly
originated bank loans for fixed asset investment from the National Bureau of Statistics
(NBS). We then add up these series to construct the aggregate series of heavy GDP, light
GDP, heavy loans, and light loans. To understand the monetary transmission mechanism
for the Chinese economy, we use these four new series as well as other additional series to
estimate several variations of the benchmark model.
II.2. Empirical framework. The M2 variable (Mt ) and the other n = 10 variables form
a medium-sized dynamic model. One key equation in this model, following Chen, Ren, and
Zha (2017), is the monetary policy equation in which monetary policy switches endogenously between two regimes, depending on whether the gap between GDP growth and its
target is positive or not. For the Chinese government, M2 growth has been used as the
primary policy instrument. Use of M2 growth in the monetary policy equation captures
China’s quantity-based policy that differs from the interest-rate based policy widely used for
developed economies.
∗
Denote gm,t = ∆Mt , πt = ∆Pt , gx,t = ∆xt , and gx,t
= x∗t − xt−1 . The (log) GDP level
∗
target is x∗t and thus gx,t
measures the targeted GDP growth. Chen, Ren, and Zha (2017)’s

regime-switching monetary policy equation is specified as

∗
gm,t = γ0 + γm gm,t−1 + γπ (πt−1 − π ∗ ) + γx,t gx,t−1 − gx,t−1
+ σm,t εm,t ,

(1)

where εm,t is a serially independent monetary policy shock with the standard normal distribution. The time-varying coefficients take the form of


∗
∗
σ
γ
≥0
if gx,t−1 − gx,t−1
if gx,t−1 − gx,t−1 ≥ 0
m,a
x,a
, σm,t =
γx,t =
σ
γ
∗
∗
if gx,t−1 − gx,t−1
<0
if gx,t−1 − gx,t−1
<0
m,b
x,b

.

The subscript “a” stands for “above the target” and “b” for “below the target”. Note that
γx,t and σm,t have the time t subscript because they have to be estimated with the time
t variable gm,t . There are two parts associated with a switch in monetary policy regime:
exogenous shock and endogenous change of monetary policy from the normal regime to a
more aggressive regime. The time-varying coefficients, γx,t and σm,t , represent two policy
regimes in response to output growth: (a) the normal state when actual GDP growth meets
the target set by the government as a lower bound and supported by monetary expansion
and (b) the shortfall state when actual GDP growth falls short of its target.8 The Chinese
growth may be understated. All these debates imply that one should not simply abandon official GDP
statistics without viable and authoritative alternatives, especially when analyzing monetary policy.
8The overall impact of monetary stimulus depends on changes in both γ
x,t and σm,t . In Section IV, we
show that most of the dynamic impact of monetary stimulus in 2009 was explained by a change in the value
of γx,t (i.e., a change in the rule).

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY

7

government’s GDP growth target, by weighing social and political considerations heavily, is
politically mandated and takes precedence over all other economic objectives. In estimation,
∗
we take π ∗ and gx,t
as given.9

To quantify how monetary policy affects Mt as well as other macroeconomic variables yt ,
we postulate the dynamics of yt in a general system of simultaneous equations
A0 yt + b0 Mt = c +

4
X

A` yt−` +

`=1

4
X

b` Mt−` + ξt ,

(2)

`=1

where yt−` is an n × 1 vector of endogenous variables, c is an n × 1 vector of constant terms,
the n × 1 vector of shocks ξt , orthogonal to the monetary policy shock εm,t , has mean zero
and covariance identity matrix, c and b` are n × 1 coefficient vectors, and A` is an n × n
coefficient matrix. The variable vector yt includes πt and xt as well as other variables; for a
later analysis in Proposition 2, we let the first two elements of yt be πt and xt .
In the existing literature (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1999; Sims and Zha, 2006),
strong identifying restrictions are imposed on A0 to identify system (2). To maintain the
principle of minimal restrictions on identification (Sims, 1980), we impose no restrictions
on A` and b` (including the contemporaneous coefficient vector b0 and the contemporaneous
coefficient matrix A0 ). The principle of minimal restrictions is especially relevant to the
Chinese economy because the relationships among its key macroeconomic variables remain
largely unknown to the research community.
Without any restrictions, system (2) is unidentified because the transformed system
(QA0 )yt + (Qb0 )Mt = (Qc) +

4
X
`=1

(QA` )yt−` +

4
X

(Qb` )Mt−` + Qξt

`=1

obtained by multiplying any orthogonal matrix Q generates the same dynamics of yt as does
the original system.10 Because the policy variable Mt is contemporaneously correlated with
the rest of the variables (yt ), the identification question arises as to whether monetary policy
equation (1) is identified and whether the effect of a monetary policy shock εm,t on the
economy indexed by yt depends on the rotation matrix Q, when equation (1) is estimated
jointly with subsystem (2). The following proposition answers this question by establishing
the identification of monetary policy in the dynamic system.
Proposition 1. When the system represented by (1) and (2) is jointly estimated, the following
two results hold.
• Monetary policy equation (1) is identified, even though subsystem (2) is unidentified.
• Impulse responses of yt to εm,t are invariant to the rotation matrix Q.
9The

government specifies the CPI inflation target between 3% and 4%. The value of π ∗ is set at 3.5%.
that Qξt and ξt have exactly the same probability distribution: a normal probability distribution

10Note

with mean zero and variance identity matrix.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY

Proof. See Appendix B.

8



The intuition for identification of the monetary policy equation is that Mt is determined
before all other variables are determined at time t. In most of the SVAR literature, it is
required that the rest of the system has a recursive structure as well—an incredibly strong
assumption. What is new in Proposition 1 is that this additional assumption is unnecessary
and moreover the responses of all variables in the system to a monetary policy shock can be
uniquely determined.
To assess the effect of monetary policy, one must be able to estimate the impulse responses
to a monetary policy shock. The following proposition shows that the impulse responses are
nonlinear and regime-dependent.
Proposition 2. The impulse responses to a monetary policy shock, εm,t , can be computed
from the following regime-dependent system:
#"
" #
"
#
"
#
4
e 11 B
e 12 Mt−`
X
Mt
B
ε
m,t
`,t
`,t
et
= b̃t +
+D
,
e 21 B
e 22
B
yt
y
ξt
t−`
`,t
`,t
`=1
|
{z
}

(3)

e`,t
B

12
22
e1,t
e1,t
where B
is a function of γx,t and γπ and B
is a function of γx,t , γπ , b0 , and A0 .

To prove Proposition 2, consider the complete system composed of (1) and (2), which can
be written in the SVAR form of

" # "
h γ
# 
γx,t
γ0 −γπ π ∗ −γx,t x∗t−1
π
1
1+γm
0
M
σm,t
σm,t
t
σ
m,t
σ
σ
m,t
m,t
1×n


=
+
yt
c
b 0 A0
b1
A1
|
{z
} |
|
{z
}
{z
c̃t

e0,t
A



m
− σγm,t

"

1×(n−2)

e1,t
A



"

e2,t
A

0

0

e3
A

#



i "

 Mt−1
yt−1
}

#

"

# "
#
M
M
M
ε
t−2
t−3
t−4
m,t
1×n
1×n
1×n
+
+
+
. (4)
+
y
y
yt−4
ξt
t−2
t−3
b3 A 3
b 4 A4
b2
A2
| {z }
| {z }
{z
}
|
0

#

0

0

0

e4
A

e
e
e−1
e−1
e`,t = A
e−1
ct , B
It follows that b̃t = A
0,t e
0,t A`,t , and Dt = A0,t , where


σm,t
0
1×n  .
e−1 = 
A
0,t
−1
−σm,t A−1
0 b 0 A0
e1,t and B
e2,t embody cross-equation restrictions (i.e., reIt is straightforward to see that B
12
e1,t
strictions across the first equation and the rest of the equations). One can also see that B
22
e1,t
depends on γx,t and γπ and B
depends on γx,t , γπ , b0 , and A0 . The dependence of the
22
e1,t on γx,t implies that the impulse responses in the shortfall state
reduced-form coefficient B

are different from those in the normal state, as will be demonstrated in Section III.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY

9

The regime dependence and cross-equation restrictions make estimation of impulse responses an extremely difficult task in two aspects. First, both output coefficient and shock
volatility in monetary policy equation (1) depend on the state of the economy. These
endogenous-switching parameters make it computationally challenging to estimate the mediumsized nonlinear system (3).11 Second, although the first equation in system (3) is exactly
the same as the monetary policy equation represented by (1), the parameters in the other
equations of system (3) are functions of σm,t and γx,t . In principle, therefore, estimating the
monetary policy equation jointly with the rest of system (3) may not yield the same results
as does estimation of equation (1) alone.
To overcome these difficulties, we propose a new estimation method stated in the following
proposition.
Proposition 3. Statistical estimation and inference of nonlinear system (3) are equivalent
to two separate estimation procedures such that nonlinear monetary policy equation (1)
and linear system (2) can be estimated independently. That is, estimation and inference of
system (2) do not depend on the coefficients of equation (1).
Proof. See Appendix C.



Corollary 1. The reduced form of system (2) is
yt = d +

4
X
`=1

B` yt−` +

4
X

h` Mt−` + ut ,

(5)

`=0

−1
−1
−1
where d = A−1
0 c, B` = A0 A` , h` = A0 b` , and ut = A0 ξt . This reduced-form linear system

can be estimated independently of monetary policy equation (1). That is, a regime shift in
monetary policy does not affect estimation of the reduced-form system represented by (5).
Although yt depends on Mt in equation (5), the separation property in Proposition 3 or
Corolary 1 still holds because Mt is predetermined by the monetary policy equation alone.
The customary SVAR representation is the reduced-form system represented by (3). This
representation facilitates a clear way of understanding how variables respond to a structural
shock dynamically (in our case, the monetary policy shock εm,t ). Direct estimation of this
nonlinear system, however, is computationally expensive and conceptually difficult for the
general researcher to handle. Working with the alternative form represented by (1) and (5)
enables one to avoid the needless cost of dealing with the nonlinear system represented by
(3).
Equivalent to the system represented by (1) and (5) is the one represented by (1) and
(2). There are two advantages of working directly on (1) and (2). First, one can use the
11In

fact, in the initial stage of this research, we tried to estimate such a nonlinear system without much

success. The main problem is the time involved in computation.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 10

standard Bayesian prior of Sims and Zha (1998), which is imposed directly on the structural
form.12 Second, once estimation of the contemporaneous coefficient matrix A0 is obtained,
one can proceed to estimate, equation by equation, system (2) (see Appendix C for the proof).
Although the monetary policy equation represented by (1) is nonlinear, its estimation entails
little computational cost on estimation of the rest of the system.13
In summary, Propositions 1 and 3, together with Corollary 1, provide a general framework
in which one is able to quantify how a regime change in monetary policy affects the aggregate
economy without violating the Lucas critique (Leeper and Zha, 2003; Sims and Zha, 2006).
They also provide a powerful toolkit for estimating a relatively large nonlinear system with
minimal computational costs.
III. Monetary policy transmission
Assessing the impacts of monetary stimulus as a result of a shift in monetary policy regime
requires one to estimate the impulse responses to a monetary policy shock in both normal
and shortfall states. In this section, we provide an analysis of these impulse responses and
discuss several key results that are the driving force behind the dynamic impacts of monetary
stimulus on the banking system and the real economy.
III.1. Impulse responses in the normal state. In normal times when GDP growth is
above the government’s target, what is the impact of monetary policy on aggregate output?
Figure 4 displays the impulse response of GDP to a monetary policy shock along with probability bands. The impulse responses of other macroeconomic variables for the benchmark
model are displayed in Figure 5. From Figures 4 and 5 one can see that a positive onestandard-deviation shock to monetary policy raises M2 by 0.9% and GDP by 0.37% at their
peak values. The output response is hump-shaped, while the M2 response is much more
persistent. Both responses are highly significant both economically and statistically. The
CPI response displays little price puzzle, further supporting our argument that the estimated
monetary policy shock does not contain endogenous responses to other macroeconomic variables.14 The correct sign of a price response is one of the building foundations for the SVAR
12The

hyperparameters for the prior, in the notation of Sims and Zha (1998), are λi = 1 for i = 0, 1, 2, 4,

λ3 = 4, µ5 = µ6 = 1. Except for the hyperparameter λ3 , the prior setting is standard. The large decay value
for λ3 is necessary for the Chinese data as it helps produce a superior out-of-sample forecasting performance
documented by Higgins, Zha, and Zhong (2016) and Li (2016).
13All the coefficients in equation (1) are very tightly estimated (including those in the shortfall state) and
the estimates are γm = 0.391, γπ = −0.397, γx,a = 0.183, γx,b = −1.299, σm,a = 0.005, σm,b = 0.010. Note
that there are a total of 15 shortfall periods, including the three quarters of 2009Q1-Q3.
14A price puzzle emerges if the identified monetary shock is contaminated by the endogenous component
such that prices do not fall in response to contractionary monetary policy. This point is made forcibly by
Sims (1992).

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 11

literature (Sims, 1992; Uhlig, 2005). In response to an expansionary monetary policy shock,
the excess reserve ratio and the Repo rate fall in the initial periods.15 These responses are
consistent with most theoretical predictions of the effect of a monetary policy shock.
The response of total (real) bank loans has a pattern very similar to the M2 response
(Figure 6), indicating that monetary expansion increases output through an increase of
bank lending. To see how monetary policy affects different sectors, we add the time series
of either heavy GDP or light GDP to the benchmark model. The bottom row of Figure 6
reports the estimated impulse responses: heavy GDP responds more strongly than light
GDP does. Because bank credit to industries such as real estate is typically not of short
term, these heavy and light GDP responses are consistent with our next finding that most of
the increase in bank loans does not stem from an increase of short-term loans. As shown in
the top row of Figure 6, the response of short-term bank loans is much smaller in magnitude
than that of total bank loans and its wide probability bands further indicate weak statistical
significance.
Such a finding about bank lending is reinforced by how investment and consumption respond to expansionary monetary policy. Most industries in the heavy sector are capital
intensive with higher investment rates than those in the light sector. This fact, together
with our previous finding of the larger response of heavy GDP than light GDP to a monetary policy shock, indicates that investment rather than consumption is a driving engine
behind the output fluctuation. Indeed, Figure 7 shows that investment responds strongly to
an expansionary monetary policy shock (hump-shaped response) while the response of consumption (no hump shape) is small in magnitude and its statistical significance, according to
the probability bands, is very weak.16 The result is in sharp contrast to the finding of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) for the U.S. economy that the response of consumption
to an expansionary monetary policy shock is hump-shaped, strong, and sizable.
Some key variance decompositions attributable to the monetary policy shock relative to
all other shocks are reported in Table 1. The monetary policy shock explains one fifth of the
GDP variation at the peak value. This result is robust across various model specifications.
The contribution to the investment fluctuation reaches 16% at its peak; the contribution to
the bank-loan fluctuation is over 23% for the five-year horizon. By contrast, the contribution
to the fluctuation in short-term bank loans is small (3 − 6%), the contribution to the price
fluctuation is also small (0.5 − 7%), and the contribution to the consumption fluctuation is
15The
16This

lending and deposit rates respond in a similar fashion.
result is generated by a larger model that expands the benchmark model to inclusion of the

investment and consumption series. The data on many components of GDP is available but with a long
delay. In our case, the sample is available only up to 2015Q4 for investment and consumption and 2015Q3
for heavy GDP and light GDP.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 12

even smaller (under 3.1% for the first four years). These results reinforce our argument that
monetary policy affects the real economy mainly through bank credit to investment in the
heavy sector whose evidence is presented in the next section.

III.2. Impulse responses in the shortfall state. The estimated impulse responses in
the shortfall state differ from those in the normal state in both timing and magnitude.
Figures 8-11 plot the estimated impulse responses in the shortfall state. Our subsequent
analysis focuses on the first one year horizon in which the impulse responses differ most from
those in the normal state. We discuss impulse responses over longer horizons in Section IV.3.
As a direct result of aggressive monetary policy to stem the shortfall of GDP growth, the
M2 response peaks within 2 quarters, faster than the response in the normal state, and the
GDP response peaks within 3 quarters as compared to a much delayed peak (9 quarters)
in the normal state. According to our estimates, the volatility of a monetary policy shock
in the shortfall state is twice as high as in the normal state (0.10 vs 0.005), which leads to
a stronger response of M2 supply on impact (a 1% increase in the shortfall state versus a
0.5% increase in the normal state). The response is immediately translated to the banking
system with the initial response of bank lending to a monetary policy shock in the shortfall
state almost doubling the initial response in the normal state (1% vs. 0.55%). By contrast,
short-term bank loans rise only 0.5% for the first year (the bottom right panel of Figure 8).
Longer term bank loans are typically used for investment. Bank lending to investment
can be divided into credit to heavy and light sectors. We expand the benchmark model with
two new credit series: newly originated bank loans to heavy and light sectors (as a percent
of GDP). Figure 9 reports the estimated impulse responses for these two series across the
normal and shortfall states. In the normal state, the magnitude of responses of heavy loans
to a monetary policy shock is more than twice as large as that of responses of light loans
(dotted lines in Figure 9). This asymmetric response is exacerbated in the shortfall state
(solid lines in Figure 9), as an increase of money supply is channelled disproportionally into
heavy loans. As an outcome, the response of new credit to the heavy sector in the shortfall
state is almost twice as large as in the normal state. These results are consistent with the
additional finding that the response of heavy GDP is much stronger than the response of
light GDP (Figure 10).
In the shortfall state, because most of the new bank credit is allocated to financing investment in the heavy sector, the response of consumption is almost the same as that in the
normal state (comparing Figures 7 and 11). By contrast, the peak response of investment in
the shortfall state, occurring two quarters earlier, is significantly higher than in the normal
state (1.5% vs. 1.1% by comparing Figure 11 and Figure 7). Thus, the early GDP responses
rely on investment rather than on consumption.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 13

The asymmetric responses of bank credit across the states as well as across the sectors
lead to the asymmetry of monetary policy’s impacts on the real economy across the states.
Table 1 reports the asymmetric importance of the monetary policy shock in driving the GDP
fluctuation. In the shortfall state, the GDP variation attributed to the monetary policy shock
is as high as 45%, more than twice as much as the counterpart in the normal state. Relative
to all other shocks in the economy, monetary policy plays a far more important role in
stimulating the aggregate economy in the shortfall state than in the normal state.
The impulse response analysis illustrates the powerful mechanism of monetary transmission for each of the two states. When the economy switches from the normal state to the
shortfall state, monetary policy switches accordingly in response to the shortfall of GDP
growth. The nonlinear effects on the aggregate economy of this endogenous change of monetary policy are discussed in Section IV.
III.3. Role of interest rates. Much of the recent policy discussion centers on reforms of
moving gradually away from control of M2 growth as the primary policy instrument toward
control of short-term nominal interest rates as in the U.S. and other developed economies.
Yet there are few academic studies on how effective the interest rate channel would be for
the Chinese economy.
Our empirical analysis provides strong evidence that interest rates have been ineffective in
transmitting monetary policy into China’s real economy. When we remove the three interest
rates from the list of variables in the benchmark model, the estimated response of GDP to
a monetary policy shock is almost identical to its benchmark counterpart (Figure 4). This
finding is consistent with the existing empirical result that variations in market interest
rates cannot explain macroeconomic fluctuations (Sheng and Wu, 2008) and supports the
argument that the transmission of monetary policy works through credit volumes rather
than through interest rates.17
Our finding is in contrast to Bernanke and Blinder (1992), who use the federal funds
rate to identify the effect of a monetary policy shock. As Bernanke and Blinder (1992)
show, interbank interest rates in the U.S. economy are transmitted into the real economy
through broad financial markets. In China’s state-dominated financial system, quantitybased monetary policy has been more effective in directly influencing the supply of bank
loans, regardless of what happens to interest rates in interbank markets.18 Our evidence
17The

external sector is also unimportant to monetary transmission. When we remove foreign exchange

reserves from the list of variables in the benchmark model, the impulse responses (circle and plus lines in
Figure 4) are essentially identical to its benchmark counterpart.
18To control bank credit volumes effectively, the PBC uses additional policy instruments, such as “window
guidance” and regulatory rules, to force commercial banks to increase or decrease lending volumes or activities
and to direct loans to certain industries, regardless of the prevailing interest rates. Moreover, the PBC

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 14

indicates that bank lending volumes constitute the key transmission mechanism for the
effect of monetary policy on the real economy.
There are several institutional reasons for the normal interest-rate channel to fail in the
monetary transmission mechanism. First, since bond markets in China are not fully developed, long-term interest rates for investment are largely insulated from changes in short-term
interest rates. Second, lending and deposit rates in the banking system have not been fully
liberalized to reflect the risk to bank loans.19 Third, firms in the heavy sector, protected by
the government from bankruptcy, are insensitive to changes in interest rates.20 As a result,
there are no efficient financial markets to price out the external finance premium for firms.
IV. The impact of the 2009 monetary stimulus
The goal of this paper is to assess the dynamic impacts of monetary stimulus on credit
allocation and the real economy. The preceding analysis of impulse responses in normal
and shortfall states provides a foundation for quantifying these impacts. Because the effects
of monetary policy are uniquely determined in our empirical framework and the rest of the
system is not affected by a switch in monetary policy regime, we are able to use the posterior
estimates to simulate a counterfactual economy in which we assume that monetary policy
regime had not changed in 2009Q1-Q3 from the normal accommodative monetary policy
and there were no expansionary monetary policy shocks during these periods. Following
Sims and Zha (2006), we back out the monetary policy shock sequence εm,t and all the
other reduced-form shock sequences ut . We keep these shocks intact in our counterfactual
simulations except for monetary policy shocks in 2009Q1-Q3. The difference between actual
and counterfactual paths measures the impact of the unprecedented monetary stimulations
(both exogenous and endogenous) during the first three quarters of 2009.
IV.1. Impacts on the aggregate economy. The stimulus plan announced in November
2008 by the Chinese government called for massive investment in ten areas of Chinese economy to promote GDP growth in the face of the 2008 global financial crisis.21 Among the ten
controls credit volumes by planning the aggregate credit supply for the coming year and then by negotiating
with individual commercial banks for credit allocations.
19For a long time, China has adopted a dual-track interest rate system (Yi, 2009). As early as 1996, China
removed control of interbank lending rates (i.e., Chibor and Repo rates), but deposit and lending rates have
since then been under strict control of the government. Liberalization of the overall financial market has
been slow in China. See Liu, Wang, and Xu (2017) for theoretical implications of interest rate liberalization
on the Chinese economy.
20Li, Liu, and Wang (2016) argue that strategic industries in China have been enjoying monopoly power
given by the government, rather than facing market competition.
21See the official website of the State Council for the details of such a plan at http://www.gov.cn/
ldhd/2008-11/09/content_1143689.htm.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 15

areas of investment in the stimulus package, real estate was listed as the number one area of
focus and consequently received a significant amount of bank credit.22
A regime switch in monetary policy played the most conspicuous role in implementing the
government’s stimulus package.23 With our empirical framework we are able to separate a
change in monetary policy from the effect of this change. The shortfall state lasted for only
three quarters from 2009Q1 to 2009Q3 in which monetary policy switched to stimulation.
By the third quarter of 2009, M2 growth sprang up to 25% from the average of 15% in
normal times. Figure 12 shows the effect of this policy switch on M2 growth. The shaded
bar marks the period 2009Q1-2009Q3 in which monetary policy changed. High M2 growth
in the period after 2009Q3 was the consequence of this policy change. If the PBC had not
changed its policy by increasing M2 supply drastically, M2 growth would have been hovering
around 15% for the next two years (the circle line in Figure 12).
Such a monetary stimulus had a significant impact on GDP growth. The left panel of
Figure 13 indicates that as high as 85% of actual GDP growth in 2009-2010 was attributable
to the stimulus. By the end of 2009, GDP growth reached 11.59% with an increase of 4.67%
above the 6.91% growth rate in 2008Q4. The portion attributable to the stimulus, measured
by the difference between actual and counterfactual paths (right panel of Figure 13), reached
4% in 2009Q4, which accounted for 85% of the 4.67% increase.
Without the stimulus, actual GDP growth would have been below its official 8% target in
2009 (left panel of Figure 13) and would have been lower by as much as 4% during the next
two years (right panel of Figure 13). As also shown in the right panel of Figure 13, most of
the impact (about 70% − 80%) was driven by an endogenous switch in the monetary policy
rule in response to the shortfall of GDP growth, not by a change in shock volatility or by
exogenous monetary policy shocks. Thus, it is this endogenous switch in the policy rule that
offers the key to understanding the stimulus effect on GDP growth. Despite the economic
significance, however, the effect of this monetary stimulus on GDP growth was transitory.
The gap between the actual and counterfactual paths began to narrow in 2010 and became
negligible by the end of 2011.
Unlike many developed economies such as the U.S., the effect of China’s monetary stimulus
on GDP growth is through investment, rather than through consumption (which includes
consumer durable goods). Figure 14 displays the sharp contrast between the impacts on
investment and consumption. The regime switch to extraordinarily expansionary monetary
policy in 2009Q1-2009Q3 had a negligible effect on consumption growth, but it increased
22

The remaining areas are rural infrastructure, transportation, health and education, environment, basic

industries, disaster rebuilding, income-building, tax cuts, and finance.
23
To facilitate the effects of monetary injection on bank credit, credit quotas to commercial banks were
eliminated during this monetary stimulus.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 16

investment growth by as much as 13% (the difference between the actual and counterfactual
paths). With the 40% investment-to-GDP ratio at the end of 2008, a 13% increase in
investment growth should contribute to a 4% increase in GDP growth by accounting, which
is perfectly in line with the magnitude of the stimulus effect on GDP growth.
Consistent with its unbalanced impact on investment and consumption, the 2009 monetary stimulus exerted asymmetric impacts on industries with different capital intensities.
Figure 15 shows that the monetary stimulus led to a significantly larger increase of heavy
output than light output. At the end of 2008, growth of heavy GDP was 5.7%. After the
stimulus, growth of heavy GDP reached 15.5% in 2010Q1, a 9.8% increase (9.8 = 15.5 − 5.7).
The stimulus contributed to 4.6%, close to a half of the increase.24 While light GDP growth
fell after the stimulus period, a rapid rise in heavy GDP growth more than compensated this
fall. As a result, GDP growth after 2009Q3 was driven by growth in the heavy sector.
IV.2. Impacts on credit allocation. The mechanism underlying the effect of monetary
stimulus on the macroeconomy is the credit channel specific to China. The left panel of
Figure 16 shows that the 2009 monetary stimulus increased real bank loans by as high as
10% (the difference between actual and counterfactual paths), which has a magnitude close
to its impact on M2 growth. Most of the increase in M2 supply is channeled to the real
economy through bank loans with terms longer than one year. As one can see from the right
panel of Figure 16, monetary stimulus had a considerably smaller effect on the increase of
short term loans.
Longer term loans are mainly used to finance investment in physical capital. Since most
industries in the heavy sector are capital intensive with higher investment rates, one would
expect that more bank credit was allocated to the heavy sector during the stimulus period.
According to the 2010Q1 MPR, most of newly issued medium and long term (MLT) bank
loans went to real estate, infrastructure, and other supporting industries such as steel and
cement: in 2010Q1, the growth rate of new loans allocated to real estate was 38.5%; the
growth rate of new loans allocated to infrastructure was 33.3%. Our counterfactual experiment shows that monetary stimulus plays a crucial role for this asymmetry of credit
allocation. The increase of heavy loans (in percent of GDP) attributable to the monetary
stimulus was 1.1% in 2009Q4, which accounted for half of the overall increase in heavy loans
24Other

factors than the stimulus, such as the implicit guarantee provided by the government on bank

credit to targeted industries (e.g., real estate and supporting industries), continued to play an important
role in the rising share of heavy-sector output in GDP. Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and Zha (2016) provide a
theoretical model to show that a positive financial shock on the collateral constraint faced by entrepreneurs
in the heavy sector would lead to an increase in aggregate investment via capital reallocation from light to
heavy sectors and consequently an increase in aggregate output.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 17

(1.1% out of 2.3%). By contrast, the impact of monetary stimulus on light loans as percent
of GDP was small (0.48%).
To shed light on the transmission of monetary stimulus on the macroeconomy through
credit allocation, we compare the magnitude and timing of the stimulus effects on output
and credit allocation across heavy and light sectors. The left panel of Figure 18 shows that
the growth rate of heavy GDP was much higher than the growth rate of light GDP after
the monetary stimulus (4.8% versus 2.4% at the peak). The asymmetric effect on output
growth in these two sectors was sustained by asymmetric credit allocation to investment in
the two sectors: the increase in newly originated loans to investment in the heavy sector was
considerably higher than that in the light sector (1% versus 0.5% at the peak). The peak for
credit increase occurred one quater earlier than the peak for output growth, underscoring the
leading role of asymmetric credit allocation in the asymmetric effects of the 2009 monetary
stimulus on the real economy.
IV.3. Importance of real estate. In this section we focus on the effect of the 2009 monetary stimulus on the real estate sector.25 We begin by studying the impact on real estate
prices after adjusting for CPI inflation. The effect on CPI inflation of the regime switch to
more aggressive monetary policy in 2009Q1-Q3 was marginal (the left panel of Figure 19).
Most of the rapid rise of inflation from a negative rate in 2009 to 6% in 2011 was attributable to monetary policy that had already been put in place at the speed of 15% per year for
M2 growth. By contrast, the impact of the same monetary stimulus on land prices (after
adjustments of CPI inflation) was sizable: the stimulus was responsible for half of the 40%
increase in land prices at the end of 2009 (the difference between actual and counterfactual
values in the right panel of Figure 19).
The sharp rise in land prices was fueled by new credit disproportionately allocated to real
estate. The monetary stimulus increased newly originated loans to real estate (as percent of
GDP) by 0.58% in 2009Q3-Q4, accounting for more than half of the increase in new credit to
the heavy sector. In the U.S. and other developed economies, the credit boom was associated
with mortgage loans demanded by households. In China, a majority of new bank credit was
allocated to investment, especially in the heavy sector. This preferential credit allocation
pushed up the demand for land. Given the limited supply of land in large cities, therefore,
an increase of bank credit to real estate generated soaring (real) land prices during and after
the stimulus period.26
25According

to the 2009Q2 MPR, newly originated MLT loans to the real estate industry in the first half

of 2009 totaled 350.1 billion RMB, 1.5 times the amount of new bank credit to real estate for the entire year
of 2008. Our data confirms that 45% of the increase in new loans to the heavy sector was allocated to real
estate in 2009.
26Chen

and Wen (2017) provide a theory to explain the rapid increase of house/land prices in China.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 18

The close relationship between real estate loans and land prices can be seen in Figure 21.
The stimulus effects on real estate loans and land prices were very similar in 2009 and 2010.
The finding is consistent with the theoretical prediction based on two-way interactions: an
increase of real estate loans pushed up the land price, which in turn relaxed the collateral
constraint and encouraged banks to lend more to real estate developers with real estate as
collateral.27
One question is why the actual growth paths of land prices and bank loans fell below the
counterfactual paths after 2010Q2. To answer this question, consider the following simple
example as illustration:
zt = Bt zt−1 + t ,
where zt is an (n + 1) × 1 vector with the first element being M2 and the first element of
the shock vector t is an exogenous monetary policy shock. The time-varying coefficient is
defined as Bt = Bn in normal times and Bt = Bs in the shortfall state. At time 1, the
economy enters the shortfall state; at time 4, the economy returns to the normal state. The
quarterly dynamics of zt can be traced out recursively:
z1 = Bs z0 + 1 ,
z2 = Bs2 z0 + Bs 1 + 2 ,
z3 = Bs3 z0 + Bs2 1 + Bs 2 + 3 ,
z4 = Bn Bs3 z0 + Bn Bs2 1 + Bn Bs 2 + Bn 3 + 4 ,
..
.
For the first term on the right hand side of the equation, for example, the effect due to
endogenous switching from the normal state to the shortfall state can be measured by (Bs −
Bn )z0 for the first quarter and (Bn Bs3 − Bn4 )z0 for the fourth quarter. Clearly, although
the shortfall state lasts for only three quarters, the coefficient Bs influences the dynamics
of zt beyond the third period. The time series displayed in Figure 1 shows that M2 growth
rose sharply in 2009Q1-Q3 but fell sharply as well after 2009. When we fit the model to
the data, the coefficients Bs and Bn are jointly estimated to reflect this sharp rise and fall
pattern. Consequently, even though our hypothetical length of the shortfall state for impulse
responses lasts more than three quarters, they tend to fall at the speed faster than those in
the normal state after the initial four quarters.
We assemble the impulse responses of four related variables in one figure for comparison
(Figure 22): M2, total bank loans, real estate loans, and land prices. All these impulse
responses exhibit similar patterns across the two states: the responses in the shortfall state
are stronger than in the normal state for the first four quarters, but decline at a faster speed
27See

Iacoviello and Neri (2010); Jermann and Quadrini (2012); Liu, Wang, and Zha (2013).

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 19

since then, and eventually fall below their counterparts in the normal state. As discussed
previously, the sharper fall of land prices originates from the transitory surge in M2 growth
during the shortfall state, which translates into temporary surges in bank loans, real estate
loans, and land prices. These results provide strong evidence for the credit channel unique
to China’s monetary policy transmission.
The transmission of monetary stimulus to the macroeconomy via asymmetric credit allocation bears lasting consequences. Despite an already high investment rate at the end of 2008,
the 2009 monetary stimulus raised the investment-to-GDP ratio by more than 4% (left panel
of Figure 23) and the debt-to-GDP ratio by as high as 13% (right panel of Figure 23) by
2016. Most of new bank loans during the stimulus period were advanced to the heavy sector
for financing time-to-build investment and thus were allocated as MLT loans. This made
the impacts on the investment-to-GDP and debt-to-GDP ratios persistent, even though the
stimulus itself was temporary (i.e., only three quarters).
Such persistent effects have exposed China’s economy to overinvestment. Indeed, the IMF
2016 Country Report No. 16/270 and 2017 Country Report No. 17/247 express concerns
about “excess capacity in real estate and heavy industry” in China and its impact on global
commodity prices. In 2015, for example, there were six industries that suffered the most
severe overcapacity problem measured by the rate of capacity utilization: steel (67%), coal
(64.9%), cement (73.8%), flat glass (68.0%), electrolytic aluminum (75.4%), and shipbuilding
(69%).28 All these six industries are heavy industries by the Chinese government’s official
classification.
Perhaps a graver situation is the fast accumulation of the vacant real estate stock. Measured by the floor space, real estate vacancy increased from 199.47 million square meters in
2009 to 718.53 million square meters in 2015. To give a sense of how severe this overly built
real estate stock is, the space of 718.53 million square meters can accommodate 24 million
individuals in China. This oversupply of real estate properties has raised serious concerns
for the rising debt to GDP ratio, as more than a half of newly originated bank credit during
the 2009 stimulus was allocated to the real estate sector. To deal with the problems of rising debt, industrial overcapacity, and oversupply in real estate, the Central Economic Work
Conference organized jointly by the State Council and the Central Committee of Communist
Party of China (CPC) has listed, among top major tasks, three specific objectives: deleveraging debt, reducing excess capacity, and destocking real estate. Our analysis demonstrates

28These

figures were published in the 12/23/2016 Economic Research Report of the State Council’s Na-

tional Development and Reform Commission (http://www.sic.gov.cn/News/455/7349.htm). By
the international standard, an industry has excess capacity if its rate of capacity utilization is between 75%
and 79% and suffers severe overcapacity if the rate is below 75%.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 20

that underlying all these problems facing the Chinese government is the asymmetric credit
allocation wrought by its 2009 monetary stimulus.
V. Conclusion
We show two distinctive facets of China’s monetary transmission: (1) monetary policy’s
nonlinear effect on GDP growth across two different states of the economy and (2) asymmetric
credit allocation across two different sectors. In normal times, the effect of monetary policy
on output is achieved with more credit allocated to financing investment in the heavy sector
than in the light sector. When GDP growth falls short of the government’s official target, the
monetary authority responds to the shortfall state by switching to much more expansionary
policy than in normal times. As a result, this expansionary stimulation contributes to more
output growth by exacerbating the asymmetric credit allocation in favor of investment in
real estate and heavy industries.
We find that the 2009 monetary stimulus contributed to a temporary 4% increase of GDP
growth, out of which three fourths was accounted for by a switch of the monetary rule itself
rather than a change in shock volatility. Higher GDP growth was not achieved by an increase
in consumption but by a disproportionate increase of bank credit to real estate and heavy
industries with excess capacity. As a result, this monetary stimulus had large and persistent
effects on the investment ratio and debt-to-GDP ratio. The high investment-to-GDP and
debt-to-GDP ratios have been concerns for policymakers. Our framework is potentially
useful for the Chinese government to design and implement new policy initiatives to strike
a balance between stimulating growth and deleveraging debt.29 This paper serves as a first
step toward opening up further studies on the dynamic impacts of monetary policy on the
Chinese economy and its banking system.
Although this paper focuses on China, there are two general developments in our empirical methodology. One is that we impose minimal identifying restrictions on the model, in
contrast to the existing literature that often imposes strong assumptions such as Choleski
or sign restrictions. The other is the computational strategy that separates estimation
of the monetary policy equation from that of the rest of the system. This development
makes it practical for one to quantify the dynamic impacts of monetary stimulus within
the endogenous-switching framework. Our new econometric methodology can be used to
study the transmission mechanism of large or unconventional interventions by the monetary
authorities in other countries.
29In the speech during the 2017 annual International Monetary and Financial Committee (Zhou, 2017),

the

PBC governor Xiaochuan Zhou states: “Monetary policy will remain prudent and neutral, striking a better
balance between stabilizing growth and the task of deleveraging, preventing asset bubbles, and containing
the accumulation of systemic risks.”

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 21

14
M2
GDP

25

12

20

10

15

8

10
2000

30
Growth rate (y/y, %)

Growth rate (y/y, %)

30

6
2005

2010

20

15

10
2000

2015

2005

2010

2015

2010

2015

140
Debt-to-GDP ratio (%)

50
Investment rate (%)

25

M2
Bank loans

45

40

35
Investment/GDP

30
2000

2005

2010

2015

130

Loans/GDP

120
110
100
90
80
2000

2005

Figure 1. Macroeconomic time series. In the upper left panel of the figure,
the scale for GDP growth is to the right and the scale for M2 growth is to
the left. The rectangular box in each graph marks the period from 2009Q1 to
2010Q4. At the end of 2008, China’s State Council announced a plan to invest
4 trillion RMB over this period in an attempt to minimize the impact of the
global financial crisis on its economy.

50

50

45

45

SOE share

As % of total fixed investment

As % of total industrial sales revenue

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 22

40
35
30
25
20

40
35
30
25
20

SOE share

15
2000

2005

2010

2015

15
2000

2005

2010

Figure 2. Macroeconomic time series (continued). The rectangular box in
each graph marks the period from 2009Q1 to 2010Q4. At the end of 2008,
China’s State Council announced a plan to invest 4 trillion RMB over this
period in an attempt to minimize the impact of the global financial crisis on
its economy.

2015

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 23

5
Loans-to-GDP ratio (%)

Loans-to-GDP ratio (%)

10
8
6
Heavy loans
Light loans

4
2
0
2000

2005

2010

4
3
2
1
Real estate loans

0
2000

2015

57

2010

2015

2010

2015

50
Light GDP

As % of GDP

Heavy GDP

As % of GDP

2005

55

53

51
2000

2005

2010

2015

48

46

44

42
2000

2005

Figure 3. Macroeconomic time series (continued). The rectangular box in
each graph marks the period from 2009Q1 to 2010Q4. At the end of 2008,
China’s State Council announced a plan to invest 4 trillion RMB over this
period in an attempt to minimize the impact of the global financial crisis on
its economy.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 24

5

10

-3

4.5

4

3.5

GDP

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
4

8

12

16

Quarters

Figure 4. Dynamic responses of real GDP to a one-standard-deviation positive monetary policy shock. The asterisk line represents the response estimated
from the benchmark model and dashed lines represent the corresponding .68
probability bands. The diamond line represents the response estimated from
the model excluding interest rates. The circle line represents the response
estimated from the model excluding foreign exchange reserves. The plus line
represents the response estimated from the model excluding both interest rates
and foreign exchange reserves.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 25

12

10 -3

4
3

CPI

10

M2

10 -3

8

2
1

6

0

4

-1
4

0

8

12

16

10 -3

5

8

12

16

4

8

12

16

10 -4

0

Repo

ERR

-0.5

4

-1

-1.5

-5

-10

-2

-15
4

8

12

16

Quarters

Figure 5. Dynamic responses of various key policy variables to a onestandard-deviation positive monetary policy shock. Asterisk lines represent
the estimated responses and dashed lines represent the corresponding .68 probability bands. “ERR” stands for the excess reserves ratio in the banking system, and “Repo” is the 7-day rate for national interbank bond repurchases.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 26
12

10 -3

12

8

8

ST bank loans

10

Bank loans

10

6
4
2

6
4
2

0

0

-2

-2
4

8

8

12

16

10 -3

8

4

8

12

16

4

8

12

16

10 -3

6

Light GDP

6

Heavy GDP

10 -3

4

2

0

4

2

0
4

8

12

16

Quarters

Figure 6. Dynamic responses to a one-standard-deviation positive monetary
policy shock: (total) bank loans, short term bank loans (ST bank loans), valueadded output produced from the heavy sector (Heavy GDP), and value-added
output produced from the light sector (Light GDP). Asterisk lines represent
the estimated responses and dashed lines represent the corresponding .68 probability bands.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 27

15

10 -3

15

10

Consumption

Investment

10

10 -3

5

0

5

0
4

8

12

16

4

8

12

16

Quarters

Figure 7. Dynamic responses of investment and consumption to a onestandard-deviation positive monetary policy shock. Asterisk lines represent
the estimated responses and dashed lines represent the corresponding .68 probability bands.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 28
13

10 -3

4.5
4

11

3.5

10

3

M2

GDP

12

9

2

7

1.5
1
4

8

12

16

4

8

12

16

4

8

12

16

0.015

ST bank loans

0.015

Bank loans

2.5

8

6

10 -3

0.01

0.005

0

0.01

0.005

0
4

8

12

16

Quarters

Figure 8. Dynamic responses to a one-standard-deviation positive monetary
policy shock in the shortfall state. Asterisk lines represent the estimated responses and dashed lines represent the corresponding .68 probability bands.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 29

10

-3

10

1.4
Shortfall
Normal

1.2

Light loans as percent of GDP

Heavy loans as percent of GDP

1.4

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

-3

Shortfall
Normal

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

Quarters

Figure 9. Dynamic responses to a one-standard-deviation positive monetary
policy shock. “Heavy loans” are newly originated bank credit to fixed investment in the heavy sector. “Light loans” are newly originated bank credit to
fixed investment in the light sector.
10

-3

7

6

6

5

5

Light GDP

Heavy GDP

7

4
3

-3

4
3

2

2

1

1

0

10

0
4

8

12

16

4

8

12

16

Quarters

Figure 10. Dynamic responses to a one-standard-deviation positive monetary policy shock in the shortfall state. Asterisk lines represent the estimated
responses and dashed lines represent the corresponding .68 probability bands.

20

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 30

20

10

-3

20

-3

15

Consumption

Investment

15

10

10

5

0

10

5

0

4

8

12

16

4

8

12

16

Quarters

Figure 11. Dynamic responses to a one-standard-deviation positive monetary policy shock in the shortfall state. Asterisk lines represent the estimated
responses and dashed lines represent the corresponding .68 probability bands.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 31

28
Counterfactual
Actual

26

M2 y/y growth (percent)

24

22

20

18

16

14

12

10
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 12. Actual and counterfactual historical paths of M2 year-over-year
(y/y) growth rates. The shaded bar marks the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3
during which a switch of monetary policy to more aggressive stimulation is
identified by the model. The counterfactual path assumes that monetary policy
had not changed during this stimulation period.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 32

14

3.5
Counterfactual
Actual

3

GDP y/y growth (percent)

GDP y/y growth (percent)

13
12
11
10
9
8
7

2.5
2
1.5
1

Stim shock + rule change
Rule change

0.5
0

6
5
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

-0.5
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 13. Actual and counterfactual historical paths of GDP year-overyear (y/y) growth rates. The shaded bar marks the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3
during which a switch of monetary policy to more aggressive stimulation is
identified by the model. The counterfactual path assumes that monetary policy
had not changed during this stimulation period. The diamond line in the right
panel indicates the contribution from the change of systematic monetary policy
alone.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 33

30

25
20
15
10
5

Counterfactual
Actual

0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Consumption growth (y/y, %)

Investment growth (y/y, %)

30

25

Counterfactual
Actual

20
15
10
5
0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 14. Actual and counterfactual historical paths of year-over-year
growth rates of GDP in investment and household consumption. The shaded
bar marks the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3 during which a switch of monetary
policy to more aggressive stimulation is identified by the model. The counterfactual path assumes that monetary policy had not changed during this
stimulation period.

16

16

14

14

Light GDP growth (y/y, %)

Heavy GDP growth (y/y, %)

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 34

12
10
8
6
4

Counterfactual
Actual

2
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Counterfactual
Actual

12
10
8
6
4
2
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 15. Actual and counterfactual historical paths of heavy GDP and
light GDP growth rates. The shaded bar marks the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3
during which a switch of monetary policy to more aggressive stimulation is
identified by the model. The counterfactual path assumes that monetary policy
had not changed during this stimulation period.

35

35

30

30

ST bank loans (y/y growth, %)

Total bank loans (y/y growth, %)

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 35

25
20
Counterfactual
Actual

15
10
5
0
2007

2008

2009

2010

20
15
10
5
0
2007

2011

Counterfactual
Actual

25

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 16. Actual and counterfactual historical paths of outstanding bank
loans (year-over-year growth rates). The shaded bar marks the period of
2009Q1-2009Q3 during which a switch of monetary policy to more aggressive stimulation is identified by the model. The counterfactual path assumes
10

10

Loans to light sector as percent of GDP

Loans to heavy sector as percent of GDP

that monetary policy had not changed during this stimulation period.
9
8
7
6
Counterfactual
Actual

5
4
3
2
1
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

9
8
7
6
Counterfactual
Actual

5
4
3
2
1
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 17. Actual and counterfactual historical paths of newly originated
loans in percent of GDP. The shaded bar marks the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3
during which a switch of monetary policy to more aggressive stimulation is
identified by the model. The counterfactual path assumes that monetary policy
had not changed during this stimulation period.

2012

5

1.2

Actual minus counterfactual (% of GDP)

Actual minus counterfactual (y/y growth, %)

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 36

Heavy GDP
Light GDP

4
3
2
1
0
-1
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

1

Heavy loans
Light loans

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 18. Actual and counterfactual historical paths of the two components
of GDP (heavy and light) and newly originated loans in percent of GDP.
The shaded bar marks the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3 during which a switch of
monetary policy to more aggressive stimulation is identified by the model. The
counterfactual path assumes that monetary policy had not changed during this
stimulation period.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 37

60
8

Land price (y/y growth, %)

CPI inflation (y/y, %)

40
6
Counterfactual
Actual

4
2
0

20
0
-20
Counterfactual
Actual

-40

-2
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

-60
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 19. Actual and counterfactual historical paths of year-over-year CPI
inflation and real land price growth (adjusted by CPI inflation). The shaded
bar marks the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3 during which a switch of monetary
policy to more aggressive stimulation is identified by the model. The counterfactual path assumes that monetary policy had not changed during this
stimulation period.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 38

1.2

Actual minus counterfactual (as percent of GDP)

Real estate loans
Heavy loans

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 20. Historical paths of newly originated loans in percent of GDP.
“Heavy loans” stands for new loans to the heavy sector and “Real estate
loans” stands for new loans to the real estate sector. The shaded bar marks
the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3 during which a switch of monetary policy to
more aggressive stimulation is identified by the model. The counterfactual
path assumes that monetary policy had not changed during this stimulation
period.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 39

25
Real estate loans
Land price

Actual minus counterfactual (y/y growth, %)

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 21. Historical paths of year-over-year growth rates of land price
growth and newly originated loans to the real estate. The shaded bar marks
the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3 during which a switch of monetary policy to
more aggressive stimulation is identified by the model. The counterfactual
path assumes that monetary policy had not changed during this stimulation
period.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 40

12

10

-3

12

10

-3

Shortfall
Normal

Shortfall
Normal

10
Bank loans

M2

10

8

6

6

4

4
4

8

12

4

10 -4

8

12

0.025
Shortfall
Normal

4

2

Shortfall
Normal

0.02

6
Land price

Raito of RE loans to GDP

8

8

0.015
0.01
0.005

0

0
4

8

12

4

8

12

Quarters
Figure 22. Impulse responses of various key macroeconomic variables to an
expansionary monetary policy shock in the normal and shortfall states.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 41

140

Loans-to-GDP ratio (percent)

Investment rate (percent)

50

45

40

35
Counterfactual
Actual

30

130
Counterfactual
Actual

120
110
100
90
80

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 23. Actual and counterfactual historical paths of the investmentto-GDP ratio and the debt-to-GDP ratio (the ratio of bank loans to GDP).
The shaded bar marks the period of 2009Q1-2009Q3 during which a switch of
monetary policy to more aggressive stimulation is identified by the model. The
counterfactual path assumes that monetary policy had not changed during this
stimulation period.

2016

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 42

Table 1. Variance decompositions attributed to a monetary policy shock (percent)
Quarter

4

8

12

16

20

GDP (normal state)
Benchmark model

13.7 19.5 20.2 18.9 17.1

Benchmark model excl Rs

12.7 18.3 20.1 20.0 18.7

Benchmark model excl FXR

14.7 20.5 21.4 20.3 18.5

Benchmark model excl Rs and FXR

12.8 18.2 20.1 20.1 19.2
GDP (shortfall state)

Benchmark model

36.4 44.3 45.0 43.4 40.9
Benchmark model
(normal state)

CPI
Total bank loans
ST bank loans
Investment
Consumption

0.4

2.1

4.2

6.0

7.2

24.6 23.0 22.7 22.8 23.3
5.8

4.2

3.3

3.0

3.2

13.4 16.1 15.8 15.0 14.2
0.4

1.4

2.4

3.1

3.5

Note. The abbreviation “excl” stands for excluding, “Rs” for all interest rates, and “FXR”
for foreign exchange reserves.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 43

Appendix A. Data and Definitions
The methodology of collecting and constructing the quarterly data series used in this
paper is based on Higgins and Zha (2015) and Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and Zha (2016).
The details of constructing all the series except M2, bank loans, ST bank loans, and land
prices are described in these two references. The main data sources are China’s National
Bureau of Statistics, the People’s Bank of China, and CEIC. The proc X-12 procedure in the
SAS software package is used for seasonal adjustment. All series bar interest and exchange
rates are seasonally adjusted. All interpolated series are based on the method of Fernandez
(1981), as described in Higgins and Zha (2015). One exception is net exports, which are
interpolated with the method of Denton (1971).
• M2. M2 money supply, quarterly average of the monthly series (RMB billion). For
the last monthly observation, we use the level of M2 (CEIC ticker CKSAAC). The 12
monthly observations prior to the last observation are constructed recursively from
the month-over-month gross growth rates of CKSAAC each multiplied by a constant
adjustment factor. The adjustment factor is chosen so that the 12-month growth
rate of the last observed value of our constructed series is equal to the last published
12-month growth rate (CEIC ticker CKSAACA). Once these last 13 observations are
determined, we recursively construct the level series back to 1996M4 with the published year-over-year growth rate, back to 1994M12 with the year-over-year growth
rate provided by the PBC, and back to 1990M3 with an interpolated year-over-year
growth rate derived from the quarterly level of M2 (CEIC ticker CKAAC).
• GDP. Real GDP by value added (billions of 2008 RMB).
• GDP growth target. Real GDP growth target set by the central government of
China.
• CPI. Consumer price index.
• Investment price. The price index of fixed asset investment.
• ERR. Excess reserves ratio computed as the ratio of excess reserves to total deposits
in the banking system at the end of the quarter.
• ARR. Actual reserves ratio computed as the ratio of total reserves to total deposits
in the banking system at the end of the quarter.
• Lending rate. One-year benchmark lending rate for commercial banks, set by the
PBC, quarterly average.
• Deposit rate. One-year benchmark deposit rate at commercial banks for enterprises,
set by the PBC, quarterly average.
• Repo rate. The 7-day market rate for national interbank bond repurchases, quarterly average.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 44

• Chibor rates. The 1-day and 7-day China interbank offered rates, quarterly average.
• Bank loans. End-of-quarter financial institution loans outstanding (i.e., the third
monthly observation of each quarter, RMB billion). We construct this series all the
way back to 1978Q4 prior to seasonal adjustment. The last monthly observation is
taken from the CEIC ticker CKSAC. The 12 monthly observations prior to the last observation are constructed recursively from the month-over-month gross growth rates
of CKSAC each multiplied by a constant adjustment factor. The adjustment factor
is chosen so that 12-month growth rate of the last observed value of our constructed
series is equal to the last published 12-month growth rate (CEIC ticker CKSAD).
Once these last 13 observations are determined, we recursively construct the level
series back to 1997M4 with the published year-over-year growth rates. We then use
data from WIND to backcast the series prior to 1997M4, assuming that the ratio of
the series from WIND to our series prior to 1997M4 is the same as it is in 1997M4.
• ST bank loans. Short-term (ST) bank loans outstanding with the third monthly
observation of each quarter (RMB billion). The constructed series goes back to
1994Q1. Multiplying the bank loans series by the ratio of CEIC ticker “CKAHLA–
CN: Loan: Short Term” to CEIC ticker “CKSAC–CN: Loan”, we construct the
monthly level series. The series prior to 1999M1 is extrapolated with the WIND
data on short-term bank loans using the same ratio extrapolation method as the
construction of the bank loans series.
• FXR. Foreign exchange reserves (RMB billion).
• Exchange rate.

The spot RMB/US$ exchange rate, quarterly average of the

monthly series from the Federal Reserve Board.
• Net exports. Nominal net exports as a percentage of nominal GDP. Annual measure
from national domestic product is interpolated by seasonally adjusted quarterly U.S.
dollar series from General Administration of Customs converted to RMB.
• Investment. Gross capital formation based on the expenditure side of national domestic product interpolated by fixed-asset investment and deflated by the investment
price index. The U.S. counterpart of this series is gross private domestic investment,
except our Chinese series includes government and SOE investment.
• Consumption. Household consumption based on the expenditure side of national
domestic products, interpolated quarterly by retail sales of consumer goods and deflated by the CPI. This series includes consumer durable goods.
• Heavy GDP. Value-added output produced by the heavy sector (RMB billion).
The heavy sector includes real estate, infrastructure, transportation, telecommunication, and basic industries such as steel, cement, electricity, chemical products, coal,

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 45

petroleum processing, and natural gas. The classification of the heavy sector is described in Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and Zha (2016).
• Light GDP. Value-added output produced by the light sector (RMB billion). Industries that does not belong to the heavy sector are those in the light sector such
as education, health care, scientific research, and environment. The classification of
the light sector is described in Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and Zha (2016).
• Heavy and light loans. Newly originated loans from financial institutions for investment in both heavy and light sectors (RMB billion). Annual series on heavy,
light, and total loans are constructed by aggregating industry-level data on newly
originated domestic loans for investment in fixed assets excluding rural households
downloaded from the NBS website. Annual total loans are interpolated by a modified
measure of seasonally adjusted new quarterly total loans using Fernandez (1981) interpolation adapted by Higgins and Zha (2015). Annual heavy loans are interpolated
with the same Fernandez (1981) method jointly using the same quarterly measure
of total loans and a modified measure of seasonally adjusted new real estate loans
for investment as interpolaters. The two interpolaters are constructed from monthly
data originally from the NBS and downloaded from CEIC [tickers COBDPD and
CECGB, respectively]. After quarterly aggregation and seasonal adjustment, both
interpolaters are modified to add up to their orignal unadjusted annual totals using
an intermediate Fernandez (1981) interpolation step as adapted by Higgins and Zha
(2015). Newly originated quarterly loans from financial institutions for investment
in the light sector is defined as the difference between the interpolated series on total
and heavy new domestic loans.
• Land price. Wharton/NUS/Tsinghua Chinese residential land price index from Wu,
Gyourko, and Deng (2012). The original series, downloaded from Joseph Gyourko’s
website, is updated through 2016Q2.
• Real estate loans. Newly originated bank loans to investment in the real estate
sector (RMB billion). The series is constructed by aggregating the monthly series
published by the NBS, seasonally adjusting, and interpolating the annual series using
the Higgins and Zha (2015) adaptation of Fernandez (1981) interpolation so that the
quarterly series aggregates to the annual total.
• SOE shares of industrial sales and fixed investment. Constructed with data
downloaded from the NBS.
Appendix B. Proof of Proposition 1
For system (4), we first show that the first equation (the monetary policy equation) is
identified. According to Theorem 2 of Rubio-Ramı́rez, Waggoner, and Zha (2010), this

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 46

eA
e0,t = A
b0,t , where Q
e is an
equation is identified if the following statement is true: if Q
b0,t maintains the form of
orthogonal matrix, and A
"


#  11
b
11
12
b
b
0
A
A0,t A0,t
0,t
1×n  ,
=
21
22
b
b
21
b
b22
A0,t A0,t
A0,t A
0,t

e must be of the form
then Q
"

# 
11
12
1
e
e
Q
Q

=
e21 Q
e22
Q
0

0



1×n 
.
e22

Q

n×1

(B.1)

eA
e0,t = A
b0,t is equivalent to
To show that the above statement is true, note that Q
"


#  11
b
12 e22
12 e21
11 e11
e
e
e
A
0
Q A0,t + Q A0,t Q A0,t
0,t
1×n  .
=
22 e22
22 e21
21 e11
e
e
e
21
b
b22
Q A0,t + Q A0,t Q A0,t
A0,t A
0,t

e12 = 0. Because Q
e is an
e22 = 0, we have Q
e12 A
e22 is invertible for the system and Q
Since A
0,t
0,t
e21 = 0 and Q
e11 = 1. This proves (B.1).
orthogonal matrix, it must be that Q
We now show that impulse responses of yt to εm,t are invariant to the rotation matrix Q or
the ordering of elements in yt . Note that the rotation matrix Q in subsystem (2) is the same
e22 . Because the first equation of system (3) is identified and the rotation matrix Q
e for
as Q
the whole system satisfies (B.1), the rotation matrix Q would affect the impulse responses
of yt to ξt but not those to εm,t .
The ordering of elements in yt relates to a permutation, not a rotation. Since the first
equation of system (3) is identified, the invariance of impulse responses of yt to εm,t to any
ordering follows directly from Theorem 4 of Zha (1999).

Appendix C. Proof of Proposition 3
To show the first equation in system (4) can be estimated independently of the rest of
the system, it is sufficient to show that the likelihood function (or the posterior probability
density function when a proper prior is introduced) for the first equation can be maximized
without affecting the likelihood or the posterior probability density for the rest of the system.
Denote
"
zt
(1+n)×1

=

Mt
yt

#
,

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 47

e`,t by ãi , and the ith element of c̃t by c̃it , where i = 1, . . . , 1 + n and
the ith row of A
`,t
` = 0, . . . , 4. The likelihood (LH) function for system (4) is

"
#2 
T X
1+n
4
 1X

X
T
e0,t ) exp −
ãi0,t zt − c̃it −
ãi`,t zt−`
LH ∝ det(A

 2 t=1
i=1
`=1

#2 
"
4
T

 1X
X
−T
×
ã1`,t zt−`
ã1`,t zt − c̃1t −
exp −
= σm,t

 2 t=1
`=1

"
#2 
1+n
T
4


XX
X
T
i
i
i
e22 ) exp − 1
det(A
ã
z
−
c̃
−
ã
z
.
0,t
0,t t
t
`,t t−`
 2

i=2 t=1

(C.1)

`=1

The first part of the right hand side of (C.1) is the likelihood for the first equation and the
second part is the likelihood for the rest of the system. Clearly, the maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) of the first equation can be performed independently of the MLE of the
i
i
e22
second equation. Moreover, it follows from system (4) that the coefficients A
0,t , ã , and c̃t
`,t

are constant across time for i = 2, . . . , 1 + n. Thus, the second term of the right hand side
of (C.1) is time invariant and is equivalent to the estimation of the linear VAR system.
Sims and Zha (1998)’s Bayesian prior is designed for the structural form (4), not for the
conventional form (3). This important feature ensures that when the prior is applied to the
second part of system (4), the posterior probability density function has exactly the same
form as the second part of the right hand side of (C.1). Thus, the posterior estimation of
the rest of the system can be performed independently of estimation of the first equation.
e22 ≡ A0 , moreover, each equation in the second
Conditional on the estimated value of A
0,t

block of system (C.1) can be estimated independently of other equations.
Appendix D. Role of the external sector
One aspect of monetary policy under discussion focuses on how monetary policy reacts to
movements in the exchange rate market. This and many other details are abstracted from
the simple policy equation. A natural question is whether the endogenous part of monetary
policy encompasses possible reactions to exchange rate movements. If the answer were
negative, then our exogenous monetary policy shocks would contain endogenous movements
related to the external sector. To test this hypothesis, we regress the estimated monetary
policy shock series on the four lags of the foreign exchange rate as well as net exports (as
percent of GDP). For completeness, we also regress the estimated endogenous components
of monetary policy on the same variables. Table D.1 reports the regression results. These
results indicate that the foreign exchange rate and net exports have no explanatory power
for exogenous monetary policy shocks, while movements in the external sector are effectively

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 48

Table D.1. Endogenous and exogenous components of monetary policy
Adjusted R2

p-value
Shock Systematic Output only
Exchange rate 0.361
Net exports

0.968

∗∗∗

Shock Systematic Output only

∗∗

0.000

0.032

0.000∗∗∗

0.000∗∗∗

Fit
0.015
0.450
0.456
Note. The testing hypothesis is that all coefficients of the exchange rate are zero or that all
coefficients of net exports are zero. The dependent variable is either estimated monetary
policy shock or estimated systematic component of monetary policy. The two-star
superscript indicates a 5% significance level and the three-star superscript indicates a 1%
significance level.

captured by endogenous monetary policy. The identified monetary policy shocks, therefore,
are not contaminated by an endogenous response to fluctuations in the RMB exchange rate.
Foreign exchange reserves are a combination of the exchange rate and trade surplus; thus,
they have been an important factor for capital control. PBC’s sterilization operations by
selling central bank bills or raising the reserve requirement ratio to freeze the excess liquidity
in the banking system would affect foreign exchange reserves significantly (Chang, Liu, and
Spiegel, 2015). But how important are foreign exchange reserves for the transmission of
monetary policy to domestic output? We study this issue by removing foreign exchange
reserves from the list of variables in the benchmark model. Figure 4 displays the estimated
response of GDP (the circle line) for this case. One can see that the result is very close to
the response from the benchmark model, confirming that the effects of monetary policy in
China work mainly through bank loans to domestic investment, not through the external
sector.
In the spirit of the simple Taylor rule (Taylor, 1993), the endogenous component of China’s
monetary policy is “sufficiently encompassing” to the extent that fluctuations in GDP growth
and CPI inflation capture other factors such as net exports and foreign exchange reserves
(Taylor, 2000). The Chinese central government’s overriding goal is to target real GDP
growth and promote this growth beyond the target. The main task of monetary policy is to
help achieve this goal, all else becoming a means to this end.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 49

References
Bernanke, B., and A. Blinder (1992): “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of
Monetary Transmission,” American Economic Review, 82, 901–921.
Bianchi, J., and S. Bigio (2014): “Banks, Liquidity Management and Monetary Policy,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report 503.
Chang, C., K. Chen, D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2016): “Trends and Cycles in
China’s Macroeconomy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2015, 30, 1–84, University of
Chicago Press.
Chang, C., Z. Liu, and M. M. Spiegel (2015): “Capital Controls and Optimal Chinese
Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 74, 1–15.
Chen, K., J. Ren, and T. Zha (2017): “The Nexus of Monetary Policy and Shadow
Banking in China,” NBER Working Paper No. 23377.
Chen, K., and Y. Wen (2017): “The Great Housing Boom of China,” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(2), 73–114.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999): “Monetary Policy
Shocks: What Have We Learned and To What End?,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics,
ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1A, pp. 65–148. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
Holland.
(2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 1–45.
Clark, H., M. Pinkovskiy, and X. Sala-i-Martin (2017): “China’s GDP Growth May
be Understated,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23323.
Denton, F. T. (1971): “Adjustment of Monthly or Quarterly Series to Annual Totals:
An Approach Based on Quadratic Minimization,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 66, 99–102.
Fernandez, R. B. (1981): “A Methodological Note on the Estimation of Time Series,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 63(3), 471–476.
Higgins, P., T. Zha, and W. Zhong (2016): “Forecasting China’s Economic Growth
and Inflation,” China Economic Review, 41, 46–61.
Higgins, P. C., and T. Zha (2015): “China’s Macroeconomic Time Series: Methods and
Implications,” Unpublished Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
Iacoviello, M., and S. Neri (2010): “Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an
Estimated DSGE Model,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 125–164.
Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,”
American Economic Review, 102(1), 238–271.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 50

Leeper, E. M., C. A. Sims, and T. Zha (1996): “What Does Monetary Policy Do?,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1–78.
Leeper, E. M., and T. Zha (2003): “Modest Policy Interventions,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 50(8), 1673–1700.
Li, X., X. Liu, and Y. Wang (2016): “A Model of China’s State Capitalism,” Unpublished
Manuscript.
Li, Z. (2016): “Forecasting China’s Economy: A Bayesian Approach,” Unpublished Manuscript, Emory University.
Liu, Z., P. Wang, and Z. Xu (2017): “Interest-rate Liberalization and Capital Misallocations,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Liu, Z., P. Wang, and T. Zha (2013): “Land-Price Dynamics and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 81(3), 1147–1184.
Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, and M. Liu (2016): “Are Chinese Growth and Inflation
Too Smooth? Evidence from Engel Curves,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(3), 113–144.
Nie, J. (2016): “Gauging the Strenth of Chinese GDP Growth,” The Macro Bulletin, pp.
1–3, http://macrobulletin.kcfed.org.
Rubio-Ramı́rez, J. F., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2010): “Structural Vector Autoregressions: Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference,” Review of Economic
Studies, 77, 665–696.
Sheng, S., and P. Wu (2008): “The Binary Transmission Mechanism of China’s Monetary
Policy: A Research on the ‘Two Intermediaries, Two Targets’ Model,” Economic Research
Journal (in Chinese), 10, 37–51.
Sims, C. A. (1980): “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica, 48(1), 1–48.
(1992): “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The Effects of Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review, 36, 975–1011.
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (1998): “Bayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate Models,”
International Economic Review, 39(4), 949–968.
(2006): “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?,” American Economic Review, 96, 54–81.
Taylor, J. B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” in Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, ed. by A. H. Meltzer, and C. I. Plosser, vol. 39, pp.
195–214. Amsterdam.
(2000): “Using Monetary Policy Rules in Emerging Market Economies,” Unpublished Manuscript, Standford University.
Uhlig, H. (2005): “What are the effects of monetary policy on output? Results from an
agnostic identification procedure,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(2), 381–419.

IMPACTS OF MONETARY STIMULUS ON CREDIT ALLOCATION AND THE MACROECONOMY 51

Wu, J., J. Gyourko, and Y. Deng (2012): “Evaluating Conditions in Major Chinese
Housing Markets,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 42(2), 531–545.
Yi, G. (2009): “The 30-Year-Long Course of China’s Market-Based Interest Rate Reform,”
Journal of Financial Research (in Chinese), 1, 1–14.
Zha, T. (1999): “Block Recursion and Structural Vector Autoregressions,” Journal of
Econometrics, 90(2), 291–316.
Zhou, X. (2017):

“International Monetary and Financial Committee Statement,”

https://www.imf.org/External/spring/2017/imfc/statement/eng/chn.pdf,

International

Monetary Fund.
Emory University and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Emory University, and NBER

