                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE LABOR MARKET CONSEQUENCES OF REFUGEE SUPPLY SHOCKS

                                       George J. Borjas
                                        Joan Monras

                                      Working Paper 22656
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22656


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




Borjas: Professor of Economics and Social Policy, Harvard Kennedy School; Research Associate,
National Bureau of Economic Research; and Program Director, Program on Labor Mobility, IZA.
Monras: Assistant Professor of Economics, CEMFI; and Research Affiliate, IZA. We are grateful
to Andrea Ichino, Joan Llull, Jan Stuhler, and four referees for valuable comments on a previous
draft of this paper. The paper was prepared for presentation at the 64th Panel Meeting of
Economic Policy in October 2016 in Florence, Italy. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by George J. Borjas and Joan Monras. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Market Consequences of Refugee Supply Shocks
George J. Borjas and Joan Monras
NBER Working Paper No. 22656
September 2016
JEL No. J23,J6

                                         ABSTRACT

The continuing inflow of hundreds of thousands of refugees into many European countries has
ignited much political controversy and raised questions that require a fuller understanding of the
determinants and consequences of refugee supply shocks. This paper revisits four historical
refugee shocks to document their labor market impact. Specifically, we examine: The influx of
Marielitos into Miami in 1980; the influx of French repatriates and Algerian nationals into France
at the end of the Algerian Independence War in 1962; the influx of Jewish émigrés into Israel
after the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s; and the exodus of refugees from the
former Yugoslavia during the long series of Balkan wars between 1991 and 2001. We use a
common empirical approach, derived from factor demand theory, and publicly available data to
measure the impact of these shocks. Despite the differences in the political forces that motivated
the various flows, and in economic conditions across receiving countries, the evidence reveals a
common thread that confirms key insights of the canonical model of a competitive labor market:
Exogenous supply shocks adversely affect the labor market opportunities of competing natives in
the receiving countries, and often have a favorable impact on complementary workers. In short,
refugee flows can have large distributional consequences.


George J. Borjas
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu

Joan Monras
CEMFI
Calle Casado del Alisal, 5
28014 Madrid
jm3364@gmail.com
                                                      3


                 The Labor Market Consequences of Refugee Supply Shocks

                                 George J. Borjas and Joan Monras*


1. Introduction
        The recent inflow of hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees into many European
countries has inevitably rekindled interest in documenting the determinants and
consequences of such “refugee supply shocks.” Although the war in Syria started in 2011,
and refugee camps formed in the area soon thereafter, the refugees initially moved mainly
to Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey. As the Syrian conflict continued and escalated, however,
the refugees began to move to Europe through Greece, with alternate routes quickly
emerging in Hungary, Austria, and the Balkans. It is difficult to enumerate precisely just
how many refugees have already entered the continent, but many news reports claim that
over 1 million asylum seekers arrived in Europe in calendar year 2015.
        This inflow of refugees has already generated a great deal of political conflict in all
the receiving countries, and has exposed major fissures in the economic, social, and cultural
fabric that holds together the European Union. Much of the controversy surrounds the
long-term implications of the open-door policy implicit in German Prime Minister’s Angela
Merkel’s unilateral assertion that “the fundamental right to asylum for the politically
persecuted knows no upper limit” (Alexe, 2015).
        The full consequences of the epochal events now reverberating throughout Europe
will not be known for many years (or perhaps even decades). Nevertheless, the persistent
influx of large numbers of refugees raises fundamental questions about their impact that
encourage a “revisiting” of other refugee supply shocks in other countries and at other
times to determine if there are universal lessons to be learned from such shocks.
        This paper provides such a revisiting. Despite the obvious differences in the factors
that have motivated refugee shocks throughout history—including the size and timing of


        * Borjas: Professor of Economics and Social Policy, Harvard Kennedy School; Research Associate,
National Bureau of Economic Research; and Program Director, Program on Labor Mobility, IZA. Monras:
Assistant Professor of Economics, CEMFI; and Research Affiliate, IZA. We are grateful to Andrea Ichino, Joan
Llull, Jan Stuhler, and four referees for valuable comments on a previous draft of this paper. The paper was
prepared for presentation at the 64th Panel Meeting of Economic Policy in October 2016 in Florence, Italy.
                                               4


the flows, the human capital of the refugees, and the countries and localities affected by the
upheaval—there are important similarities as well, and these similarities can help provide
a unifying framework for how to think about the labor market consequences of current or
future supply shocks.
       Almost by definition, refugee supply shocks are exogenous along a number of
important dimensions. The timing of the supply shock typically has little to do with
economic conditions in the receiving countries. The size of the supply shock depends at
least partly on the circumstances that created the exogenous political turmoil. And the skill
composition of the refugees often hinge on the nature of the political conflict that
motivated the exodus. In some cases, these political events lead to an outflow of high-skill
workers, while in other cases they lead to an outflow of low-skill workers.
       The paper reexamines the evidence surrounding some key historical refugee supply
shocks. In particular, we document the labor market consequences of four distinct shocks,
each of which has been analyzed separately in previous research:
       (1) The flow of Cuban refugees in the Mariel boatlift in 1980, a supply shock that
affected mainly the city of Miami (Card, 1990; Borjas, 2016, 2017; Peri and Yasenov, 2015).
       (2) The flow of refugees into France, both French repatriates and Algerian nationals,
that followed the conclusion of the Algerian War of Independence in 1962 (Hunt, 1991).
       (3) The flow of Jewish émigrés to Israel following the collapse of the Soviet Union in
the early 1990s (Friedberg, 2001).
       (4) The flow of refugees into several European countries from the long Yugoslav
Wars during the 1990s (Angrist and Kugler, 2003).
       Table 1 summarizes some of the essential details that characterize these supply
shocks. There are obviously large differences in the number of refugees involved. The
Mariel supply shock, for example, involved a total of about 120,000 refugees; the exodus
created by the Yugoslav Wars involved 250,000 persons; the shock of Soviet émigrés into
Israel involved almost 500,000 refugees; and nearly 1.5 million refugees entered France
after the end of the Algerian conflict. The different shocks also differed substantially in the
skill composition of the refugee population. The Mariel shock, for instance, consisted
mainly of very low-skill workers, with most of them lacking a high school education; the
Soviet émigrés entering Israel were disproportionately high-skill, with most of them having
                                              5


at least a college degree; and the refugee flow exiting Algeria consisted of both extremes,
with many low-skill Algerian nationals and many at least moderately skilled French
repatriates.
       Although each of these shocks has been examined independently in prior research,
our analysis differs in three crucial ways. The existing studies “pick and choose” a
particular methodological approach, often based on the type of data available or on the
idiosyncratic characteristics of a particular shock, to document their impact. An obvious
problem with this piecemeal approach is that it is unclear if the empirical findings truly
reveal universal insights about the impact of refugee supply shocks, or instead reflect the
fact that a particular researcher chose a particular methodological approach to study the
impact of a particular episode. Put bluntly, are the findings documented in the literature
sensitive to the choice of methodological approach used to examine the impact of a
particular supply shock?
       Our analysis instead derives a single empirical approach based on the implications
of factor demand theory. In principle, this methodological approach can be applied to
measure the consequences of any refugee supply shock. The theoretical derivation
indicates exactly the type of correlation between labor market outcomes and the number of
refugees that should be estimated in any specific context. And it also delineates precisely
the conditions under which that observed correlation can be interpreted as measuring a
causal impact of the refugee-induced increase in the supply of labor.
       Second, our analysis plays close attention to isolating the particular groups that are
most likely to be affected by refugee supply shocks. As noted earlier, the supply shocks
sometimes consist of high-skill workers, while in other cases they consist of low-skill
workers. One important lesson from our examination of the evidence is that the adverse
labor market impact of refugee supply shocks can only be properly estimated when the
analysis closely matches the skills of the refugees with those of the native workers who are
most likely competing in the same labor market.
       Equally important, the emphasis on the skill distributions of native and of refugees
implies that we can also examine the impact of the supply shocks on potentially
complementary native groups. For example, the low-skill Marielitos may have had a
beneficial impact on the wage of high-skill Miamians, while the high-skill Soviet émigrés
                                              6


may have had a beneficial impact on low-skill Israelis. These potential complementarities
are obviously an important component of any complete assessment of the labor market
consequences of refugee supply shocks. Our analysis of the natural experiments generated
by the various supply shocks provides the first estimates of the cross-effects of
immigration that are based entirely on observed data and are not contaminated by any
extraneous assumptions about the functional form of the aggregate production technology.
       Finally, rather than rely on proprietary or confidential data, we use the publicly
available censuses maintained at IPUMS. Although these data are sometimes less than ideal,
they can be easily adapted to measure the labor market consequences of refugee supply
shocks on both competing and complementary workers. In view of the very contentious
policy debate over the economic impact of immigration, the use of publicly available data
has one non-trivial implication: Our results are fully reproducible.
       The empirical analysis reported below uses the theory-derived empirical
specification to estimate the impact of the Marielitos, of the French repatriates and Algerian
nationals moving to France, of the flow of Soviet émigrés into Israel, and of the refugees
from the Yugoslav wars into several European countries. Despite the obvious differences in
the historical events that we examine, in the skill composition of the refugees, and in the
countries and localities affected by the shocks, the use of a unified empirical framework to
study each of the episodes reveals a common thread: Exogenous refugee supply shocks
have an adverse effect on the labor market opportunities of competing natives in the
destination countries. Depending on the episode and the data, we document that the shock
sometimes reduces the wage of competing workers; sometimes it reduces their
employment rates; and sometimes it reduces both. At the same time, however, the
empirical analysis also reveals that exogenous supply shocks often have a beneficial impact
on the employment opportunities of complementary native workers. In short, refugee
supply shocks have sizable distributional consequences in the labor markets of receiving
countries.
                                                  7


2. Framework
       It is instructive to begin the discussion by considering how one would go about
estimating the labor market impact of immigration if one had an ideal empirical setting and
ideal data. In particular, suppose that the receiving country has a competitive labor market
and that volatile political conditions abroad randomly generate a flow of refugees. It is
crucial to emphasize that the refugee supply shock is random along all relevant dimensions,
including the timing, the size and skill composition of the flow, and the eventual geographic
sorting of the refugees in the receiving country.
       The economy of the receiving country is composed of r isolated labor markets.
These labor markets can be defined along a number of characteristics commonly shared by
groups of workers. To fix ideas, and because this is the context most often seen in the
existing literature, it is useful to think of the index r as indicating a regional labor market
(although our discussion can be easily applied to alternative classifications, such as an
occupation). In this ideal setting, workers cannot move from one labor market r to another
in response to either supply or demand shocks. The production technology in the firms
populating each of these markets uses s different types of workers that are defined along
another characteristic, such as their educational attainment. Pairs (r, s) of labor markets
and factor types define each of the k different “cells” in which the national labor market can
be subdivided and for which data are available.
       We can derive a standard isoelastic labor demand function for each of these k cells
by assuming that competitive firms maximize profits in each market. Prior to the refugee
supply shock (t = 0), there are Lrs0 workers in region r of skill type s. The pre-shock CES
aggregate production function for region r is given by:


                                        1/δ
                      ⎡             ⎤
(1)            Qr 0 = ⎢ ∑ α s0Lδrs0 ⎥         ,
                      ⎣ s           ⎦


where δ = (σ - 1)/σ; and σ is the elasticity of substitution across worker types. Note that
the weights attached to the various skill groups (i.e., the α’s) can vary over time, due
perhaps to technological shifts that may favor one skill group over another.
                                                        8


        Profit maximization implies that we can write the wage paid to workers in cell (r, s)
at t = 0 as:


(2)               log wrs0 = log pr 0 + logα s0 + η logQr 0 − η log Lrs0 ,


where pr0 is the price level in region r prior to the supply shock, and η (= 1/σ) is the wage
elasticity.
        It is useful to think of the variable Lrs0 as giving the number of pre-existing workers
in cell (r, s) prior to the supply shock. For simplicity, we will often refer to this pre-existing
workforce as “natives,” but it should be obvious that Lrs0 could potentially include both
native- and foreign-born workers. In the short run, with the quantity of other factors of
production held constant, economic theory predicts that an increase in the size of the
workforce in a particular region-skill cell reduces the “own” wage.1 Note also that wrs0, the
equilibrium wage prior to the refugee supply shock, incorporates the impact of all
immigration-induced supply shocks prior to the random political upheaval that generates
the new flow of refugees.
        The labor markets in the receiving country are then “shocked” by the political
upheaval abroad. This upheaval sends an influx of Mrs new refugees into each region-skill
cell. We can write the post-shock marginal productivity condition as:


(3)               log wrs1 = log pr1 + logα s1 + η logQr1 − η log(Lrs1 + Mrs ).


        The wage change observed in cell (r, s) as a result of the refugee supply shock can
then be written as:




                                                           rs0 yields ∂ log wrs0/∂ log Lrs0 = −(1−κs)/σ, where κs
        1 Differentiating equation (2) with respect to L
is the share of income accruing to skill group s.
                                                          9


                                                                         Lrs1 + M rs
                 Δ log wrs = Δ log pr + ηΔ logQr + Δ logα s − η log                  ,
                                                                             Lrs 0
                                                 Lrs1 (1+ mrs )
(4)                         = θr + θ s − η log                  ,
                                                       Lrs 0
                                                 Lrs1
                            = θr + θ s − η log         − η mrs ,
                                                 Lrs 0


where θr = Δ log pr + Δ log Qr, and is captured by a region-specific fixed effect; θs = Δ log αs,
and is captured by a skill-specific fixed effect; and mrs = Mrs/Lrs1.2 Note that mrs gives the
relative size of the supply shock: the percent increase in the number of workers due to the
entry of refugees into cell (r, s).
        In addition to the fixed effects θr and θs, equation (4) has two regressors. Not
surprisingly, the wage change depends on the refugee supply shock. Although there is
much confusion in how this supply shock should be measured (compare, for example,
Borjas, 2003; and Card and Peri, 2016), the marginal productivity condition that is the
foundation of the theory-based empirical approach clearly indicates that the measure of
the supply shock should give the percent by which immigrants increased the size of the
workforce, with the base being the number of native workers in the post-shock period.3
        Equation (4) also shows that the wage in cell (r, s) may have changed because the
number of native workers in that labor market might have risen or fallen between the two
periods. Some of the change in the number of natives may be due to demographic factors
that are unrelated to changes in economic conditions during the relevant period, such as
mortality in the pre-existing workforce, the labor market entry of workers born many
years earlier, or secular trends in the skill mix of the native population. But some of the
change in Lrs may be endogenous, induced by the refugee supply shock itself. In other




        2 The derivation of equation (4) uses the approximation log (1 + m ) ≈ m , which is appropriate as
                                                                          rs    rs
long as the refugee supply shock is “small.”
        3 Card and Peri (2016) argue that it is preferable to use the pre-shock period workforce as base (see
also Dustmann et al., 2016). The bias induced by any particular specification is related to the endogenous
labor supply response of the natives. We discuss the labor supply response in greater detail below.
                                                10


words, the entry of the Mrs refugees might generate a labor supply response in the native
population.
        As a starting point, suppose that the change in the supply of pre-existing workers is
exogenous, due to long-term demographic factors. We have already assumed that the
refugee supply shock is, by definition, exogenous. The correct specification of a regression
model that estimates the impact of the refugee supply shock would then relate the wage
change in a particular labor market to the percent change in supply in the native
population and to the percent change in supply attributable to the refugees (as well as
region and skill fixed effects). The two “supply” regressors should have identical
coefficients, and those coefficients, as indicated by equation (4), should equal the wage
elasticity η.



3. Statistical Difficulties
        It is obvious that the real-world data typically available to measure how
immigration affects labor markets do not meet the ideal conditions of the refugee supply
shock discussed above. Although the timing of the shock may be independent from
economic conditions in the receiving country, the actual number of refugees as well as their
distribution across the (r, s) cells will be affected by those conditions. After all, only those
persons who have the most to gain by leaving will be the ones likely to end up as refugees.
Moreover, those self-selected refugees will tend to settle in those regions of the receiving
country that offer the most favorable economic opportunities.
        Natives will also respond to the refugee supply shock. These responses imply that
the region-skill cells cannot be thought of as isolated islands, and that supply shocks that
affect one cell have spillover effects on other cells. In the short run, for example, native
workers or firms might move from one regional labor market to another to take advantage
of the changes in the wage structure. In the long run, the demographic variables that may
be the “fundamentals” determining endowments of each factor of production are no longer
exogenous, as natives might pursue particular types of human capital investments and
avoid others.
                                                         11


        In addition to these endogeneity issues, there is a measurement problem inherent in
this type of analysis that might generate substantial bias: The skills that refugees acquired
prior to the political upheaval might not be very valuable to employers in the receiving
country. In other words, some of those skills may evaporate during the move. For instance,
a college degree acquired abroad might not have the same “knowledge content” as a college
degree acquired in the receiving country. Similarly, language difficulties might impose a
barrier for migrants wishing to enter certain occupations. As a result, the observable skills
of the refugees, as measured by years of educational attainment or professional certificates,
provide erroneous information about which specific factors of production they are truly
competing with or complementing. This measurement error in the size of the supply shock
in cell (r, s) will, in general, bias the estimate of the wage elasticity.
        We use the empirical counterpart of equation (4) to estimate the wage effects of the
refugee supply shock and to discuss various identification problems. Our basic empirical
regression specification is given by:4


                                                 Lrs1
(5)               Δ log wrs = θr + θ s − η log         − η mrs + ε rs .
                                                 Lrs 0


It is obvious that a key requirement for correctly estimating the wage elasticity η is that the
residual εrs be independent from both the size of the refugee supply shock and from the
size of the native response. It is easy to imagine many real-world situations in which such a
restriction will fail to hold.


        3.1 Endogenous native labor supply
        A key statistical problem that affects estimates of the wage elasticity arises from the
endogeneity of native labor supply. Remarkably, the existing literature has, at best, only
superficially addressed the biases created by this type of native response.5



        4 It is possible to extend the discussion of the labor supply decision by taking into account the
probability of finding a job. In that case, we can derive an equation similar to equation (5) for the
unemployment rate; see the appendix in Monras (2015b) for such a derivation.
                                                         12


        The endogeneity of the change in native labor supply in a particular region-skill cell,
Δ log Lrs, can arise due to two distinct factors. First, the amount of labor that native persons
already participating in the labor market will offer to employers likely depends on the
wage. Put differently, the refugee supply shock affects native labor supply at the intensive
margin. Second, the number of natives who choose to offer their services in a particular
labor market will respond to changes in the market wage, creating a native response to the
refugee supply shock at the extensive margin as well.
        Regardless of which margin we are referring to, it is easy to see how endogenous
native labor supply contaminates estimates of the wage elasticity by taking a first-order
Taylor’s expansion of the log change in the size of the native workforce. Equation (5) can
then be rewritten as:


                                            Lrs1 − Lrs 0
(5′)             Δ log wrs = θr + θ s − η                − η mrs + ε rs .
                                                Lrs1


We can then posit a standard model of the labor supply response of natives by writing:


                 Lrs1 − Lrs 0    M
(6)                           = γ rs1 + urs ,
                     Lrs1        Lrs1


where the parameter γ measures the native labor supply response. If the refugee supply
shock lowers the market wage, the supply parameter γ is unambiguously negative as long
as the substitution effect dominates the income effect in the neoclassical labor supply
framework. In other words, as the entry of refugees lowers the price of leisure, not only do
fewer natives work, but those who do remain in the workforce work fewer hours. We can
substitute the labor supply response in equation (6) to obtain the reduced form:

        5 There are some exceptions. For example, Borjas (2003, Table III) estimates the wage impact of
immigration using a regression model that includes a variable giving the number of native workers in the skill
group (which is then differenced by adding appropriate fixed effects to the model). However, the properties
of the wage elasticities resulting from this particular specification have not been examined in the subsequent
literature, despite the widespread adoption of the “skill-cell” approach. Similarly, Monras (2015a) includes
the changes in the level of regional GDP and in native labor supplies of the various skill groups in his main
regression specification.
                                                     13



(7)            Δ log wrs = θr + θ s − η (1+ γ ) mrs + ε*rs .


       Equation (7) shows that if we simply exclude the change in the native-born
workforce from the estimated regression model (as almost all of studies in the existing
empirical literature do), the regression coefficient that relates wage changes to the supply
shock measures an amalgam of the wage elasticity η and the labor supply parameter γ. As
long as -1 < γ < 0, the OLS estimate of the factor price elasticity is biased towards 0,
suggesting that the refugee supply shock had a relatively weak impact on wages. The
intuition is obvious: the wage impact of the refugee supply shock is attenuated by the fact
that natives supplied less work effort to the labor market, and as a result the real supply
shock was not as large as implied by mechanically calculating the number of refugees.
Equation (7) also illustrates the interesting case where the displacement effect is one-to-
one (or γ = −1). The wage change in cell (r, s) is then uncorrelated with the refugee supply
shock because the “complete” native response ensured that there was no supply shock to
speak of.
       It is worth noting that the magnitude of the supply parameter γ, which determines
the size of the downward bias in estimates of the wage elasticity, depends on how the
isolated labor markets (r, s) are defined. For example, Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1997)
documented that the estimated wage elasticity is more negative the larger the geographic
size of the labor market (e.g., states as opposed to cities). This result follows easily from
equation (7) because it is probably more costly to move across states than across cities (i.e.,
γ is more negative the smaller the geographic area). Similarly, in some contexts it may be
sensible to define labor markets in terms of occupations, rather than regions. Because it
may be more difficult for natives to switch occupations (implying γ is closer to zero), the
resulting bias should be relatively small.


       3.2 Endogenous migrant locations
       A positive spurious correlation between εrs and mrs may arise because migrants
choose in which localities to settle in the receiving country. Suppose that there are two
                                               14


regions where the refugees can settle; region 1 is thriving (i.e., wages are growing fast),
while region 2 is not. Income-maximizing refugees are then more likely to end up in region
1, creating a positive correlation between the change in the wage observed in cell (r, s) and
the refugee supply shock, and making it more difficult to detect any potential wage
depression caused by the supply shock itself.
       The search for an instrument that corrects for this specific type of endogeneity
dominates the existing discussion of the statistical problems that arise when measuring the
wage impact of immigration. Beginning with Altonji and Card (1991), the typical study uses
what has become known as the “migration networks” instrument. In particular, Altonji and
Card proposed that an instrument for mrs could be the geographic sorting of an earlier
wave of immigrants, arguing that the new immigrants would most likely end up in those
regions where the earlier immigrants settled because family networks reduce the costs of
migration. If labor market conditions in particular areas were not very persistent over time,
this means that new migrants enter particular regions for reasons that are unrelated to
current labor market conditions. The migration networks instrument has been refined
(Card, 2001) by constructing a more sophisticated lag based on national origin: the new
immigrants from country j are more likely to settle in those cities where earlier waves of
type-j immigrants settled.
       It is widely recognized that using a “lagged supply shock” as an instrument is invalid
if economic conditions in local labor markets are serially correlated. The initial waves of
type-j immigrants chose to settle in region r for a reason (including faster wage growth),
and if this reason persists over time, the serial correlation violates the condition that the
instrument should be independent of the error term in equation (5).
       Although the migration networks instrument is widely used in the literature, very
few studies examine the validity of the zero serial correlation assumption. Jaeger, Ruist,
and Stuhler (2016) provide a rare and important exception, documenting that the non-zero
serial correlation actually found in real-world local labor markets badly contaminates IV
estimates of the wage elasticity. The Jaeger-Ruist-Stuhler solution to the serial correlation
problem, however, makes exacting data demands, requiring that we observe local labor
market conditions for a very long span of time prior to the supply shock. Such data are not
                                               15


available in the context of the refugee supply shocks examined in this paper. Instead, the
empirical work reported below adopts the approach introduced by Monras (2015). He
argues that the combination of a networks instrument together with a supply shock that
occurred at time t for truly exogenous reasons (combined with adequate controls for the
trend in local economic conditions) provides a “compromise” solution that can help identify
the effect of migration even in the presence of serial correlation.
       It is worth stressing that this particular endogeneity issue remains a concern even if
the cells were demarcated by occupation rather than region. The self-selected refugees will
likely have skills marketable in occupations that are in high demand, again creating a
spurious positive correlation between the residual in the wage growth regression and the
size of the refugee supply shock in a particular market, and biasing the estimate of η
towards zero. We will use an analogous “employment networks” logic to construct an
instrument in this context, arguing that the costs of entering an occupation for a new
immigrant are likely to be lower when that occupation has already been penetrated by
their compatriots. The compatriots can provide valuable (and cheap) information about job
opportunities in particular sectors of the labor market. The empirical analysis reported
below uses this alternative approach when analyzing the Israeli labor market, where the
small geographic size of the country severely hampers the use of geographic variation.


       3.3 Downgrading of immigrant skills
       A particularly challenging measurement problem arises when the pre-migration
skills of immigrants are not a good predictor of the group of native workers with whom
they will compete in the receiving country. For example, some of the training that the
eventual refugees acquired prior to the move is specific to the country of origin, inevitably
leading to a reduction in the stock of human capital that is marketable in the post-
migration period. As a result, the observation that a particular refugee supply shock
contained many high-skill workers “on paper” does not necessarily imply that it is the high-
skill natives who will be adversely affected by this shock. As demonstrated in Dustmann,
Frattini, and Preston (2013), the classification issues raised by this type of “skill-
downgrading” can contaminate estimates of the wage impact of immigration.
                                                          16


        It is easy to determine the nature of the bias by considering the generic regression
model that allocates immigrants and natives to specific region-skill cells. To simplify the
discussion, suppose that the pre-existing size of the workforce remains constant after the
refugee supply shock and that there are two types of workers in each of r regional labor
markets: high-skill (h) and low-skill (u).6 The data, therefore, consist of two observations in
each of r locations. Equation (5) then implies that the wage change for each of the two
types of workers is given by:7


                                     M rh
(8a)             Δ log wrh = θ − η        + erh ,
                                     Lrh1


                                     M ru
(8b)             Δ log wru = θ − η        + eru .
                                     Lru1


        If the pre-migration skills of group h survived the move to the receiving country,
equations (8a) and (8b) would correctly specify the regression model that estimates the
wage elasticity η. Suppose, however, that a fraction π of the high-skill refugees “lose” their
skills during the move.8 The true regression model that would correctly estimate the wage
impact of immigration is then given by:


                                     (1− π)M rh
(9a)             Δ log wrh = θ − η              + erh ,
                                        Lrh1




        6 The derivation of the bias would be unaffected if we allowed for changes in native labor supply by
using the reduced form specification in equation (7) and reinterpreting the estimate of the wage elasticity as
one that nets out the labor supply response.
        7 To simplify the discussion, suppose that the wage growth has been deflated by the observed wage
growth observed for each region and for each skill group, so that the regression need not include the vectors
of fixed effects θr and θs.
        8 More generally, we can think of L as giving the number of efficiency units of a particular group of
pre-existing workers, and π would be the rate at which the efficiency units depreciate after the move.
                                                          17


                                     M ru + πM rh
(9b)             Δ log wru = θ − η                + eru .
                                         Lru1


Note that equations (9a) and (9b) correctly measure the size of the refugee supply shock
affecting each cell after we account for the skill downgrading.
        By algebraically manipulating equations (9a) and (9b), we can then rewrite the true
regression model as:


                                     M rh      −M rh
(10a)            Δ log wrh = θ − η        − ηπ       + erh ,
                                     Lrh1       Lrh1


                                     M ru     M
(10b)            Δ log wru = θ − η        − ηπ rh + eru .
                                     Lru1     Lru1


        By comparing equations (8a) and (8b) with equations (10a) and (10b), it is easy to
see that the downgrading of skills, and the resulting measurement error in the size of the
supply shock, effectively adds a regressor to the generic regression model. This additional
regressor takes on a value of (−Mrh/Lrh1) for the high-skill labor markets, and (Mrh/Lru1) for

the low-skill labor markets. The coefficient of this additional regressor would equal −ηπ.
        Put differently, the bias introduced by unobserved skill downgrading can be easily
reinterpreted as an omitted variable bias, so it should be relatively simple to determine the
direction of the bias. A straightforward application of the omitted-variable bias formula
(see the Appendix) shows that the OLS coefficient of the refugee supply shock variable
resulting from estimating the misspecified model in equations (8a) and (8b) is:9


                                        σ 2h      ⎡       σu ⎤
(10)             plim η̂ = η − ηπ                 ⎢1− ρhu σ ⎥ ,
                                    σ 2h + σ u2   ⎣        h ⎦




        9 The derivation of equation (10) assumes that the native workforce is equally split between high-
and low-skill workers.
                                                 18


where σ 2s is the variance in the measure of the supply shock for type s workers across
markets; and ρhu is the correlation between the high-skill and the low-skill supply shocks.
       Equation (10) implies that if the refugee supply shock had no effect on wages (so
that η = 0), the misclassification of some high-skill immigrants into low-skill cells does not
generate any bias. The OLS coefficient measuring the wage elasticity will still be zero.
       If the true wage elasticity η is negative, however, skill downgrading biases the
estimated wage elasticity, and the nature of the bias obviously depends on how the high-
and low-skill supply shocks are distributed across markets. One particularly interesting
special case arises when the supply shocks for high-skill and low-skill workers are equally
spread out (so that σ 2h = σ u2 ). It is then easy to show that the wage elasticity is biased
towards zero regardless of the value of ρhu. Another interesting special case occurs when

the correlation ρhu equals zero, so that (roughly) the cities where high-skill refugees end up
provide no information about where the low-skill refugees settle. It is obvious from
equation (10) that the estimated wage elasticity will again be biased towards zero.


       3.4 Complementarities across skill groups
       Up to this point, our discussion has focused on estimating the impact of a refugee
supply shock in a particular region-skill cell on the wage of natives who belong to that same
region-skill cell—in other words, the identification of the “own” wage effect of immigration.
We have shown that, under certain conditions, the functional form assumption of an
aggregate CES production function in a regional labor market produces a very simple
regression model that identifies the own wage effect by relating the wage change observed
in a particular cell to the refugee supply shock in that cell, even while ignoring the changes
that might have occurred in the quantities of other factor inputs. This regression model has
become the de facto generic regression in the literature (although it is not often linked to a
factor demand theoretical framework).
       The entry of the refugees into a particular skill group obviously has ramifications for
the wages of workers in other skill groups, and a full accounting of the impact of the supply
shock would require documenting not just the own wage effect of immigration, but the
“cross effects” as well. Because the number of potential cross-effects explodes as the
                                                   19


number of skill groups increases, the existing literature, including both the early work of
Grossman (1980) and the framework introduced in Borjas (2003), reduces dimensionality
by exploiting properties of functional form assumptions about the production technology.
For example, Borjas (2003) classifies workers into 32 skill groups (four education groups
and eight experience groups). If capital is also a factor input, there are then a potential
1,089 wage effects that need to be estimated. The imposition of a nested CES framework on
the data, where various skill groups are aggregated into efficiency units, leads to a
remarkable reduction in the number of primitive parameters (i.e., the elasticities of
substitution). In Borjas (2003), only three distinct elasticities of substitution are sufficient
to derive all 1,089 potential own- and cross-wage effects.
        This reduction in the parameter space, however, obviously comes at great cost.
Specifically, the nested CES framework greatly limits the types of cross-group
complementarities that are allowable. Moreover, the functional form assumptions
introduce numerical constraints on the value of the wage effects. For example, a constant
returns to scale aggregate production function that has capital and labor efficiency units as
inputs must imply that the long-run wage effect of immigration averaged across all skill
groups is identically equal to zero. This numerical constraint then cascades over to all other
wage effects estimated in such a framework, raising questions about whether the results
accurately reflect the underlying data and greatly reducing their value for policy analysis.
         To minimize the influence of such extraneous assumptions on the estimated cross-
effects of immigration, we only assume the existence of a generalized production function.
To simplify the exposition, we consider a production function with two inputs, F(Lrh, Lru),
where Lrh gives the number of high-skill workers in region r, and Lru gives the
corresponding number of low-skill workers.10 The production function F has the typical
properties (i.e., concave, twice differentiable, etc.). If we set the price level as the numeraire,
we can then write a general characterization of what happens to wages in region r and skill
group s (s = h, u) as:



        10 Assuming more worker types introduces more regressors into the regression model, but does not
change the nature of the empirical analysis.
                                                             20


(11)                Δ log wrs = α sh Δ log Lrh + α su Δ log Lru .


where αsj gives the factor price elasticity defined by ∂ log wrs/∂ log Lrj.11
         Instead of imposing functional form assumptions on the production technology, we
exploit the fact that the refugees in many of the historical episodes examined in this paper
were often concentrated in one particular skill group. Low-skill refuges made up a very
large fraction of the Marielitos in Miami and of the Algerian nationals moving to France,
while college graduates dominated the influx of Soviet émigrés in Israel. To easily illustrate
our approach, suppose that we consider an episode where all refugees belong to the low-
skill group. We can then rewrite equation (11) as:


(12)                Δ log wrs = α sh Δ log Lrh + α su Δ log Lru + α su mru ,


where the Δ log Lrs variables are now interpreted as the change in the number of native
workers in cell (r, s); and mru = Mru/Lru1, the measure of the refugee supply shock.
         We can then estimate equation (12) separately for each skill group. This
methodological approach essentially exploits the natural experiment created by the
refugee supply shock to measure not only the own wage effect, but also the cross effects.
Put differently, the cross-effects are identified by relying on the exogenous nature of
refugee supply shocks and on the historical concentration of the refugees in a very small
number of skill groups. The cross effect is given by the coefficient that relates the labor
market outcomes of skill groups untouched (at least directly) by the refugees to the
measure of the supply shock in the skill group that was most directly affected by the
political upheaval.




         11 A simple derivation of (11) starts with the fact that the marginal productivity condition (say, for
high-skill workers) is wrh = Fh (Lrh , Lru ) . Totally differentiating the first-order condition yields:
dwrh = Fhh dLrh + Fhu dLru . Equation (11) then follows easily from this differential, where the factor price
elasticity α ij = κ i cij ; κi is the share of income accruing to skill group i; and cij is the elasticity of
complementarity (cij = FijF/FiFj) between groups i and j.
                                              21


       It is important to re-emphasize that this approach does not impose any constraints
on the potential value of the cross-effects. In fact, we can even use equation (12) to re-
estimate the own-effect without imposing the aggregate CES functional form restriction
used to derive equation (5). The regression implied by equation (12), therefore, effectively
lets the data decide what impact refugees had on the earnings of all native groups.


       3.5 Other problems
       In an ideal (from a researcher’s point of view) supply shock, the migrants would be
randomly selected from the population of the sending country. However, it is hardly ever
the case that migrants are a random sample of that population. For example, Fernandez-
Huertas (2011) documents that Mexican workers moving to the United States tend to be
less skilled than the Mexican workers who choose to remain behind. Although this type of
selection may be due to a variety of factors, Borjas (1987) shows how differences in the
returns to skills between the sending and receiving countries can systematically generate
various patterns of selection.
       Even in the context of exogenous refugee supply shocks, the political change in the
sending country inevitably affects different types of people differently. Those who benefit
from the new regime will be more likely to stay behind, while those who lose will have
greater incentives to become refugees. For example, a Communist takeover “taxes” the
economic well being of entrepreneurs. If the receiving country values those types of skills,
the self-selection of the refugees creates a spurious positive correlation between the
residual εrs in equation (5) and the share of refugees entering those markets, mrs. This
positive correlation would further attenuate the estimate of the wage elasticity η. Although
it is recognized that the self-selection of immigrants contaminates the measured wage
impact of immigration, there have not been any studies that attempt to quantify this bias.
       In addition, the supply shock might generate “general equilibrium” effects because
the refugees might influence the average level of productivity in the aggregate economy.
One such effect that has received some attention is the possibility that some immigrants,
and particularly high-skill immigrants, bring new ideas and knowledge that expand the
production frontier. Specifically, the high-skill immigrants not only introduce increased
                                              22


competition with high-skill natives, but also create knowledge spillovers that increase the
productivity of all other workers in the process.
       Unfortunately, the typical attempt to estimate the impact of supply shocks on the
average wage level in a receiving country has again relied on extraneous functional form
assumptions about the production technology. This approach builds in a numerical answer
for the general equilibrium wage effects. In the absence of productivity spillovers, for
example, if the aggregate production function were Cobb-Douglas, the elasticity relating the
average wage level to the size of the workforce must equal (the negative of) capital’s share
of income in the short run and zero in the long run.
       The reliance on functional form assumptions to quantify the general equilibrium
effects is not surprising. The estimation of these aggregate effects from actual data raises
extremely difficult challenges. How exactly would one estimate the impact of a supply
shock on the average wage level from available data? Suppose that we observe that a
country receiving more refugees is doing better post-shock than it was pre-shock. Is this
due to what migrants bring to the receiving country, or is it possible that there are other
unobserved factors, unrelated to immigration, that are determining economic growth in
that country? Making before-and-after comparisons in the average wage of a country
provides very little information about how the refugee supply shock affected the overall
level of economic activity.
       In sum, our discussion shows the importance of thinking carefully about both the
underlying theoretical model and the statistical problems created by real-world supply
shocks when we attempt to measure the labor market impact of immigration. In one sense,
the measurement of the wage impact of refugee supply shocks is a trivial exercise. The
canonical model of supply and demand, which is fundamental to our understanding of how
real-world labor markets work, predicts that the refugees will obviously lower the wage of
competing native workers in the short run. To conduct yet another study documenting that
labor demand curves are downward sloping, therefore, would seem to be a rather
pedestrian exercise.
       It turns out, however, that measuring the elasticity of wages with respect to migrant
inflows introduces thorny measurement and statistical problems that have yet to be fully
resolved. In fact, labor economists have devoted a disproportionate amount of time and
                                              23


effort in the past three decades to document what is, in the end, a trivial empirical finding.
The resulting confusion (and sometimes obfuscation) in the literature has not been a
productive contribution to the immigration policy debate.
       The examination of refugee supply shocks—which are truly exogenous on at least
some dimensions—can perhaps help clarify and increase our understanding of how
immigration affects real-world labor markets. The real-world conditions that generate
refugee supply shocks will almost never replicate the idealized conditions that lead to the
generic empirical approach that is widely used in the literature. As we have seen, however,
many of the statistical problems created by real-world circumstances tend to bias
estimates of the wage impact of immigration in the same direction: attenuating the
negative wage effect predicted by factor demand theory.



4. Mariel
       On April 20, 1980, Fidel Castro declared that Cuban nationals wishing to emigrate
could leave freely from the port of Mariel. Cuban-Americans living in the United States
quickly organized a boatlift to bring their relatives. The first migrants arrived on April 23,
and over 100,000 had taken advantage of Castro’s invitation by June 3. By the time the
boatlift ended through an agreement between the US and Cuban governments in October
1980, about 125,000 Cubans had moved and Miami’s workforce had grown by about 8
percent. The Marielitos were disproportionately low-skill, with most lacking a high school
diploma. The Mariel supply shock increased the size of this low-skill workforce in Miami by
nearly 20 percent.
       We begin our empirical analysis of refugee supply shocks by reexamining the Mariel
data from the perspective of the factor demand framework introduced earlier. The Mariel
context plays a prominent role in the literature that examines the wage impact of
immigration. Card’s (1990) landmark study of this particular supply shock was a pioneer in
the now-common approach of examining outcomes from natural experiments to measure
parameters of great policy interest.
       The Card study looked at labor market conditions, including wages and
unemployment, in Miami in the years before and after Mariel, and compared the change in
                                                      24


those variables to what was happening in comparable cities that were presumably
unaffected by the refugees. Surprisingly, this comparison indicated that the relative wage
for the average worker in Miami remained unchanged, leading Card to conclude that even
sizable supply shocks had little effect on the price of labor in the affected markets.
        There has been a flurry of renewed interest in the Mariel supply shock in the past
year, sparked by the Borjas (2017) reappraisal of the Mariel evidence.12 Using a key lesson
from the voluminous research in the past two decades on the labor market impact of
immigration, Borjas argued that it is crucial to study the impact of the Marielitos by
focusing specifically on the earnings of the workers most likely to be affected by the supply
shock—namely, the low-skill workforce. It turns out that the comparison of low-skill wages
in Miami and various control cities before and after Mariel overturns the perception that
Mariel had a negligible effect, showing instead that the relative earnings of male high
school dropouts in Miami fell and that the magnitude of the wage drop was substantial.


        4.1 Summary Statistics
        Table 2 summarizes the available data on the size and skill composition of the
Mariel supply shock. The Cuban refugees began to arrive only a few weeks after the 1980
decennial census was conducted, so that the first enumeration of the Marielitos in large-
scale surveys was not done until 1990. Specifically, the 1990 census reports the number of




         12 See Peri and Yasenov (2015) and Borjas (2016). The empirical debate hinges on whether women
and non-Cuban Hispanics should be included in the sample when calculating the average wage in a local labor
market. Borjas (2016) notes that the inclusion of women is problematic because the female labor force
participation rate was rising rapidly in the 1980s, and it grew differentially in different metropolitan areas.
The inclusion of women then inevitably changes the sample composition over time, contaminating wage
trends. Similarly, nearly half of the additional observations that would be added by including non-Cuban
Hispanics in the sample are of immigrants who arrived after Mariel, again changing the sample composition
and contaminating wage trends in local labor markets. Finally, the original draft of the Peri and Yasenov
(2015) study examined a sample of workers aged 16-61 without any controls for whether a particular person
was enrolled in school. This led to the erroneous classification of high school students aged 16-18 as “high
school dropouts” because those students had not yet received their high school diploma. It is worth noting
that the possibility that Card’s evidence does not correctly convey what happened to the low-skill labor
market in Miami was first noted in the online appendix of Monras (2014), which examined wage trends in the
pooled sample of high school dropouts and high school graduates and documented a relative decline in the
wage of Miami’s low-skill workforce.
                                                         25


Cuban-born persons who moved to the United States during the years 1980 or 1981.13 We
define this group to be the population of refugees resulting from the Mariel supply shock.
         The 1990 census enumerated 120,605 such immigrants. That census also reports
the geographic location of the refugees as of 1985, with 69.4 thousand of the Marielitos (or
almost 60 percent) living in Miami five years after the shock. Note that although all existing
studies of the impact of the Mariel supply shock focus on labor market outcomes in the
Miami metropolitan area relative to some set of placebo cities, 40 percent of the Marielitos
were living outside the Miami area within 5 years after the shock. The main alternative
locations were New York City (which housed 13 percent of the refugees), Los Angeles (7
percent), and Tampa (3 percent).14
         The regression framework derived earlier allows for the Marielitos to have an
impact on cities other than Miami. This fact marks one key distinction between our
regression-based approach and the treated-untreated difference-in-differences
methodology employed in both the Card (1990) and Borjas (2017) studies. We discuss the
implications of this methodological distinction in greater detail below.
         Table 2 also confirms the insight that motivated the Borjas (2017) reappraisal. The
Mariel supply shock was composed of disproportionately low-skill workers. Over 60
percent of the refugees lacked a high school diploma, as compared to only 20 percent of the
native-born workforce in Miami. In contrast, only 7 percent of the Marielitos had a college
diploma, as compared to over 25 percent of native workers. As a result, even though the
Marielitos increased Miami’s population by only 8 percent, they increased the number of
male workers without a high school diploma by 32 percent.


         13 The data from later surveys, including the 2000 decennial census, indicate that the number of
Cuban immigrants who arrived in 1981 is relatively small, so that this definition of the Marielitos should not
create substantial measurement error; see the detailed discussion in Borjas (2017).
         14 We identify the 1985 locations from the 1990 census data both because of the larger sample size
of the decennial census and because the census specifically identifies persons born in Cuba (as opposed to
having Cuban ancestry, which is the only information available in the CPS). To further increase the precision
of our measure of the supply shock, we remove other immigrants arriving in the United States between 1980
and 1985 from the base population in each cell. Specifically, we measure mrs = C rs1 / (Lrs1 − C rs1 − I rs1 ), where
Crs gives the number of Marielitos in cell (r, s); Irs gives the number of “other” immigrants who arrived in
1980-85; and Lrs1 gives the size of the cell in 1985. The regression results are almost identical if we do not
exclude the other immigrants from the base.
                                                      26


        The bottom panel of Table 2 reports the rate of wage growth during the relevant
period for each education group, both in Miami and outside Miami. We use the March CPS
data to calculate the pre- and post-Mariel average log wage in a sample of non-Hispanic
men aged 25-59.15 We pool workers who reported earnings data in calendar years 1977-79
to calculate the average pre-Mariel wage, and pool data for calendar years 1981-84 to
calculate the post-Mariel wage. We do not use earnings data from the 1980 calendar year
because the Marielitos arrived towards the middle of that year.
        The summary statistics reported in the bottom panel of the table shows that the rate
of wage growth for high school dropouts was far lower in Miami than outside Miami.
Interestingly, the table also shows that the rate of wage growth for high school graduates, a
group whose size was only increased modestly by the Marielitos, is noticeably higher in
Miami than outside Miami. Similarly, the unemployment rate of high-skill workers
decreased in Miami, while increasing in the rest of the country. These patterns hint at the
possibility that refugee supply shocks generate not only adverse own wage effects, but also
improve labor market conditions for complementary workers, a result that was overlooked
in earlier studies.


        4.2 Results
        We initially use the regression models derived in equations (5) and (7) to identify
the own effects of the Mariel supply shock. The analysis uses the sample of 38 metropolitan
areas, including Miami, which can be consistently matched over the 1977-1984 period.16
We classify workers into four education groups: high school dropouts, high school
graduates, some college, and college graduates.17 We examine the labor market outcomes
of non-Hispanic men aged 25-59, a group that approximates the prime-age native-born

        15 Our empirical analysis of all four refugee episodes focuses on examining labor market outcomes
for prime-age men. This is the group of workers most attached to the labor market, so that wage and
employment trends are less likely to be contaminated by changes in sample composition.
        16 We use the aggregated 3-digit version of the metarea variable in the IPUMS files (rather than the
4-digit version that would generate a sample of 44 metropolitan areas) to avoid including in the analysis local
labor markets that have very few observations.
        17 The unit of observation that defines a market could be further refined to a city-education-age cell.
Such a definition, however, leads to a very small average number of observations per cell in the refugee
shocks examined in this paper.
                                                         27


workforce in Miami, the city most affected by the Marielitos, around 1980. The unit of
observation in the regressions is a city-education cell, so that the identifying variation
arises both from the fact that the Marielitos settled in a specific set of locations and were
disproportionately represented in the least-skilled group.
         Table 3 reports the regression coefficients that estimate the own effect of the Mariel
supply shock. Throughout the analysis, the regressions are weighted by (n1n0 ) / (n1 + n0 ) ,
where nt gives the number of observations used to calculate the dependent variable in a
particular city-education cell at time t.18 As implied by the theory-based regression
specification in equations (5) and (7), all the regressions include education fixed effects and
metropolitan area fixed effects.19 We use three alternative dependent variables: the rate of
wage growth in a city-education cell (where the wage variable measures weekly earnings);
the change in the average unemployment rate (where the unemployment rate is defined as
the ratio of the number of persons unemployed to the number of persons in the labor
force); and the change in the average employment rate (defined as the ratio of the number
of employed to the size of the corresponding population).
         It is useful to begin by discussing the regression coefficients from the simplest OLS
specifications reported in the first two columns of Panel B of the table, where the
dependent variable is the change in the average log weekly wage. The theory-based
specification derived earlier requires the inclusion of the variable Δ log Lrs, a regressor that
gives the log change in the size of the native workforce in the cell. The table reports
coefficients from two alternative regression models that address the endogeneity of this
variable in different ways. First, we simply exclude the variable from the regression so that
the estimated wage elasticity is a reduced form coefficient that incorporates the native
labor supply response (and is biased towards zero) Alternatively, we replace the variable Δ


         18 These are the optimal weights when constructing aggregated first-differenced cells from micro-
level data. The variance of the differenced average residual (assuming the variance of the person-specific
error term is not serially correlated and has constant variance) is given by (σ ε / n0 + σ ε / n1 ) . The optimal
                                                                                   2        2



weight takes into account the fact that measurement error of the mean value in the cell is less accurate if the
number of observations in that cell is small.
         19 The inclusion of these fixed effects do not saturate the regression because the nature of the Mariel
supply shock led to very unbalanced supply shifts across both cities and education groups.
                                                         28


log Lrs with the corresponding change in the native-born population in that cell, so that the
coefficient of this variable itself becomes a type of reduced-form coefficient.20 Note that the
coefficient of the variable measuring the size of the Mariel supply shock is about -1.3, and
statistically significant, regardless of how we address the endogeneity of the native labor
supply response.21 Figure 1 helps visualize the wage impact of the Marielitos. It is clear that
the negative own wage effect is driven mostly by the changing market conditions facing
low-skill workers in the very small number of cities where most of the refugees settled.
         A crucial feature of the Mariel supply shock is that the refugees could only leave
from the port of Mariel. Many of the Cuban-Americans who already lived in the United
States bought or rented boats they would then take to Mariel to pick up their relatives (as
well as other potential refugees) waiting at the port. It is inevitable that the geographic
sorting of the new arrivals would be very similar to that of the pre-existing Cuban
population in the United States, a group that sponsored and physically enabled the entry of
the Marielitos. Given the extreme clustering of the pre-Mariel Cuban refugees in the Miami
metropolitan area, with about 50 percent of that population living in Miami in 1980, it is
not surprising that about 60 percent of the Marielitos ended up there as well.
         We address the potential endogeneity created by the geographic distribution of the
Marielitos by using the geographic sorting of the pre-Mariel Cuban immigrants to predict
where the new refugees would settle.22 The first panel of Table 3 shows the relevant
coefficient from the first stage regression, summarizing the relation between the size of the
Mariel supply shock in cell (r, s) and the share of Cubans in that cell prior to 1980. Not
surprisingly, the coefficient is strongly positive.23

         20 This reduced-form specification implies that the regression coefficient of the refugee supply shock
will generally differ from that of the change in the population of the specific cell.
       21 The wage elasticity estimated in the regression framework is very similar to the -1.5 elasticity
produced by applying a difference-in-differences approach to the March CPS data; see Borjas (2017).
        22 We use data from the 1980 census to calculate the distribution of pre-Mariel Cubans across the
region-skill cells.
         23 In other words, we use the lagged share of Cubans in the workforce as the instrument. The first-
stage regression coefficient then essentially estimates by how much the pre-existing immigrant workforce in
a given cell increased the supply of migrants to that cell as a result of the refugee shock. Some studies in the
literature (e.g., Ottaviano and Peri, 2007) use the predicted location of the actual flows observed in the data. If
the instrument is sufficiently strong in these alternative IV specifications, the first-stage coefficient, by
construction, will hover around 1.0.
                                                        29


        The IV estimates of the wage elasticity reported in the second panel are again about
-1.3, so that there is little indication that controlling for the endogeneity of the geographic
sorting of the refugees plays any role in determining their labor market impact.24 The
similarity between the OLS and IV estimates in the Mariel context is not surprising. The
physical characteristics of the boatlift ensure that the geographic sorting of the Marielitos
after arrival had little to do with economic conditions circa 1980.
        The bottom two panels of the table report analogous regressions using the change in
the unemployment and employment rates as dependent variables. None of the coefficients
are significantly different from zero. The own effects of the Mariel supply shock, therefore,
seem to be restricted to changes in wages. This finding may perhaps be informative about
how labor markets adjust to supply shocks during a period of very high inflation. The US
inflation rate was 13.5 percent in 1980 and 10.3 percent in 1981.
        Table 4 reports selected coefficients from the more comprehensive regression
model that identifies both own- and cross-effects. We can carry out this analysis because
most of the Marielitos were high-school dropouts, allowing us to examine their impact on
the other skill groups. To do so, we estimate equation (12) separately in each of the four
education groups used in the analysis (i.e., high school dropouts, high school graduates,
some college, and college graduates). The regression model also includes variables
measuring the change in the native population in each of the groups. This regression
specification enables us to detect potential complementarities across factor types without
imposing any functional form restrictions on the production technology.
        As before, the estimated own wage effect is negative and significant, with a wage
elasticity of about -0.9. Similarly, the estimate of the own employment effect is not
distinguishable from zero.25 The analysis, however, shows that the cross effects are
numerically important. Although the supply shock of the predominantly low-skill


        24 We also estimated the Mariel regressions using data from the Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) CPS
files rather than the March CPS, and obtained similar results, although, as in Borjas (2017), the point estimate
of the own wage elasticity is smaller. The own wage elasticity estimated in the ORG when the regression
model includes the change in the size of the native population is -0.51 (0.11) in the OLS regression, and -0.43
(0.16) in the IV regression. These elasticity estimates are again virtually identical to the -0.5 elasticity implied
by applying a difference-in-differences methodology to the ORG data.
        25 The instrument in this regression uses only variation in the location of the least-skilled Cubans.
                                              30


Marielitos lowered the wage of high school dropouts, it raised the wage of workers with a
high school education, and this effect is both numerically and statistically significant. The
cross-wage elasticity is about +0.7. In addition, the unemployment rate of workers with
more than a high school diploma also fell significantly.
       In sum, our analysis of the Mariel supply shock yields a remarkable result. As
implied by the simplest model of factor demand in a competitive market, supply shocks can
have both negative and positive effects on the pre-existing workforce. Those workers who
most resemble the refugees suffer the wage loss, while the wage gains accrue to those
workers who complement the skills brought in by the refugees.
       The data also indicate that the negative and positive effects of supply shocks need
not occur along the same dimensions. In the Mariel context, the own effects tend to show
up as wage cuts, while cross effects are observed in both wages and employment. There is
obviously much to learn about how labor markets adjust to supply shocks. Regardless of
how the market reaches a new equilibrium, however, it is evident that refugee supply
shocks can have important distributional consequences.


       4.3 Alternative Approaches to Natural Experiments
       It is of interest to contrast the results summarized in Tables 3 and 4 with the
evidence reported in existing studies of the Mariel supply shock. As we noted earlier, there
is a key methodological difference between our theory-based regressions and the
atheoretical approach exemplified in earlier studies. Both Card (1990) and Borjas (2017)
pursued a difference-in-differences approach, comparing the changed conditions in the
Miami labor market to the changed conditions in a set of control cities.
       It is obviously very difficult to construct perfect control groups or “placebos”
outside a laboratory setting. A good placebo needs to satisfy two distinct conditions. First,
the treated and control groups must be comparable in important ways. Card (1990)
compared Miami to a control group of four cities: Atlanta, Houston, Los Angeles, and Tampa.
This particular placebo was partly selected by looking at employment dynamics in various
cities both before and after the Mariel supply shock. The Borjas (2017) reappraisal showed
that the construction of the control group plays a key role in any evaluation of the impact of
the Marielitos. Using an alternative control group based on employment trends prior to the
                                                       31


supply shock, as well as employing the Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010) synthetic
control method, consistently resulted in larger (i.e., more negative) estimates of the own
wage effect of the supply shock.
       A second condition that a good placebo must satisfy is that there should not be any
spillovers between the treatment and control groups. This condition, although conceptually
important, has been ignored in all existing Mariel studies. It is trivial to see how such
spillovers arise in this context. Nearly 40 percent of the Marielitos chose to settle in cities
outside Miami. In fact, two of the cities in the control group used in Card’s (1990) study
were cities that actually received many refugees: 7.4 thousand settled in Los Angeles and
another 3.1 thousand settled in Tampa. The generic difference-in-differences approach,
therefore, suffers from the fact that some of the cities in the control group were treated by
the exogenous supply shock as well.
       Unlike the traditional difference-in-differences calculations that compare Miami and
a placebo, our regression-based analysis allows for the refugee supply shock to affect many
different markets, along both the region and skill dimensions. We identify the impact by
exploiting the different numbers of Marielitos settling in different cities and the different
numbers of Marielitos in different education groups. In other words, the regression
approach fully incorporates the fact that the refugee supply shock “treated” many markets,
and in fact treated those markets differentially, and then uses that dispersion to identify
how supply shocks alter labor market outcomes.



5. Émigrés to Israel from the former Soviet Union
       Prior to the late 1980s, it was extremely difficult for Soviet Jews to migrate to
Israel.26 The pressures for such migration began soon after the Six-Day War in 1967, when
Israel began to more forcefully state its demand that Soviet Jews be allowed to rejoin their
families or build a new life in Israel. The Soviet reluctance to allow such migration became
an important obstacle in attempts to improve relations between the Soviet Union and the




       26 See Buwalda (1997) for a detailed history.
                                                          32


West, and it was not until Michael Gorbachev’s Glasnost initiative in 1986 that the Soviet
Union began to consider and allow the emigration of its Jewish population.
         In 1986 and 1987, a small number of visas were granted to Soviet Jews who wished
to emigrate. Most of these émigrés, however, chose to settle in the United States or Canada,
and only a small fraction moved to Israel. The United States was a particularly appealing
destination because the country allowed Soviet emigrants to qualify for refugee status,
making it relatively easy to obtain entry visas.
         By 1989, the United States had changed the rule that automatically classified Soviet
émigrés as refugees, making it almost impossible for Soviet Jews to move to that country
unless an American relative could sponsor their entry. In contrast, Israel’s Law of Return
continued the open-door policy of welcoming all Jews. As Friedberg (2001) notes:
“Between 1989 and 1995, 610,100 immigrants arrived from the [former Soviet Union],
increasing the size of the Israeli population by 13.6%.”


         5.1 Summary Statistics
         We use data drawn from the 1983 and 1995 Israeli census microdata maintained by
IPUMS. Each of these data files represents a 10 percent random sample of the Israeli
population. The censuses report information on country of birth and the year of migration
(if born abroad). Using the 1995 census, we classify a Soviet émigré as someone born in the
former Soviet Union who migrated to Israel between 1990 and 1995. For expositional
convenience, we will refer to the pre-existing population of Israeli citizens as “natives” even
though a very large fraction (42 percent) was born outside Israel. As Table 5 shows, the
Soviet émigrés made up almost 10 percent of the population in 1995.27
         The table also summarizes key characteristics of the Soviet émigrés. In contrast to
the Marielitos, the émigrés were very highly skilled. Few of them (only about 11 percent)
lacked a secondary education, as compared to a third of the Israel population. In contrast,

         27 The inflow of Soviet émigrés was so large that we measure the size of the shock as
 m k = Soviet k / (Lk1 + Soviet k ) , where Sovietk gives the number of émigrés in cell k. The point estimates of the
wage impact do not change significantly if we exclude the number of émigrés from the denominator, but the
IV coefficient is less precisely estimated. This is probably because the derivation of our estimating equation
uses the approximation that the refugee supply shock is “small,” an assumption that is false for many cells in
the Israeli context.
                                                     33


43 percent of the émigrés had completed a university education, as compared to only 18
percent of the Israeli natives.
       The table documents interesting differences between the occupational distributions
of the émigré and native populations. Note that 14 percent of the émigrés, despite their
very high educational attainment, ended up as “unskilled workers,” even though only 7
percent of the native Israeli population worked in such jobs. Similarly, over 50 percent of
the émigrés worked as “skilled workers in industry and construction,” again a far higher
representation than the 35 percent of natives in that occupation.28
       The bottom panel of the table presents summary statistics giving the wage growth
of native Israelis observed in selected education/occupation categories. We examine the
change in annual earnings (the only wage measure that is available in both Israeli
censuses). It is suggestive that the education-occupation cell that was most affected by the
Soviet émigrés, university graduates who end up as “skilled workers in industry and
construction,” experienced a remarkably large drop in earnings during the period.
       We will show below that this mismatch between the pre-existing skills of the
émigrés (as measured by their educational attainment) and the type of job they actually
ended up doing in Israel may have played an important role in generating Friedberg’s
(2001) conclusion that the émigrés did not affect the Israeli wage structure. A
reexamination of the data that allows for the very high-skill émigrés to influence the
earnings of workers employed in occupations that typically employ low-skill workers (and
hence workers with lower education levels) overturns this result and demonstrates that
the émigrés indeed adversely affected the wage of “truly competing” workers, and likely
increased the wage of complementary workers.


       5.2 Results
       Israel is a small country; its land size is roughly the size of El Salvador or New Jersey.
As a result, it makes little sense to define a labor market in terms of a region-skill
classification. The short commuting distance from one city to another would generate


       28 The full name of the occupation is “skilled workers in industry, and construction, and other skilled
workers.”
                                                   34


sufficient spillovers across markets to make it difficult to measure the impact of a supply
shock by exploiting dispersion at the regional level. Not surprisingly, Friedberg's (2001)
examination of the Soviet supply shock focused on the impact of the émigrés on wages
across occupations, so that these "markets" are less likely to be affected by the spillovers
resulting from native internal migration.
        Although we adapt Friedberg's choice of an occupation (rather than a local labor
market) to define the relevant unit of analysis, our analysis differs in a crucial way. As the
summary statistics reported above suggest, the educational attainment of the émigré
provides an additional measure of skills that is likely to affect productivity and wages—
even if the émigrés must initially work in jobs that do not reflect their credentials.
Therefore, we define a labor market as a particular occupation-education pairing.
        We classify workers into four education categories: less than primary schooling,
completed primary schooling, completed secondary schooling, and completed a university
education.29 We also use the occupation classification available in the IPUMS files of the
Israeli census, which are the eight broad occupation groups listed in Table 5. As in our
study of the Mariel supply shock, we restrict the empirical analysis to male Israeli natives
aged 25-59. Finally, the nature of the Israeli census data implies that we can only use the
change in log annual earnings as the dependent variable. The occupation of employment is
only available for persons who work so that we cannot analyze the impact of the supply
shock on either the employment or the unemployment rate.
        Table 6 summarizes the main regression results using the simpler specification that
focuses on identifying the own wage effects. Consider initially the OLS results in the first
two columns of the bottom panel. The estimated coefficient is about -0.73 (with a standard
error of 0.27). Note that the estimate of the wage elasticity of about -0.7 is unchanged when
we add a regressor giving the change in the size of the native population in the particular
cell.
        The table also reports the wage effect resulting from the IV specification. The
instrument is the share of earlier Soviet migrants (who were observed in the 1983 census)
employed in a particular occupation-education pairing. The key coefficient in the first stage

        29 Friedberg (2001) examines the education-adjusted wages of workers in a particular occupation.
                                                      35


of the IV is highly significant, so that the new émigrés found employment in roughly the
same occupations that employed the compatriots that arrived prior to the collapse of the
Soviet Union. The IV estimate of the wage elasticity is -0.62 (0.32), very similar to the
coefficient obtained in the OLS regression. In short, a regression analysis based on the
notion that a labor market consists of an occupation-education cell unambiguously
indicates that the Soviet émigrés adversely affected the earnings of comparable workers.
        Figure 2 visualizes this insight. The figure shows a large "cloud" of occupation-
education cells that were unaffected by the Soviet influx. It also shows that the relatively
few cells that “welcomed” the émigrés are the source of the negative wage effect. The
affected cells are composed of the select occupations that attracted high-skill émigrés. Not
surprisingly, those occupations were the ones that experienced the lowest wage growth
between 1983 and 1995.30
        As shown in Table 5, the size of the Soviet supply shock was largest for workers who
had a university degree. For this particular skill group, the inflow of the refugees
represented a 26 percent increase in supply. As with our analysis of the Mariel supply
shock, we exploit this fact to derive a simple method for estimating the potential cross-
effects. Specifically, we estimate the cross-effects model given by equation (12) separately
for each of the education groups, where the key regressor gives the supply shock
experienced by university graduates in a particular occupation group.31
        Table 7 reports IV regression coefficients from the cross-effects specification. The
results again indicate that the own-effects of the high-skill Soviet émigrés are negative,
implying a wage elasticity of about -0.7. The table also reveals, however, that there were
some positive complementarities between the high-skill émigrés and the least skilled
Israeli natives who had not completed their primary education. The earnings of the lowest

        30 There was a currency change in Israel in 1986, one year after the 1985 census that we use to
establish the baseline in the pre-shock period. The wage data in 1985 is denominated in Shekels while the
post-shock period data is denominated in New Shekels. Therefore, the vertical axis in Figure 2 reflects both
the change in the currency as well as real wage growth. Our analysis examines relative differences across
education-occupation cells. The currency change is absorbed by the constant in the regressions.
        31 The regression also includes a variable that controls for the change in the size of the native
population in the “own” occupation-schooling group. Because of the small number of observations within
each education group, we exclude the “cross” changes in native labor supply. The results reported below
would be very similar if, instead, we aggregated the data to two education groups and included both the own-
and cross- native supply responses.
                                                36


education group increased after the refugee supply shock, with a cross-elasticity of +0.35
(0.18).
          Note also that the refugee supply shock had, if anything, a slight negative impact on
the earnings of intermediate skill groups.. The coefficients that measures the cross wage
elasticity between the high-skill émigrés and the middle-skill Israelis are about -0.1
(though not significant). This result is likely to be a consequence of the skill downgrading
that many Soviet émigrés encountered after they entered the Israeli labor market, an issue
we discuss in much greater detail shortly. The skill downgrading obviously implies that
some high-skill émigrés were competing in the same labor market as lower-skilled natives,
so that the cross-effects measured by the regressions reported in Table 7 actually
incorporate an “own effect” on the intermediate skill groups as well. But it is unlikely that
the skill downgrading cut the efficiency units of a college-educated Soviet émigré to that of
an Israeli native who had not completed a primary education, explaining why it is the least
skilled Israeli natives who gained from the Soviet supply shock.
          These results are comparable to the ones obtained in the Mariel context. The entry
of the low-skill Marielitos increased the wage of natives who were more highly skilled,
while the entry of the high-skill Soviet émigrés increased the wage of natives who were
least skilled. These cross-effects document the potentially large distributional
consequences that refugee supply shocks can have on the receiving country’s labor market.


          5.3 Skill Downgrading
          In important ways, the evidence summarized in Table 6 is both similar to and very
different from the evidence reported in Friedberg (2001), the study that has most carefully
examined the consequences of this specific supply shock. As we noted earlier, the Friedberg
analysis uses an occupation as the unit of analysis and examines the trend in education-
adjusted wages within an occupation. Friedberg also reports both OLS and IV estimates of
the own wage effect attributable to the Soviet influx.
          In fact, the own wage effects that Friedberg estimated in her OLS regressions are
very similar to those reported in Tables 6 and 7, showing a significant reduction in the
wage of those occupations most affected by the Soviet émigrés. For example, Friedberg
(1990, Table II) reports an own wage elasticity of -0.616 (0.206). Friedberg then argued
                                                    37


that the occupational sorting of the new émigrés in Israel was endogenous, as income-
maximizing émigrés would obviously gravitate towards the highest-paying occupations.
        To control for this endogeneity, Friedberg used the migrant's occupation in the
Soviet Union, prior to migration, as an instrument for the migrant's eventual occupation in
Israel, arguing that the pre-migration occupational choice was obviously unaffected by the
Israeli wage structure. The use of this particular instrument, which is available in a small
survey of Soviet émigrés used by Friedberg but is not available in the IPUMS files, leads to
an IV estimate of the wage elasticity that is positive and insignificant, leading her to
conclude that "the influx of Russians to a given occupation in Israel does not appear to have
adversely affected the wage growth of natives working in that occupation” (Friedberg,
2001, p. 1395).
        It is important to emphasize that the difference between the OLS and IV results in
the Friedberg study is puzzling, and remains unexplained.32 As long as émigrés are income-
maximizers, entering the most profitable occupations, the endogeneity created by the self-
sorting of the émigrés into high-paying jobs should bias the OLS coefficient towards zero. In
short, Friedberg’s correction for this type of endogeneity should have presumably led to a
more negative wage elasticity, and not to a more positive one.
        Table 6 shows that our IV estimate of the wage elasticity remains negative and
significant, and is, in fact, about the same magnitude as the OLS coefficient. There is a
crucial difference, however, between the two instruments: Friedberg's instrument is based
on the occupation that the Soviet émigrés held in the Soviet Union prior to migration; our
instrument is based on the actual occupations that earlier waves of émigrés with similar
education pursued in Israel.
        The difference in the estimates of the wage elasticity implied by the two different
instruments is, of course, related to the possibility that the skills the émigrés acquired in
the Soviet Union may not be completely transferable to the Israeli labor market. In fact, it is
easy to document that the pre-existing skills of the émigrés are not a very good predictor of
the type of job they actually end up doing.


        32 Cohen-Goldner and Paserman (2011) make a related point, arguing that Friedberg used a weak
instrument that led to an understatement of the wage impact of the émigré supply shock.
                                               38


       Table 5 also reports the occupation distributions of the émigrés and natives who
have a university degree. Recall that half of the émigrés are in this particular education
category. The table clearly shows a substantial downgrading in the type of job that a high-
skill émigré held in Israel. Only one percent of native university graduates, for example, end
up as "unskilled workers." Among émigrés, however, the probability of working in such
jobs increases ten-fold. Only four percent of native university graduates end up being
"skilled workers in industry and construction." Among the émigrés, however, the
probability increases 9-fold, to 36 percent. In short, the data clearly indicate that pre-
existing educational skills, although obviously correlated with the type of job that the
émigrés will do in Israel, can generate very large errors in predicting the post-migration
allocation of émigrés across occupations. The obvious skill downgrading can help explain
not only the different wage elasticities produced by the two instruments, but also the
puzzling result in the Friedberg study where the use of instrumental variables leads to a
more positive wage elasticity.
       Consider the specific example where fluency in Hebrew represents a barrier into
certain occupations. For instance, suppose there are two occupations in Israel, one where
workers need to be fluent in Hebrew (e.g., a TV personality) and one where workers do not
(e.g., working at a manufacturing assembly line). As a result of the difference in language
requirements, the typical Soviet émigré, even though he might hold a university degree,
will inevitably end up in occupations where Hebrew fluency is unimportant.
       In fact, it is easy to document that type of sorting in the Israeli labor market. The
1983 Israeli census reports whether Hebrew was a first language for each enumerated
person. We can construct a measure of the share of workers who have Hebrew as a first
language (excluding migrants from the Soviet Union) in each occupation-education cell.
Figure 3 reveals a strong negative relationship between the size of the Soviet supply shock
in each cell and the fraction of people who speak perfect Hebrew. The Soviet supply shock
was far smaller in those occupations that require Hebrew fluency.
       Suppose further that the wage elasticity η is indeed negative, so that when a new
wave of Soviet émigrés arrives in Israel, the average wage in the occupations where
Hebrew fluency is unimportant falls. The OLS wage elasticity reported in Table 6 is
                                              39


essentially measuring the wage change in the occupations where Hebrew fluency is
irrelevant (i.e., the occupations actually affected by the supply shock) relative to the wage
change in occupations where Hebrew fluency is required (i.e., the occupations less affected
by the supply shock). Our IV estimate is picking up exactly the same effect. The first-stage,
which uses an instrument on the occupations where prior Soviet waves were actually
employed in Israel, will predict that few of the émigrés enter occupations with strict
Hebrew fluency requirements. As a result, the OLS and IV specifications would lead to
almost identical estimates of the wage elasticity.
       Friedberg’s (2001) instrument, the occupation where the émigré was employed in
the Soviet Union, ignores that skills are not perfectly transferable across countries and that
the émigrés may only be able to enter certain occupations in Israel. This implies that the
first-stage regression will allocate a worker who used to be a TV personality into a similar
occupation in Israel, an occupation that may require near-perfect Hebrew fluency and that,
in fact, employs very few such émigrés. As a result, the Friedberg IV wage elasticity may be
comparing wages before and after the shock in occupations that have strict Hebrew fluency
requirements (i.e., an occupation where there was little supply increase) with wage
changes in jobs where Hebrew fluency is unimportant (i.e., occupations where the supply
increase was much larger). This would result in a positive estimate of the wage elasticity. In
short, Friedberg's IV is effectively giving more weight to occupations that, in fact, did not
receive a shock.
       To document the importance of skill downgrading when measuring wage impacts in
the Israeli context, we carried out two distinct exercises. First, for each education level we
can distribute the émigrés according to the native distribution across occupations in 1983.
This prevents the across-occupation skill downgrading and plays a role similar to the
instrument used in Friedberg's study. Alternatively, we can keep the distribution of
émigrés across occupations as observed in the data, allowing émigrés to enter occupations
normally performed by lower educated workers, but within each of those occupations we
can then assume that the émigré inflow was distributed into the different education groups
according to the native distribution of education, where natives tended to be less educated.
This allows for skill downgrading along both the occupation and education dimensions.
                                              40


       Table 8 reports the regression results from both exercises. When using the
distribution of natives across occupations to assign the Soviet émigrés, we obtain an
estimate of the wage elasticity equal to 0.257 (0.683), which resembles the Friedberg
(2001, Table II) IV estimate of 0.549 (1.28). If, instead, we keep the occupation distribution
of migrants as observed, but assign them to different education levels following the native
distribution within each occupation, we obtain an estimate of -0.72. Note that this own
wage elasticity is virtually identical to the OLS and IV estimates reported in Tables 6 and 7.
       In sum, the evidence strongly indicates that Soviet émigrés landed in occupations
that were quite different from the occupations they held in the former Soviet Union, leading
them to compete with natives in the occupations they actually entered rather than in the
occupations they held before migration. Moreover, it is also possible that there was some
skill downgrading even within occupations, with some highly educated migrants
performing tasks normally done by middle-skill Israelis.
       Put differently, skill downgrading occurred along the two dimensions that we use to
define the various cells, and ignoring the fact that measured skills may not be highly
correlated with marketable skills can lead to a substantial attenuation of the wage impact
of immigration.



6. The Algerian War of Independence
       The Algerian War ended with the signing of the Evian Accords on March 19, 1962.
Although France “insisted that the settler citizens stay and become a part of the Algerian
nation” (Choi, 2016, pp. 2, 4), the so-called settler citizens and other Algerians had other
ideas, and Algerian independence quickly sparked a flow of refugees to France. In the
summer of 1962 alone, “750,000 French citizens including 100,000 naturalized Jews and
several thousand pro-French Muslim Algerians fled the nationalist takeover.” Over time,
the number of refugees increased, as the pre-independence population of Algeria included
“900,000 white colonials of mixed European descent known otherwise as pieds noirs.”
       As this very brief summary of the events that followed the Evian Accords suggests,
the independence of Algeria sparked two distinct types of refugee flows into France. The
first consisted of the French repatriates, the French nationals (or “settler citizens”) who
                                               41


lived in Algeria and returned to France after 1962. The second consisted of Algerian
nationals. In fact, the number of Algerian nationals moving to France increased sharply in
1964 “with the arrival of over 75,000 harkis, the Muslim Algerian soldiers who had fought
on the French side during the War of Independence” (Choi, 2016, p. 6).
       Hunt (1992) examined the labor market impact of the first of these refugee flows,
consisting of repatriates, on the French labor market. Her analysis suggests that the
repatriates had only a small (but adverse) impact on the unemployment rate or wage of
French native workers.
       As was common in the early studies that examined refugee supply shocks, however,
Hunt’s regression analysis ignored that the supply shock of repatriates may have been
particularly large in some skill groups, and much less important in other groups. In
particular, her regression analysis consisted of essentially correlating the change in a
measure of (age- and education-adjusted) labor market outcomes in a particular city on a
measure of the total supply shock of repatriates affecting that city. As we have repeatedly
emphasized, it is crucial to carefully match the skill level of French natives with the skill
level of the refugees to correctly measure the labor market impact of the supply shock.
       In addition, the Hunt study overlooked the fact that the end of the Algerian war
ignited a sizable and concurrent flow of Algerian nationals. It is unlikely that the two
refugee flows are uncorrelated. If nothing else, the timing of both flows was motivated by
the same political upheaval.
       Our examination of the refugee supply shocks sparked by the end of the Algerian
conflict shows that the skill composition of the two groups of refugees and their geographic
clustering in France differ not only from each other, but also from that of the French native
workforce. A more careful identification of the French workers who might have been most
affected by either supply shock suggests that the end of the Algerian War did indeed have
adverse and sizable repercussions on competing workers in the French labor market.


       6.1 Summary statistics
                                                       42


        We use the 1962 and 1968 French census microdata maintained at IPUMS to
determine the size and skill composition of the two refugee shocks originating in Algeria.33
Each census enables us to count and document the characteristics of persons who were not
living in France at the time of the earlier census, which occurs six years prior to the
enumeration.
        Table 9 reports the counts of persons in three key demographic groups: the number
of French repatriates (or French nationals who were not living in France at the time of the
last census); the number of Algerian refugees (or Algerian nationals who were not living in
France at the time of the last census); and the number of French natives (or French
nationals who were living in France at the time of the last census).
        The 1968 French census enumerated 1.4 million persons of French nationality who
were not living in France in 1962. Although the census data maintained at IPUMS do not
indicate where these persons resided in 1962, the historical context suggests that a sizable
fraction of this group originated in Algeria.34 The supply shock of repatriates increased the
size of the native French population by about 3 percent.
        In addition, 162,000 Algerian nationals migrated to France between 1962 and 1968,
so that this supply shock increased the size of the population by about 0.4 percent. Note,
however, that nearly 23 percent of French repatriates and almost half of the Algerian
nationals were men in their prime work years, compared to only 20 percent of French
natives 35
        Our empirical analysis of the impact of the two supply shocks focuses on the group
of native French men aged 25-59, a group that had 9.1 million oersons in 1968. The

         33 It is important to note that the 1962 census enumeration was carried out before the bulk of
refugees arrived in France after the Evian accords were signed in late March 1962. In other words, it is
unlikely that the labor supply decisions of French natives enumerated in the 1962 census were affected by
the influx of refugees who would soon enter the country.
        34 We experimented with alternative definitions of the repatriate population, such as including
French nationals who had moved to France prior to 1962. The analysis reported below opts for the most
conservative definition in the sense that it leads to relatively weak labor market impacts of the repatriates. It
is important to note that, concurrent with the repatriate and Algerian supply shocks, there was also a lot of
churn in the number of foreign-born persons in France due to the entry and exit of over a million guest
workers, mainly from Spain, Portugal, and Italy.
        35 Table 9 also suggests that the bulk of the Algerian refugee influx was disproportionately male: 88
percent of the refugees aged 25-59 were men. The respective statistic for the entire population of Algerian
refugees was 78 percent.
                                              43


repatriates increased the size of this population by 3.3 percent, while the Algerian refugees
increased its size by almost 1 percent.
       Table 9 also documents the remarkable difference in the skill composition of the
various groups. Practically all (96 percent) of the Algerian refugees had less than a primary
education, as compared to only 37 percent of the French natives and 26 percent of the
repatriates. The extreme concentration of the Algerian refugees in the least skilled category
implies that this specific supply shock increased the number of low-skill workers in the
aggregate French labor market by 2.2 percent.
       In contrast, the skill composition of the French repatriates was much more balanced,
and comparable to that of French natives, with a slight skew towards a more skilled
composition. Among men aged 25-59, for example, 26 percent of French natives and 37
percent of French repatriates had at least a secondary education.
       The two refugee flows also differed in their geographic settlement after they arrived
in France. The geographic sorting of the French repatriates very much resembled that of
French natives, except that the region Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur received a somewhat
larger share. However, a much larger number of the Algerian refugees settled in the Paris
and southern regions. For example, 16 percent of Algerians settled in Rhone-Alpes, a region
that hosted only 9 percent of French natives, and an additional 35 percent settled in Ile de
France, but only 19 percent of French natives lived in the Paris metropolitan area.
       We again exploit variation across region-education cells to estimate the labor
market impact of the two distinct refugee supply shocks. The available French census data
enables us to define 88 such cells (22 regions and 4 education groups). The extreme
bunching of the Algerian refugees, both in terms of their educational attainment and their
geographic distribution, into a relatively small number of cells creates a great deal of
dispersion in the size of the supply shock across labor markets. This variation helps to
more precisely identify the labor market impact of the Algerian nationals. In contrast, the
similarity in the skills and (to some extent) geographic sorting of the French nationals and
                                                      44


the French repatriates suggests that there may not be sufficient variation to precisely
identify the impact of this particular supply shock.36
        The bottom panel of Table 9 hints at the nature of the evidence. The Provence-
Alpes-Cote d'Azur region, where a large number of the very low-skilled Algerian nationals
eventually settled, witnessed an increase in the unemployment rate of French natives with
less than a primary education of 2 percentage points (double the national average), and a
decrease in the employment rate of 3 percentage points (in contrast to an increase in the
employment rate for this skill group of 1 percentage point in the national labor market).


        6.2 Results
        Table 10 reports the regression coefficients obtained from alternative specifications
of the generic regression model that identifies the own effect of supply shocks in equations
(5) and (7). Because there are two distinct, though concurrent, supply shocks, the
regression specification is expanded to include the measure of the supply shock for each of
the two types of refugees.
        The French census data do not report any information on a worker's earnings, so
that we use two alternative variables to measure the labor market impact of the refugees:
the unemployment rate (defined as the fraction of the labor force participants in a
particular cell who are unemployed); and the employment rate (defined as the fraction of
the population in the cell that is employed). The dependent variables used in the
regressions give the change in each of these employment indicators for each region-
education cell between 1962 and 1968.
        The OLS coefficients are reported in the first two columns of the bottom two panels
of the table. It is evident that the flow of Algerian refugees had a sizable and statistically
significant positive effect on the unemployment rate of French natives, as well as a negative,
significant, and quantitatively larger effect on their employment rate, in line with what the
summary evidence reported in the bottom panel of Table 9 suggested. In other words, the
supply shock of Algerian refugees drove competing French natives out of the labor market,

        36 This fact explains why we do not include location fixed effects in the regressions reported in Table
10. Including these fixed effects does not change the results for the Algerian inflows, but makes the
coefficients for the French repatriates supply shock very unstable.
                                                       45


and made the job-finding process more difficult for those natives who stayed in the market.
Because the Algerian refugee flow was disproportionately composed of workers with very
low skills and clustered in a small number of locations, the regressions are essentially
indicating that very low-educated native workers in a small number of French cities were
indeed adversely affected by the Algerian supply shock.
        It is easy to see the positive impact of the Algerian supply shock on the
unemployment rate of comparable French natives in the raw data. The bottom panel of
Figure 4 shows the scatter diagram illustrating the relation between the change in the
unemployment rate in a particular region-education cell and the size of the corresponding
Algerian supply shock. It is obvious that the unemployment rate increased most for French
workers in those region-education cells most affected by the entry of the Algerian refugees.
        Moreover, the effect of this supply shock on the unemployment rate is numerically
large. A 5 percent increase in the size of the cell due to an influx of Algerian refugees, which
is roughly the size of the shock in the most affected region-education cell (natives who did
not complete their primary education living in Provence-Alpes-Cote d’Azur) increased the
unemployment rate of this group by 1.3 percentage points. The French unemployment rate
for prime-age, low-skill men in the mid-1960s was only 2 percent, so that the supply shock
had a substantial impact on French unemployment.
        In contrast, we find that although the impact of the repatriates on the employment
and unemployment rates of French natives generally has the “right” sign in the OLS
regressions, the coefficient is always insignificant. The weak effect becomes statistically
significant only in the unemployment rate regressions after we account for the endogeneity
of the geographic distribution of the repatriates. The first-stage coefficients reported in the
top panel of Table 10 show that both the geographic sorting of the Algerian refugees and
the French repatriates was strongly correlated to where previous Algerian refugees and
repatriates settled.37 Assuming that the lagged geographic sorting is a valid instrument, the



        37 It is important to note that the flow of repatriates, unlike the flow of Algerian nationals, began
prior to the end of the war in 1962. Many French nationals are recorded to have returned to France as early
as 1954. The French census data available at IPUMS does not enable us to determine the origin of these
repatriates. However, their skill and location distribution is similar to the larger flow of repatriates that
followed the conclusion of the Algerian independence war.
                                               46


IV regressions in the bottom two panels show that both the repatriates and the Algerian
refugees had a significant impact on the unemployment rates of French natives.
       Finally, the fact that the supply shock of French repatriates was “balanced” across
the education cells makes it difficult to estimate the resulting cross-effects using the
regression framework derived earlier. We simplified the estimation of cross-effects by
explicitly relying on the fact that refugee supply shocks are often very unbalanced in their
skill composition, so that we need only look at how the labor market outcomes of different
skill groups relate to the supply shock experienced by the one skill group that was most
affected. We can obviously carry out this exercise to estimate the cross effects resulting
from the supply shock of Algerian nationals, but it is not possible to use the methodology to
estimate the corresponding cross effects from the supply shock of French repatriates.
       As Table 9 shows, the supply shock of Algerian nationals was extremely unbalanced.
Almost all the Algerians who arrived to France between 1962 and 1968 had not completed
their primary education, suggesting that we can use equation (12) to determine how the
low-skill Algerians affected the employment opportunities of more skilled French natives.
       Table 11 reports selected coefficients from the cross-effects regressions. Not
surprisingly, the regressions still report an adverse own effect—employment rates are
lower and unemployment rates are higher for French natives who do not have a primary
education. However, we cannot detect any evidence of beneficial cross-effects in this
episode. The unemployment rate of more skilled natives did not fall when very low-skill
Algerian nationals entered their specific labor market. Moreover, the evidence indicates
that the employment rate of skilled French natives also fell, although it fell by significantly
less than the drop experienced by low-skill workers. We have been unable to determine the
reason for the absence of beneficial complementarities in the Algerian context. One obvious
conjecture is that the supply shock of Algerian nationals was quite unique in terms of just
how low-skill the refugees were relative to the baseline population.



7. The Balkan refugees
       For many of the people living in Europe during the 1990s, the names of Srebrenica,
Sarajevo, Pristina, and Podgorica are indelibly associated with incidents from the last set of
                                               47


wars fought on European soil. After the collapse of communism, the former republic of
Yugoslavia split into five new countries between 1991 and 1992: Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-
Herzegovina, Serbia, and Macedonia. This breakup, however, was not without conflict.
Various episodes of civil and military unrest hit the former communist country between
1990 and 2000. There were many casualties, and many more people lost their homes and
sought refuge by moving elsewhere, either internally within the territory of the former
Yugoslavia or to other countries in Europe.
         It is difficult to estimate precisely how many of the Balkan refugees created by the
continuous conflict moved to European countries. The different timing and location of the
various wars, as well the persistence of the fighting, generated distinct waves of refugees.
For example, the first wars started in northern Yugoslavia, when Slovenia and Croatia in
1991, and then Bosnia in 1992, declared independence. The war in Croatia and Bosnia
lasted until 1995 when the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia recognized Croatia and Bosnia-
Herzegovina as independent countries. In 1996, ethnic Albanians in Kosovo formed the
Kosovo Liberation Army to fight for the creation of an ethnically separate Greater Albania.
The War in Kosovo in 1998 and 1999 involved the southern region of former Yugoslavia,
and affected large numbers of families. The calculation of the number of refugees created
by this seemingly endless series of distinct conflicts is further complicated by the fact that
many of the refugees eventually returned to parts of the former Yugoslavia once the wars
ended.
         The refugees from the former Yugoslavia tended to move to particular countries in
Europe. The refugees then settled in particular regions within those countries. We rely on
the variation across regions within different European countries to identify the labor
market impact of this specific refugee supply shock.


         7.1 Summary Statistics
         We use census data for seven European destination countries: Austria, Greece,
Ireland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, and Switzerland. These countries were chosen based on
the following criteria. First, we only use European countries with publicly available census
data in the IPUMS archive. Second, we only use countries where we can construct a
"before" and "after" snapshot of the relevant national labor markets. The timing of the
                                                     48


Yugoslav Wars suggests that the countries must have conducted a census around 1990 and
another census around 2000.38 Third, we need to enumerate and determine the skill
distribution of the Balkan refugees, as well as measure their impact on the labor market
opportunities of comparable natives. In other words, both the “pre” and “post” censuses for
each country must report information on country of origin and labor market outcomes, and
must report educational attainment in a manner that is comparable across countries.
        Although other countries were recipients of large numbers of Balkan refugees at the
time, the census data publicly available for those other countries do not satisfy our criteria.
The French census, for example, does not report the country of origin of foreign-born
persons. Similarly, the coding of educational attainment for the UK censuses differs
significantly from that used by other countries. Finally, the relevant data are not available
for either Germany or Sweden.
        Table 12 shows that almost 260,000 persons born in the former Yugoslavia moved
to the seven European countries in our analysis during the 1990s.39 This represents a very
modest increase of only 0.3 percent in the aggregate population of those countries.
However, as with many refugee supply shocks, the refugees clustered in a relatively small
number of places. Almost all of the Balkan refugees settled in two of the countries included
in our analysis, Austria and Switzerland, with Austria receiving 76 percent of the refugees
and Switzerland receiving 17 percent. And, within those two countries, the refugees were
further clustered in specific regions, providing sufficient variation for the identification of
their labor market impact. For example, Vienna received 34 percent of the refugees in
Austria, but only 19 percent of the native population resided in that city.
        We again examine the labor market outcomes of the native-born population of men
aged 25-59 in the various receiving countries. Table 12 reports that the Balkan refugees
were disproportionately of intermediate skills. While 44 percent of prime-age men in the




        38 Specifically, we use the 1991 and 2001 censuses in our analysis of Austria, Greece, Portugal, and
Spain; the 1991 and 2002 censuses for Ireland; the 1992 and 2002 censuses for Romania; and the 1990 and
2000 censuses for Switzerland.
        39 We obtain this number by comparing the stock of migrants from Yugoslavia circa 1990 to the
stock of migrants from the former Yugoslavia circa 2000.
                                                   49


receiving countries had completed a secondary education, 67 percent of the Balkan
refugees had done so.
        Our analysis of the Balkan refugees episode again defines a labor market as a
particular region-education cell, where the region index now identifies a particular region
within a particular country of destination. The publicly available census data allows us to
identify 65 such geographic areas (across 7 different countries) in three different education
groups, so that our analysis exploits variation across 195 cells.
        Although our analysis complements Angrist and Kugler’s (2003) initial examination
of this specific refugee supply shock, there are several key differences between their study
and ours. For example, Angrist and Kugler used annual data reporting labor market
outcomes and migrant flows in all European countries.40 These annual data, however, do
not provide any information on the educational attainment of the Balkan refugees or on the
specific local labor markets (in a receiving country) that were affected by the supply shocks.
Exploiting annual variation on labor market outcomes and on the size of supply shocks
enables Angrist and Kugler to more precisely measure the changes in employment
observed around the years of the Bosnian and Kosovo Wars. But the lack of information on
educational attainment and the specific within-country regions most affected by the
refugees implies that they must rely on aggregate differences across countries to identify
the labor market impact. In a sense, our approach generates a greater degree of dispersion
across markets that can help identification. At the same time, however, our approach limits
the number of countries that can be used in such an analysis.
        Figure 5 illustrates that within our set of 7 countries, it is mainly some regions in
Austria and Switzerland that witnessed significant supply shocks of refugees from the
former Yugoslavia. In fact, there are some regions in Austria where the influx of Balkan
refugees increased the size of the workforce by about 5 percent in some education groups,
while in (some very small cells in) Switzerland the size of the supply shock sometimes
neared 20 percent.




        40 The Angrist-Kugler annual data are drawn from the Labor Force Survey maintained by the
Eurostat.
                                                       50


         7.2 Results
         Table 13 reports coefficients obtained from the generic “own effects” regression
models derived in equations (5) and (7). The pooled censuses from the seven European
countries do not contain any information on a worker's earnings, so that our dependent
variables are: the change in the unemployment rate (defined as the fraction of the labor
force participants in a region-education cell who are unemployed); and the change in the
native employment rate (defined as the fraction of the population in the cell that is
employed). Note that all regression specifications reported in the table include country-of-
destination fixed effects, so that the impact of the supply shock is being identified from the
variation across region-education cells within a particular country.41
         The OLS coefficients of the “own” labor market impact are reported in the first two
columns of the bottom two panels of the table.42 It is evident that the Balkan refugees had a
positive and significant effect on the native unemployment rate and a negative (but
insignificant) effect on the native employment rate. The point estimate suggests that a 5
percent refugee supply shock increases the unemployment rate of competing natives by
about 1 percentage point. Because this particular supply shock was largest in Austria and
Switzerland, where the unemployment rates in 2000 were 5.5 and 2.0 percent, respectively,
the Balkan refugees had a sizable effect on native labor market opportunities in those two
countries.
         Figure 5 illustrates the raw data that generates this positive correlation between the
supply shock and the change in the unemployment rate. It is evident that the positive
unemployment effect is generated by the within-country variation in the size of the supply
shock.
         Of course, the Balkan refugees may be endogenously choosing which particular
labor market to move to (in terms of choosing both a particular country of destination and
a particular region within that country), obviously preferring to settle in locations that
offer the best employment opportunities. To address the endogeneity concern, we again

         41 It is important to control for country fixed effects because different countries were trying to
converge in macroeconomic conditions prior to entering the common currency union.
         42 The regression results are similar if we estimate the regressions using only regional-education
variation in the two countries (Austria and Switzerland) that received most of the Balkan refugees.
                                                      51


use the migration network instrument. The question, of course, is whether the past share of
workers from the former Yugoslavia (prior to its breakup) is a good predictor of where the
new (post-breakup) migrants moved.
        Our instrumental variables regression again exploits the variation across regions
within each country. Interestingly, some regions in (mainly) Austria and Switzerland had
larger shares of migrants from the former Yugoslavia prior to 1990 and also received many
more migrants during the 1990s. The first two columns of the top panel of Table 13 reports
the first stage coefficient, which is positive and significant, and suggests that a 10 percent
higher share of migrants in a particular region prior to 1990 resulted in a 1.4 percent
increase in the inflow rate during the 1990s—relative to other regions in the same country.
        The use of IV to control for the geographic sorting of the Balkan refugees does not
fundamentally alter our results, but the IV coefficients of the labor market impact are more
imprecisely estimated. It is worth noting that our estimates of the “own” employment
effects seem weaker than those estimated by Angrist and Kugler (2003) using cross-
country variation. For instance, Angrist and Kugler (2003, pp. F318, F322) report that 100
more migrants lead to 35 or 83 fewer native jobs (depending on whether the impact is
estimated using OLS or IV, respectively).43
        As we noted earlier, the Balkan refugees were disproportionately located in the
middle of the education distribution; 67 percent of the refugees had a completed secondary
education, as compared to 44 percent of natives. We use the cross-effects regression model
derived in equation (12) to separately examine how this particular supply shock affected
the employment outcomes of native persons at the two extremes of the skill distribution.
        Table 14 summarizes the evidence on cross effects. Note that the expanded
regression model in equation (12) still yields the finding of adverse own effects. In other
words, there was an increase in the unemployment rate of native workers with a secondary
education and a decrease in their employment rate. Equally important, the influx of a
disproportionately large number of intermediate-skill refugees lowered the unemployment


        43 The Angrist-Kugler point estimates assume a baseline immigration level of 5 percent. In contrast,
using a setting similar to ours, Glitz (2012) examines variation across German regions that were differentially
affected by the inflow of Soviet migrants after the collapse of the Soviet Union, and obtains employment
effects that are quantitatively similar to those reported in Table 13.
                                              52


rate and increased the employment rate of low-skill natives who had at most a primary
education. Although the beneficial cross-effects on low-skill natives are often not
statistically significant, the point estimates consistently suggest that their employment
outcomes improved because of the entry of so many refugees in the next higher rung of the
skill distribution. However, the evidence on the presence of beneficial cross-effects for the
most skilled European natives, those who had completed a university education, is far
weaker.



8. Summary
       The recent (and continuing) entry of hundreds of thousands of refugees into many
European countries has already generated a great deal of political controversy and raised
many questions that require a fuller understanding of the determinants and consequences
of refugee supply shocks. This paper revisited some of the historical refugee flows to
document the labor market consequences of refugee-induced increases in labor supply.
       Specifically, our analysis reexamines the evidence surrounding four episodes: (1)
The influx of the Marielitos into Miami in 1980; (2) the influx of French repatriates and
Algerian nationals into France at the end of the Algerian War of Independence in 1962; (3)
the influx of Jewish émigrés into Israel after the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early
1990s; and (4) the influx of refugees from the former Yugoslavia into some European
countries during the long series of Balkan wars between 1991 and 2001.
       Although the labor market consequences of each of these shocks have been
separately examined in prior studies, our examination of the evidence differs from the
prior literature in three key ways. First, we use a common empirical approach, based on the
implications of factor demand theory, to document the labor market consequences of each
of the refugee supply shocks. Despite the obvious differences in the historical, economic,
and political forces that motivated the various refugee flows, the use of the same empirical
framework to study each of the episodes reveals a common thread in the evidence:
Exogenous supply shocks adversely affect the labor market opportunities of competing
natives in the destination countries.
                                              53


       In some contexts, of course, this result implies that a refugee supply shock will
mainly harm low-skill workers in some regions of the receiving country (as was the case
with the influx of Marielitos into Miami or the influx of Algerian nationals into France). In
other cases, however, it is the high-skill workforce in the receiving country that bears the
brunt of the impact (as was the case with high-skill Israelis competing with large numbers
of high-skill Soviet émigrés).
       Second, the very different skill distributions of natives and refugees in some of these
episodes suggests that these natural experiments can be further exploited to identify the
impact of the supply shocks on potentially complementary native groups. For example, the
low-skill Marielitos may have increased the wage or employment opportunities of high-skill
Miamians, while the high-skill Soviet émigrés may have benefited low-skill Israelis. These
complementarities should obviously be an important part of any assessment of how
refugee supply shocks alter the employment opportunities of native workers. Our empirical
analysis documents that, in many cases, these beneficial effects do indeed exist and are
numerically important.
       Finally, rather than rely on proprietary or confidential data, we only use the publicly
available census microdata maintained at IPUMS. Our use of easily accessible data to
examine the impact of refugee supply shocks implies that our results are fully reproducible.
The reproducibility of the evidence in this context is essential because the recent refugee
supply shocks in Europe have already sparked extremely contentious policy debates in
many receiving countries.
       Our empirical analysis of the four historical episodes of refugee supply shocks
teaches an important lesson. Although these episodes differ in countless ways, a universal
theme seems to connect the evidence. Put bluntly, the humanitarian principles that
encourage receiving countries to accept as many migrants as possible have important
distributional consequences, as predicted by the canonical model of supply and demand in
the labor market.
                                                                         54


                    Appendix: Skill Downgrading as an Omitted Variable

       A simple way to think about skill downgrading is to assume that an exogenous (and
constant) fraction π of the high-skill refugees actually enter the low-skill market. Equations
(10a) and (10b) show that the change in labor market outcomes for the two skill groups h
and u are determined by:

                                    M rh      −M rh
                Δ log wrh = θ − η        − ηπ       + erh ,
                                    Lrh1       Lrh1

                                    M ru     M
                Δ log wru = θ − η        − ηπ rh + eru .
                                    Lru1     Lru1

This implies that the estimating equation can be written as:

(A1)            Yr = α + β Xr + γ Z r + ε r,

where the vector Yr = (Δ log wrh, Δ log wru) and,

                                    ⎛M M ⎞
                Xr = (xrh , xru ) = ⎜ rh , ru ⎟ ,
                                    ⎝ Lh1 Lru1 ⎠

                                     ⎛ −M rh M rh ⎞
                Z r = (zrh , zru ) = ⎜      ,       .
                                     ⎝ Lrh1 Lru1 ⎟⎠

       Without loss of generality, we can measure variables as deviations from their means.
If we estimate equation (A1) using OLS, but excluding Z, we have a standard problem of
omitted variable bias. The bias depends on the covariance between X and Z:


                plim β̂ = β + γ plim
                                           ∑        r, j
                                                           xrj zrj
                                                                     .
                                           ∑              x2
                                                      r, j rj



We can further simplify:


                Bias = γ plim
                                ∑   r, j
                                           xrj zrj
                                                           = γ plim
                                                                         ∑x   r
                                                                                   z + ∑ r xru zru
                                                                                  rh rh
                                                                                                     .
                                ∑     r, j
                                           x   2
                                               rj                         ∑        x 2 + ∑ r xru2
                                                                                  r rh



       Define σ 2h = Var(M rh / Lrh1 ) ; σ u2 = Var(M ru / Lru1 ) ; and σ hu = Cov(M rh / Lrh1 , M ru / Lru1 ) .
The variances (σ 2h , σ 2u ) measure the dispersion in high-skill and low-skill refugee supply
                                                        55


shocks across markets r, and the covariance σhu measures the relation between high-skill
supply shocks and low-skill supply shocks. It then follows that:

                    ⎛           ⎞        ⎛ M (−M rh ) ⎞
               plim ⎜ ∑ xrh zrh ⎟ = plim ⎜ ∑ rh        ⎟ = −σ 2h ,
                    ⎝ r         ⎠        ⎝ r Lrh1 Lrh1 ⎠

                    ⎛           ⎞        ⎛ M M ⎞            ⎛ M M L ⎞
               plim ⎜ ∑ xru zru ⎟ = plim ⎜ ∑ ru rh ⎟ = plim ⎜ ∑ ru rh rh1 ⎟ = σ hu R,
                    ⎝ r         ⎠        ⎝ r Lru1 Lru1 ⎠    ⎝ r Lru1 Lrh1 Lru1 ⎠

where R = plim(Lrh1 / Lru1 ). For simplicity, we consider the case where “skills” are defined so
that the skill distribution of the native workforce is “balanced,” and R = 1. It also follows
that:

                    ⎛            2 ⎞
                                             ⎛ ⎛ M ⎞2         ⎛ M ru ⎞ ⎞
                                                                       2

               plim ⎜ ∑ xrh + ∑ xru ⎟ = plim ⎜ ∑ ⎜
                         2                           rh
                                                        ⎟ + ∑⎜       ⎟   ⎟ = σh + σu .
                                                                              2    2

                    ⎝ r       r     ⎠        ⎝ r ⎝ Lrh1 ⎠   r ⎝ Lru1 ⎠ ⎠



The correlation between high- and low-skill supply shocks across markets is given by
ρhu = σ hu /σ hσ u . Combining expressions yields equation (10) in the text:

                                      σ 2h      ⎡       σu ⎤
               plim η̂ = η − ηπ                 ⎢1− ρhu σ ⎥ .
                                  σ 2h + σ u2   ⎣        h ⎦
                                              56


                                         References

       Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010). “Synthetic control methods for
comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of California’s tobacco control program”,
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(490), 493-505.

       Alexe, D. (2015). “Angela Merkel: No legal limit to refugee numbers,” World Affairs
Journal, September 11.

       Altonji, J., and D. Card (1991). “The effects of immigration on the labor market
outcomes of less-skilled natives”, in J. Abowd and R. Freeman (eds.), Immigration, Trade,
and the Labor Market, pp. 201-234. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
      Angrist, J., and A. Kugler (2003). “Protective or counter-productive? European labor
market institutions and the effect of immigrants on EU natives”, Economic Journal 113(488),
F302–F331.

      Borjas, G. (1987). “Self-selection and the earnings of immigrants”, American
Economic Review 77(4), 531– 553.

      ---------. (2003). “The labor demand curve is downward sloping: Reexamining the
impact of immigration on the labor market”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4), 1335–
1374.
       ---------. (2014). Immigration Economics, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
     ---------. (2016). “The wage impact of the Marielitos: Additional evidence”, No.
w21850, National Bureau of Economic Research.
       ---------. (2017). “The wage impact of the Marielitos: A reappraisal”, Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, forthcoming.
        Borjas, G., R. Freeman, and L. Katz. (1997). “How much do immigration and trade
affect labor market outcomes?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1–67.
       Buwalda, P. (1997). They did not dwell alone: Jewish Emigration from the Soviet
Union 1967-1990, Woodrow Wilson Center Press, Washington, DC.
       Card, D. (1990). “The impact of the Mariel boatlift on the Miami labor market”,
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43(2), 245–257.
      ---------. (2001). “Immigrant inflows, native outflows and the local labor market
impacts of higher immigration”, Journal of Labor Economics 19(1), 22-64.

      Card, D., and G. Peri. (2016). “Immigration Economics: A review”, working paper,
University of California, Berkeley.

      Choi, S.E. (2016). Decolonization and the French of Algeria: Bringing the settler colony
home, Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
                                              57


       Cohen-Goldner, S., and M. Paserman. (2011). "The dynamic impact of immigration
on natives' labor market outcomes: Evidence from Israel," European Economic Review,
55(8), 1027-1104.

       Dustmann, C., T. Frattini, and I. Preston. (2013). “The effect of immigration along the
distribution of wages”, Review of Economic Studies 80(1), 145-173.
     Dustmann, C., U. Schonberg, and J. Stuhler. (2017). “Labor supply shocks and the
dynamics of local wages and employment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
      Fernandez-Huertas, J. (2012). “New evidence on emigrant selection”, Review of
Economics and Statistics, 93(1): 72-96.
      Friedberg, R. (2001). “The impact of mass migration on the Israeli labor market”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1373–1408.
       Glitz, A. (2012). “The labor market impact of immigration: A quasi-experiment
exploiting immigrant location rules in Germany”, Journal of Labor Economics, 2012, 30(1),
175–213.

      Grossman, J. (1982). “The substitutability of natives and immigrants in production”,
Review of Economics and Statistics 54(4), 596-603.

       Hunt, J. (1992). “The impact of the 1962 repatriates from Algeria on the French
labor market”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 45(3), 556-572.
       Jaeger, D., J. Ruist, and J. Stuhler. (2016). “Are lagged immigrant shares valid as
instruments?”, working paper.
       Monras, J. (2014). “Online appendix to ‘Immigration and wage dynamics: evidence
from the Mexican Peso crisis’”, Sciences Po.
         ---------. (2015a). “Immigration and wage dynamics: Evidence from the Mexican Peso
crisis”, No. 8924, IZA Discussion Paper.
      ---------. (2015b). “Economic shocks and internal migration”, No. 8840, IZA
Discussion Paper.
       Ottaviano, G. and G. Peri. (2007). “The effects of immigration on U.S. wages and
rents: A general equilibrium approach”, No. 13/07, Centre for Research and Analysis of
Migration.

      ---------. (2012). “Rethinking the effect of immigration on wages”, Journal of the
European Economic Association 10(1), 152-197.

       Peri, G. and V. Yasenov. (2015). “The labor market effects of a refugee wave:
Applying the synthetic control method to the Mariel boatlift”, No. w21801, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                       58


              Figure 1. The impact of the Mariel supply shock on native wages




Notes: This figure plots the change in the wage of native men aged 25-59 against the size of the migrant
inflow in each city-education cell using the March CPS survey years of 1978-1980 as the pre-migration period
and the March CPS survey years of 1982-1985 as the post-migration period. Each dot represents a city-
education cell. The size of the dots represents the size of the cells. Blue, red, green, and yellow dots indicate
“less than primary”, “Primary completed”, “Secondary completed”, and “University completed” respectively.
The figure exploits variation across 38 metropolitan areas and 4 education groups.
                                                       59


                 Figure 2. The impact of the Soviet émigrés on native wages




Notes: This figure plots the 1983-1995 change in the annual earnings of native Israeli men aged 25-59 against
the size of the migrant inflow in each cell. Each dot represents an education - occupation cell. Blue, red, green,
and yellow dots indicate “less than primary”, “Primary completed”, “Secondary completed”, and “University
completed” respectively. The size of the dots represents the size of the cells, measured by the optimal weights
used in the regression tables. The figure exploits variation across 4 educations groups and 8 occupation
categories.
                                                     60


           Figure 3. Soviet inflows and language use prior to the supply shock




Notes: The figure plots the inflow of Soviet émigrés against the share of workers who speak Hebrew as their
first language in 1983 and who were not from the Soviet Union. We remove education fixed effects from both
variables. Each dot represents an education-occupation cell. Blue, red, green, and yellow dots indicate “less
than primary”, “Primary completed”, “Secondary completed”, and “University completed” respectively. The
figure exploits variation across 4 educations groups and 8 occupation categories.
                                                       61


             Figure 4. The impact of the supply shocks after the Algerian War
                             on the native unemployment rate

A. The French repatriates




B. The Algerian nationals




Notes: The figure plots the 1962-1968 change in the unemployment rate of French native men aged 25-59
against the size of the migrant inflow in each cell. Each dot represents a region-education cell. The top figure
shows the impact of the French repatriates and the bottom figure shows the impact of the Algerian nationals.
Blue, red, green, and yellow dots indicate “less than primary”, “Primary completed”, “Secondary completed”,
and “University completed” respectively. The size of the dots represents the size of the cells. The figure
exploits variation across 4 education groups and 22 locations.
                                                       62


     Figure 5. The impact of the Balkan refugees on the native unemployment rate




Notes: The figure plots the change in the unemployment rate of native men in 7 European countries against
the size of the migrant inflow in each cell between the Census year closest to 1990 and the Census year
closest to 2000 for each of the countries used. Each dot represents a country of destination-region within the
country-education cell. Country fixed effects are removed in the graph. Different colors represent the
different countries used: Austria, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, and Switzerland. The size of the
dots represents the size of the cells. The figure exploits variation across 3 education groups and 65 locations.
                                    Table 1. Overview of the four refugee supply shocks


                                         Number of refugees
                                            (in 1000s)

                                                  Men aged Localities/occupations       Predominant skills    Increase in supply of
Refugee supply shock:                      All     25-59       most affected              of the refugees     most affected group
                                                                                                            31.9% (male high school
1. Mariel, 1980                           120.6     47.9             Miami             High school dropouts    dropouts in Miami)

                                                                                                              267.9% (male college
                                                               Skilled workers in                             graduates in “skilled
                                                                 industry and                                workers in industry and
2. Soviet émigrés to Israel, 1990         476.5    101.6          construction          College graduates        construction”)



3. The Algerian Independence War, 1962

                                                              Provence-Alpes-Cote        Balanced across     10.2% (men in Provence-
 A. French Repatriates                   1358.9    302.0            d'Azur                   groups             Alpes-Cote d'Azur)

                                                                                                             5.8% (men with less than
                                                              Provence-Alpes-Cote       Less than primary     primary schooling in Ile
 B. Algerian Nationals                    162.1     77.1            d'Azur                  schooling               de France)

                                                              Some cities in Austria   Secondary schooling
4. The Yugoslav Wars, 1991-2001           258.6     65.1        and Switzerland            completed          4.6% (men in Vienna)
               Table 2. Size and skill composition of the Mariel supply shock

                                                                  Census data, 1990
                                                Marielitos        Natives       % increase in supply
All persons (in 1000s)                           120.6          247339.0               0.05
   Aged 25-59                                     73.2          105674.6               0.1
   Men, 25-59                                     47.9           51696.4               0.1
% of men aged 25-59 with education:
   High school dropouts                            62.2              20.1                     0.3
   High school graduates                           17.3              27.7                     0.1
   Some college                                    13.8              26.3                     0.0
   College graduates                                6.6              25.9                     0.0
Sample size, men 25-59                             2211          2577549

                                                         Census data 1990, Miami counts
                                                Marielitos    Natives      % increase in supply
All persons (in 1000s)                            69.4         852.7               0.08
   Aged 25-59                                     54.7         576.0               0.09
   Male, aged 25-59                               34.5         290.5               0.12
% of men aged 25-59 with education:
   High school dropouts                             62.4              23.2                 31.9
   High school graduates                            15.9              21.7                  8.7
   Some college                                     14.5              27.5                  6.3
   College graduates                                 7.2              27.6                  3.1
Sample size, men 25-59                              833              6692

                                                   March CPS data, pooled 1978-1984 surveys
                                                Sample size Δ log wage     Δ unemployment rate
Outside Miami
  High school dropouts                            8718                -0.17                   0.06
  High school graduates                          20299                -0.15                   0.04
  Some college                                   12431                -0.12                   0.03
  College graduates                              19898                -0.06                   0.01
Miami
  High school dropouts                              146               -0.41                   0.04
  High school graduates                             218                0.02                   0.03
  Some college                                      107               -0.09                  -0.06
  College graduates                                 192               -0.02                  -0.03

Notes: The top two panels report data from the 1990 Census based on 1985 locations, with age levels
referring to 1985. The Marielitos are Cuban immigrants who arrived in the United States in 1980 or 1981; the
natives are persons who are neither non-citizens nor naturalized citizens. The bottom panel reports statistics
calculated in the sample of non-Hispanic men aged 25-59, who live in one of the 38 metropolitan areas. The
(Δ log wage) and (Δ unemployment rate) variables give the average change between the pooled 1978-1980
CPS surveys and the pooled 1982-1985 surveys. The 1981 survey, which reports earnings for the 1980
calendar year, is not used in the calculations.
                                                      65


          Table 3. The impact of the Mariel supply shock on competing workers

                                                            OLS                                IV
                                                    (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)
A. First stage
   Lagged supply shock                             1.260             1.262          ---              ---
                                                  (0.053)           (0.053)
   Change in native population                    ---               -0.002          ---              ---
                                                                    (0.001)

B. Change in log weekly wage
   Mariel supply shock                            -1.313            -1.350          -1.264           -1.310
                                                  (0.338)           (0.346)         (0.320)          (0.322)
   Change in native population                    ---                0.039          ---               0.039
                                                                    (0.045)                          (0.038)

C. Change in unemployment rate
   Mariel supply shock                             0.060             0.066           0.007            0.015
                                                  (0.072)           (0.075)         (0.079)          (0.083)
   Change in native population                    ---               -0.007          ---              -0.006
                                                                    (0.019)                          (0.016)

D. Change in employment rate
   Mariel supply shock                            -0.001            -0.001           0.052            0.053
                                                  (0.092)           (0.097)         (0.102)          (0.107)
   Change in native population                    ---               -0.000          ---              -0.001
                                                                    (0.025)                          (0.021)

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The unit of observation is a city-education cell,
and the data consist of 38 metropolitan areas and 4 education groups. The “Mariel supply shock” variable
gives the ratio of the number of Marielitos in the cell to the number of natives in the cell as of 1985. The
“change in native population” variable gives the log difference in the number of native persons in the cell
between 1980 and 1985. The first stage regression in Panel A relates the relative inflow of Marielitos in the
cell as of 1985 to the share of Cubans in the cell as of 1980. All regressions have 152 observations and include
both education fixed effects and metropolitan area fixed effects.
                                                      66


                  Table 4. Own and cross effects of the Mariel supply shock

                                               High school       High school          Some          College
                                                dropouts          graduate           college       graduates
A. Change in log weekly wage                     -0.857            0.653             0.217            0.097
                                                 (0.383)          (0.331)           (0.458)          (0.442)

B. Change in unemployment rate                    -0.156           -0.136           -0.386           -0.170
                                                  (0.223)          (0.192)          (0.197)          (0.080)

C. Change in employment rate                       0.147            0.164            0.419            0.046
                                                  (0.295)          (0.235)          (0.303)          (0.136)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The unit of observation is a city, and there are 38
metropolitan areas in the analysis. The table reports the coefficient of the “Mariel supply shock for low-skill
workers,” which gives the ratio of the number of Marielitos who are high school dropouts to the number of
natives who are high school dropouts in 1985 in the particular city. The regressions also contain regressors
giving the change in the size of the native population of each of the four education groups. The regressions are
estimated separately for each education group using IV and have 38 observations.
                                                     67


            Table 5. Size and skill composition of Soviet émigrés in Israel, 1995

                                                                                                     % increase
                                                                            Émigrés     Natives      in supply
All persons (in 1000s)                                                      476.4       4924.4            9.7
    Aged 25-59                                                              223.6       1898.7          11.8
    Men aged 25-59                                                          101.6        934.4          10.9
% of men aged 25-59 with education:
    Less than primary                                                         4.5          11.7          4.2
    Primary completed                                                         6.2          20.7          3.3
    Secondary completed                                                      46.0          49.6         10.1
    University completed                                                     43.2          18.0         26.2
% of men aged 25-59 working as:
    Academic professionals                                                   14.7          11.6         15.3
    Associate professionals and technicians                                   8.2           9.5         10.4
    Managers                                                                  1.0           9.4          1.3
    Clerical workers                                                          3.6          10.1          4.3
    Agents, sales workers and service workers                                 5.7          13.9          5.0
    Skilled agricultural workers                                              1.3           3.3          4.9
    Skilled workers in industry and construction                             51.1          35.0         17.6
    Unskilled workers                                                        14.3           7.2         24.1
% of men aged 25-59 with university education working as:
    Academic professionals                                                   29.9         50.5          17.1
    Associate professionals and technicians                                  11.6         10.4          32.2
    Managers                                                                  1.6         18.0           2.6
    Clerical workers                                                          4.8          8.4          16.4
    Agents, sales workers and service workers                                 5.3          6.6          23.3
    Skilled agricultural workers                                              1.0          1.2          24.0
    Skilled workers in industry and construction                             35.6          3.8         267.9
    Unskilled workers                                                        10.2          1.2         249.3
Sample Size: Men aged 25-59                                                 10160        93443

                                                                                    Δ log earnings   Sample size
Average in Israel, excluding skilled workers in industry and construction
    Less than primary                                                                   0.12           12470
    Primary completed                                                                   0.13           25717
    Secondary completed                                                                 0.07           58279
    University completed                                                                0.17           24770
Skilled workers in industry and construction
    Less than primary                                                                   0.00            2271
    Primary completed                                                                   0.01            3123
    Secondary completed                                                                -0.12            2748
    University completed                                                               -0.39             542

Notes: The sample of Soviet émigrés consists of persons born in the former Soviet Union who did not reside in
Israel in 1990. The sample of Israeli natives is Israeli natives consists of persons who were not born in the
former Soviet Union. The bottom panel reports statistics calculated in the sample of Israeli native men aged
25-59. The (Δ log earnings) variable gives the average change in annual earnings between the 1983 and 1995
censuses for the particular group.
                                                       68


        Table 6. The impact of Soviet émigrés on competing workers in Israel


                                                              OLS                                 IV
                                                     (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)
A. First stage
   Lagged supply shock                             2.686              2.659               ---             ---
                                                  (0.514)            (0.552)
   Change in native population                        ---             0.007               ---             ---
                                                                     (0.037)

B. Change in log annual earnings
   Émigré supply shock                            -0.730             -0.740           -0.616            -0.611
                                                  (0.266)            (0.298)          (0.316)           (0.334)
   Change in native population                        ---             0.009              ---            -0.004
                                                                     (0.083)                            (0.071)

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The unit of observation is an occupation-
education cell, and the data consist of 8 occupations and 4 education groups. The “émigré supply shock”
variable gives the ratio of the number of Soviet émigrés in the cell to the total size of the cell as of 1995. The
“change in native population” variable gives the log difference in the number of native persons in the cell
between 1983 and 1995. The first stage regression in Panel A relates the share of Soviet émigrés in the cell as
of 1995 to the share of Soviet immigrants in the cell as of 1983. All regressions have 32 observations and
include education fixed effects.
                                                      69


                Table 7. Own and cross effects of the Soviet émigrés in Israel

                                                Less than         Primary         Secondary       University
                                                 primary         completed        completed       completed
Change in log annual earnings                      0.350          -0.070           -0.083           -0.739
                                                  (0.184)         (0.117)          (0.121)          (0.208)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The unit of observation is an occupation, and there are 8
occupations in the analysis. The table reports the coefficient of the “émigré supply shock for high-skill
workers,” which gives the ratio of the number of Soviet émigrés who completed a university education
relative to the number of natives who also completed a university education in 1995 in the particular
occupation. The regressions also contain regressors giving the change in the size of the native population for
the own education group. The regressions are estimated separately for each occupation group using IV and
have 8 observations.
                                                     70


                         Table 8. Sensitivity tests to skill downgrading

Regressor:                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
Measure of supply shock:
  Predicted inflow using native occupational
  distribution within an education group                    0.257        -0.228          ---           ---
                                                           (0.683)      (0.937)
   Predicted inflow using native educational
   distribution within an occupation group                     ---         ---         -0.718        -0.729
                                                                                      (0.251)       (0.320)
Change in native population                                    ---       -0.087          ---          0.006
                                                                        (0.104)                     (0.100)

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The unit of observation is an occupation-
education cell, and the data consist of 8 occupations and 4 education groups. The dependent variable is the
change in log annual earnings between 1983 and 1995 for native Israelis in each cell. The regressor giving the
“predicted inflow using native occupational distribution within an education group” gives the émigré supply
shock calculated after assigning Soviet émigrés in each education group to occupations according to the
occupational distribution of natives within each education group. The regressor giving the “predicted inflow
using native educational distribution within an occupation group” gives the émigré supply shock calculated
after assigning Soviet émigrés in each occupation to an educational category based on the education
distribution of natives in each occupation category. All regressions have 32 observations and include
education fixed effects.
                                                     71


          Table 9. Size and skill composition of the Algerian supply shock, 1968

                                                                                          % increase in supply
                                                  French          Algerian   French        French      Algerian
                                                repatriates       nationals natives      Repatriates nationals
All persons (in 1000s)                           1358.9            162.1    45732.6         3.0           0.4
    Aged 25-59                                    595.0             87.8    18610.0         3.2           0.5
    Male, Aged 25-59                              302.8             77.1     9079.9         3.3           0.8
% of men aged 25-59 with education:
    Less than primary                               26.1            96.3       37.2            2.3        2.2
    Primary completed                               36.8             2.5       36.4            3.4        0.1
    Secondary completed                             25.8             1.0       20.2            4.3        0.0
    University completed                            11.2             0.2        6.1            6.1        0.0
% of men aged 25-59 living in:
    Ile de France                                   21.3            35.2       18.9            3.8        1.6
    Lorraine                                         3.1             7.3        4.4            2.3        1.4
    Rhone Alpes                                      9.7            16.4        8.8            3.7        1.6
    Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur                      19.2            15.6        6.3           10.2        2.1
% of low-skill men aged 25-59 living in:
    Ile de France                                  17.3            34.6       13.1             3.1        5.8
    Lorraine                                        2.8             7.5        4.3             1.5        3.9
    Rhone Alpes                                    10.6            16.8        8.2             3.0        4.5
    Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur                     22.9            15.8        6.2             8.6        5.6
Sample size of men, aged 25-59                    15139            3857     453993

                                                 Δ unemployment rate         Δ employment rate       Sample size
Average in France:
   Less than primary                                       0.01                       0.01            462579
   Primary completed                                       0.01                       0.01            330784
   Secondary completed                                     0.00                       0.00            159991
   University completed                                    0.00                       0.00             49703
Average in Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur:
   Less than primary                                       0.02                       -0.03            32188
   Primary completed                                       0.01                        0.00            20872
   Secondary completed                                     0.01                        0.01             9886
   University completed                                    0.01                        0.01             3466

Notes: The sample of French repatriates consists of French citizens who were not living in France in 1962; the
sample of Algerian nationals consists of Algerians who were not living in France in 1962; and the sample of
French natives consists of French citizens who were living in France in 1962. The bottom panel reports
statistics calculated in the sample of French native men aged 25-59. The (Δ unemployment rate) and (Δ
employment rate) variables give the average change between the 1962 and 1968 censuses for the particular
group.
                                                     72


Table 10. The impact of French repatriates and Algerian nationals on French natives


                                                           OLS                                IV
                                                   (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)
A. First stage: share of refugees
   Lagged repatriate supply shock                 1.283            0.067        ---                ---
                                                 (0.115)          (0.053)
   Lagged Algerian supply shock                  -0.063            0.558        ---                ---
                                                 (0.076)          (0.027)

B. Change in unemployment rate
   Repatriate supply shock                        0.063            0.067           0.089              0.096
                                                 (0.040)          (0.041)         (0.038)            (0.039)
   Algerian supply shock                          0.270            0.265           0.247              0.240
                                                 (0.067)          (0.069)         (0.067)            (0.069)
   Change in native population                   ---              -0.006          ---                -0.009
                                                                  (0.011)                            (0.011)

C. Change in employment rate
   Repatriate supply shock                       -0.075           -0.057          -0.100             -0.083
                                                 (0.066)          (0.069)         (0.077)            (0.081)
   Algerian supply shock                         -0.647           -0.666          -0.636             -0.651
                                                 (0.206)          (0.211)         (0.222)            (0.226)
   Change in native population                   ---              -0.022          ---                -0.019
                                                                  (0.029)                            (0.027)

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The unit of observation is a region-education cell,
and the data consist of 22 regions and 4 education groups. The “repatriate supply shock” and “Algerian supply
shock” variables give the ratio of the number of French repatriates or the number of Algerian nationals in the
cell to the number of French natives in the cell as of 1968. The “change in native population” variable gives
the log difference in the number of native persons in the cell between 1962 and 1968. The first stage
regression in Panel A relates these shares to the respective shares as of 1962. All regressions have 88
observations and include education fixed effects.
                                                      73


        Table 11. Own and cross effects of the supply shock of Algerian nationals

                                                Less than
                                                 primary          Primary         Secondary       University
A. Change in unemployment rate                    0.319            0.059            0.014           -0.039
                                                 (0.097)          (0.067)          (0.085)         (0.093)

B. Change in employment rate                     -0.662           -0.295            -0.349           -0.229
                                                 (0.239)          (0.131)           (0.139)          (0.169)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The unit of observation is a French region, and there are
22 regions in the analysis. The table reports the coefficient of the “Algerian supply shock for low-skill
workers” variable, which gives the coefficient of the ratio of the number of Algerian nationals who have less
than primary education to the number of natives without a primary education in 1968 in the particular city.
The regressions also contain regressors giving the change in the size of the native population for each of the
four education groups. The regressions are estimated separately for each education group using IV and have
22 observations.
                                                      74


   Table 12. Size and skill composition of refugees from the former Yugoslavia, 2000

                                                      Refugees        European natives      % increase in supply
All persons (in 1000s)                                 258.6           94052.4                     0.3
    Aged 25-59                                         170.2           49435.0                     0.3
    Male, Aged 25-59                                     65.1          24611.1                     0.3
Education distribution, men aged 25-59
    Primary completed or less                              25.1             44.4                    0.1
    Secondary completed                                    67.0             44.1                    0.4
    University completed                                    7.9             11.5                    0.2
% of men aged 25-59 living in:
    Austria                                                75.8              7.7                    2.6
    Greece                                                  2.9             10.0                    0.1
    Ireland                                                 0.9              3.6                    0.1
    Portugal                                                0.2              9.9                    0.0
    Romania                                                 0.9             20.5                    0.0
    Spain                                                   2.0             41.5                    0.0
    Switzerland                                            17.4              6.8                    0.7
% of men aged 25-59 in Austria living in:
    Burgenland, AUT                                      2.3                3.6                     1.7
    Niederosterreich, AUT                               12.4               19.7                     1.6
    Wien, AUT                                           33.5               18.9                     4.6
    Karnten, AUT                                         6.8                6.9                     2.6
    Steiermark, AUT                                     11.8               14.9                     2.1
    Oberosterreich, AUT                                 16.1               16.9                     2.5
    Salzburg, AUT                                        7.4                6.3                     3.1
    Tirol                                                6.3                8.5                     1.9
    Vorarlberg, AUT                                      3.3                4.4                     2.0
Sample size: men aged 25-59                             5871           1744826

Average in Austria                           Δ unemployment rate       Δ employment rate          Sample size
   Primary completed or less                       0.03                    -0.01                    76838
   Secondary completed                             0.01                    -0.01                   268539
   University completed                            0.01                    -0.00                    30759
Average in Vienna:
   Primary completed or less                         0.02                    -0.01                   17787
   Secondary completed                               0.03                    -0.01                   48006
   University completed                              0.00                    -0.00                   10100

Notes: The sample of refugees from the Balkan Wars consists of persons born in the former Yugoslavia, but
who migrated to one of the seven European countries between 1990 and 2000. The sample of European
natives consists of persons not born in the former Yugoslavia. The bottom panel reports statistics calculated
in the sample of European native men aged 25-59. The (Δ unemployment rate) and (Δ employment rate)
variables give the average change between the 1990 and 2000 censuses for the particular group.
                                                       75


         Table 13. The impact of the Balkan supply shock on competing workers

                                                             OLS                                IV
                                                     (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)
A. First stage: share of refugees
   Lagged Balkan supply shock                      0.152            0.144               ---              ---
                                                  (0.036)          (0.036)
   Change in native population                    ---               0.004               ---              ---
                                                                   (0.005)

B. Change in unemployment rate
   Balkan supply shock                             0.209            0.209             0.456           0.487
                                                  (0.078)          (0.103)           (0.311)         (0.376)
   Change in native population                    ---              -0.000            ---             -0.003
                                                                   (0.016)                           (0.017)

C. Change in employment rate
   Balkan supply shock                            -0.001           -0.000            -0.084          -0.091
                                                  (0.020)          (0.022)           (0.109)         (0.116)
   Change in native population                    ---              -0.000            ---              0.001
                                                                   (0.002                            (0.002

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The table exploits variation across 3 education
groups and 65 regions located in 7 different countries. The unit of observation is a country-region-city cell.
The “Balkan supply shock” variable gives the ratio of the number of Balkan refugees in the cell to the number
of natives in the cell as of 2000. The “change in native population” variable gives the log difference in the
number of native persons in the cell between 1990 and 2000. The first stage regression in Panel A relates the
share of Balkan refugees in the cell as of 2000 to the share of Yugoslavian migrants in the cell as of 1990. All
regressions have 195 observations and include both education fixed effects and country of destination fixed
effects.
                                                      76


                       Table 14. Cross effects of the Balkan supply shock

                                                 Primary
                                             education or less          Secondary             University
A. Change in unemployment rate                    -1.412                  1.056                 -0.008
                                                 (0.951)                 (0.754)               (0.411)

B. Change in employment rate                        0.330                  -0.103                -0.038
                                                   (0.169)                (0.058)               (0.051)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The unit of observation is a country-region cell, and there
are 65 regions located in 7 different countries.. The table reports the coefficient of the “Balkan supply shock
for middle-skill workers ,” which gives the ratio of the number of Balkan refugees who had completed their
secondary education to the number of natives who also completed a secondary education in 2000 in the
particular country-region cell. The regressions also contain regressors giving the change in the size of the
native population for each of the three education groups. The regressions are estimated separately for each
education group using IV and have 65 observations.
