                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CONSUMPTION




                              Robert E. Hall




                          Working Paper No. 2265




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1987




Prepared for the Handbook of Modern Business Cycle Theory, Robert J. Barro,
editor. This research was supported by the National Science Foundation.
I am grateful to David Bizer for outstanding assistance. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #2265
                                             May 1987




                          Consumption


                           ABSTRACT

     Macroeconomic research on consumption has been influenced
profoundly by rational expectations. First, rational
expectations together with the hypothesis of constant expected
real interest rates implies that consumption should evolve as a
random walk. Much of the research of the past decade has been
devoted to testing the random walk hypothesis and to explaining
its failure. Three branches of the literature have developed.
The first relies on the durability of consumption to explain
deviations from the random walk property. The second invokes
liquidity constraints which block consumers from the credit
market transactions needed to make consumption follow a random
walk when income fluctuates up and down. The third branch
dispenses with the assumption that expected real interest rates
are constant. It attempts to explain deviations from the random
walk in terms of intertemporal substitution.




                                        Robert E. Hall
                                        Hoover Institution and
                                          Department of Economics
                                        Stanford University
                                        Stanford, California 94305
Irtrockactian cnd scope

   No specialty in macroeconomics has been more profoirly influenced by
the rational expectations revolution than has the stLxJy of consumption.
From the early 1950s, when the life cycle-permanent income hypothesis
came to dominate the. profession's thinking about consumption, tntil the
late i970s, the consumption field was largely dormant. In the following
decade, however, a sthstantlal upsurge of new work has occurred. Though
almost all of the new work embodies the hypothesis of rational
expectations, much more has been added to our thinking than just the
simple idea that consumers make consumption plans on the basis of all
available information about future Income.
    My survey of this work will start with the initial impact of rational
expectations--the development of the Euler equation characterization of
optimal consumption behavior and the empirical tests of it. Tests have
been applied by a rumber of autFx)rs using data for the United States and
for a rumnber of other coLntries. Roughly speaking, the Euler equation
says that consumption sFx)uld evolve as a random walk; that is, the change
in consumption should not be predictable. The empirical work testing this
proposition says, in sum, that consumption is fairly close to a random
walk, but certain variables have enough predictive power that the
hypothesis is rejected in formal statistical tests.
   One interesting branch of the ensuing research has asked whether the
predictability of the change in consumption can be explained by the
inability of consumers to borrow when income is temporarily low. The
investigation of "liquidity constraints" has occupied quite a number of
investigators, most of whom have reached the conclusion that liquidity
                               I
constraints do help to explain aspects of the data not explained by the
simple rational expectations life cycle-permanent irome hypothesis. They
typically find that most of the movements of consumption are consistent
with the simple model; only a minority of consuners are constrained.
   Another branch has sought to explain departures from the simple
random walk by examining the implications of the durability of
consumption goods. Durability turns out to compete with liquidity
constraints, In that models containing both features do not rely very
heavily on liquidity constraints to explain the predictibility of
consumption.
    The third branch of the literature I will examine considers a more
refined version of the Euler equation. As a matter of theory, changes in
expected real returns sheuld influenoe the rate of change of consumption.
When asset markets offer high returns, consumers sheuld defer
consumption. That is, the rate of growth of consumption of individual
househelds should be positively correlated with the expected return.
Rejection of the simple random walk model might be the result of this
correlation. However, the aggregation of interest-rate effects is a
complicated issue; there is no simple relation between expected real
returns and the rate of growth of aggregate consumption
    There are some important topics related to consption that I have
excluded from this discussion. In particular, the literature stimulated by
Robert Barro's work on Ricardian equivalence is outside my domain. On
this, see Bernheim's (1987) survey and synthesis.




                               2
1. Rational expectations ond the Euler equation

   Work on consumption from the time of Keynes' General Theory focussed
on the development of a consumption fution, that is, a structural relation
between income (and possibly the Interest rate) and consumption.
Friedman's permanent income hypothesis arKi Modigliani's life-cycle
hypothesis were seen as st&gestiors about the way that income variables
might enter the consumption ftzxtion. The main point was that temporary
changes in Income should have less Impact on consumption than should
permanent changes. Probably the most Impressive evidence on the point
was in Friedman's examination of cross-section data on family income and -
consumption. When It came to building a consumption ftixtlon, however,
Friedman and his followers (such as Darby (1972)) made consumption a
distributed lag of current and past Income. Muth (1960) had shown that a
geometric distributed lag was optimal uxier rational expectations only
with a certain special stochastic process for income, but the consumption
fL.rlction literature did not pursue this point until many years later. In
aggregate U.S. data, the distributed lag from income to consumption had a
peculiar feature--either most of the weight applied to current income, or
the lag came out to be almost infinitely long.
   Arxlo and Modigliani's empirical consumption function (1963) took a
more structural view of expectations. They reasoned that the
umployrnent rate was an additional variable that the public might
consider in deciding whether the current level of real income was
representative of its permanent level.
   The opening shot in the rational expectations revolution was Robert
Lucas' (1976) famous critique of econometric policy models, presented In
                              3
 1973. The models he criticized consisted of sets of structural equations.
One of the three structural equations he foizxl wanting was the
consumption fintion. And his criticism was profound. It was not that the
typical consumption function was mis-specified. Rather, he said, there
isn't any such thing as a consumption function. There is a structural
relation between permanent income and consumption, but the consumption
function asserts a structural relation between observed income and
permanent income, and there is no reason to expect a stable relation of
that type. Changes elsewhere in the economy--for example, in stabilization
policy—could alter the optimal way for a consumer to make an inference
about permanent income from observed income. Development of
consumption fixtions has little purpose. In particular, a model for policy
analysis based on a consumption function is self-defeating.
   TIuh Lucas was scornful of existing econometric policy evaluation
models, his message was not completely destructive of all model-building
or empirical research. There are structural relationships in the economy,
but the consumption fution is not among them. For consumption, the
structural relation, invariant to policy interventions and other shifts
elsewhere in the economy, is the intertemporal preference ordering. The
view of consumption that flowed from Lucas' work is that today's level of
consumption is the level cFx,sen by consumers so as to maximize expected
lifetime utility, given all available information about current and future
income and prices. The consumer ies all available knowledge about the
behavior of otter actors in the economy, including the government, in
processing the information.
    Lucas' critique of the corsurnption fixxtion was overshadowed by his
critique of the Phillips curve, where he generalized and formalized a point
                               4
made very effectively several years earlier by Friedman (1968). The next
step in the development of the rational expectatatioris view of consumption
was Hall's (1978) test of a general implication of Lucas' view. Hall
neither tried to repair the traditional consumption fuxtlori nor estimate
the deep parameters of utility. Rather, he formulated a simple empirical
test of the Idea that consu-ners maximize the expected value of lifetime
utility subject to an izxhanglng real Interest rate. The basic Idea Is to
look at the Euler equation describing the optimal behavior of such a
consumer. The Euler equation characterizes the equality of the marginal
rate of substitution between consumption this year aM consumption next
year to the relative price of the two. That relative price Is simply the
present discounted cost of a unit of future consumption. Mathematically,
the consumer seeks to maximize


             (ç )S u(c.,)
subject to

                  )S (ct+5 -   wtj = At
The notation Is


   Et = mathematical expectation corElitlonal on all Information In t;
   6 = rate of subjective time preference;
   r = real rate of Interest, a constant over time;
   u() = one-period utility function, strictly concave;
   c = consumption;
                                  5
   w = earnings from sowces other than savings
   At = assets apart from binan capital.

   On the possible relaxation of the assumption of intertemporal
separability, see Browning (1986). Derivation of results with constant
expected real interest rates In genaral equilibrium appears in Christiano,
Eichethaum, and Marshall (1987).
    The Euler equation expressing the equality of the marginal rate of
substitution to the price ratio is:

        Et u' (c1) —_.1+6,u (Ct)
That is, marginal utility rext year is expected to be the same as marginal
utility this year, except for a trend associated with the constant rate of
time prefererxe, 6, and the constant real interest rate, r. Another way to
express the same idea is
          u' (ct+i) =   i+r u' (Ct)   +

Here E is a random variable whose expectation at time t (when
consumption, c, Is being chosen) is zero. In particular, is tnorrelated
with u'(ct), so this equation is a regression. If the fuxtional form of u ()
were known, this equation could be the basis of a test of optimization. For
the optimizing consumer, no variable observed in year t would receive a
rfirrzero coefficient if added to the equation. Were a variable found that
helped predict naxt year's marginal utility, and that variable were known
to the consumer at the time c was chosen, then the corumer would be
shown to have failed to optimize.
                                6
   Hall's original work did not try to make use of Information about the
fuctional form of the utility fuxtion. Instead, he argued that the Euler
equation could be approximated closely by assuming a quadratic utility
ftzxtion, In which case It could be written as

      ct+l = Xct+et

In this framework, the basic test of optimization involves placing
additional variables on the right-hand side and computing the t or F-test
for their exclusion.
    Chang (1987) considered the Issue of when simple random-walk
relations tld exactly. Zeldes (1986) computed consumption firctlons
numerically with non-negativity constraints and concluded that the
quadratic specification can be misleading in some clrcumstarxes.
    Hall foud that lagged real disposable income had little
predictive power for consumption; the hypothesis that only c helped
predict c11 among variables dated t and earlier was accepted. However,
he swed that the Euler-equation restriction was rejected for the stock
market. The recent change In the real value of the stock market has
statistically significant predictive power for the future change in
consumption.
    Flavin (i981) examined the relation between income and consumption
in the rational expectations framework and fouxi sufficient predictive
power to reject the strict optimization hypothesis. Her theoretical work
Involved the development of an explicit strtEtural consumption fuction,
based on the hypothesis that real income obeys a stable stochastic process.
Thus, her model itself is subject to Lucas' criticism, which points out
                                7
that the stochastic process of income is a result of the interaction of all
the actors in the ecommy arxl is rct a deep structural characteristic of the
corumer alone. However, her test turned out to be identical to the type of
test proposed by Hall. She fou rejection of optimization because she
Included more lagged values of Income than Hall had tried, ar because of
a few other mimr changes.
   Flavin's structural model enables her to interpret her findings
quantitatively. In her results, the parameter describing the excess
response of consumption to the contemporaneous change in income is about
0.36. She pointed out that the relatively small values of coefficients
fo.rx1 by Hall on lagged income in the reduced-form consumption regression
signify much larger structural coefficients. As a general matter, Flavin
foizxl even more evidence than did Hall to reject the pure optimization
model with a constant real interest rate.
   Goodfriend (1986) pointed out that Flavin's procedure rests on the
hypothesis that aggregate income is immediately observable. If, instead,
there is a one-quarter lag before aggregate income becomes public, one
would expect rejection roughly along the lines fouti by Flavin.
   Mankiw and Shapiro (1985) criticized Flavin's work on the grounds
that her detrerxling procedure would Induce the finding of excess
sensitivity even If it were absent from the original data. They considered
an example In which income Is a random walk. Optimal consumption Is
also a random walk. Hall's test applied to the original data will nct
reject optimization. However, with detrettled data, income and
consumption will be cyclical and will flunk Hall's test. They ncted that
Flavin's test is indecisive in the original data, because income is
essentially a random walk before detrerxllng.

                               9
   Stock and West (1987) challenged Mankiw and Shapiro's
interpretation of excess sensitivity as arising from a spuriously detrerxled
random walk. They argiEd that by detrerxling a random walk with drift,
Flavin induced a change in the large sample distribution from a mrmal to
a mnstarxlard distribution of the type associated with irilt roots. Using
theoretical results of Sims, Stock, and Watson (1987), they mted that, In
contrast, Hall's original tests based on lagged corEurnptlon were valid even
with preliminary detrending of the data. The key differerxe between Hall's
and Flavin's procedure is that Hall inclixled lagged consumption as a
regressor, whereas Flavin did mt. Stock and West presented the results
of Monte Carlo experiments to support their argument, which is otherwise
based on asymptotic theory. In addition, results obtainad by Deaton
(1986) cast doubt on the hypothesis that the bias identified by Mankiw and
Shapiro can fully explain the finding of excess sensitivity of consumption
to income.
    Deaton's work also casts doubt on the likeliF'xod of success of models
that try to fit a stochastic process to income and then infer the appropriate
response of consumption to the innovations in that process. He noted that a
mn-stationary process for real income--specifically, a first-order
autoregressive process in the first difference--seems to provide a
reasonable description of the income process. But for that process, the
observed response of consumption to an income irmovation is much too
small, rather than too big. Subtle differences In the income process have
major implications for the consumption response. Accordingly, results
obtained within a restricted class of income processes may not give
reliable statistical tests of the hypothesis of excess sensitivity. Campbell
and Deaton (1987) pursued the idea and fitted a number of low-order
                               9
ARIMA models of income. Most of them have the property that the
innovation in consumption should have a larger variance than the
innovation in income. They also reached the same conclusion by
examining the autocorrelatioris of income. However, both of their
procedures are biased toward the conclusion that consumption Is
excessively smooth, so their findings are inconclusive.
  West (1986) used a variance bounds technique to examine the question of
the relative variabilities of consumption and income. He concluded that
the evidence is ambiguous, though possibly it favors excess smoothness of
consumption. In a related paper, Christiano (1987) finds that small
influences on consumption through intertemporal substitution associated
with variations in real returns could explain an apparent excess
smoothness of consumption.
  Nelson (1987) re-examined Hall's original empirical results and
Flavin's later work. He argued that a more reasonable approximation
could be achieved by assuming logarithmic utility and a log-normal
distribution for later consumption given earlier consumption. He
demonstrated that the current change in income is a statistically
significant predictor of the coming change in consumption in that
framework. Nelson also confirmed that Flavin's strong results on excess
sensitivity may be the result of her procedure for detrendirig the data.
   Jacobson (1981) showed that measures of consumer attitudes had
predictive power even In the presence of the stock-market value included in
Hall's original study.
   Miron (1986) showed that the results obtained by Flavin and others
rejecting the simple random walk hypothesis could be reversed by using
seasonally unadjusted data and an explicit model of seasonal effects, as
                               10
opposed to the use of seasonally adjusted data.
    Kormendi and LaHaye (1986) carried out tests of the explanatory power
of lagged ircome changes for the current change In consumption for a panel
of 30 coiritries. They failed to reject the hypothesis of no explanatory
power for the panel as a whole. Using Flavin's approach, they forxI that
consumption appears to be undersensitive to changes in permanent ircome.



Time aggregation

    Evans (1982), Christiano (1984), and others have pointed out that the
data employed to test the Euler equation are time averages, whereas the
theory deals with consumption chosen at isolated points in time. Working
(1960) derived the time series properties of a time-average of a random
walk. The first differerce of the time average is a first-order moving
average process with a serial correlation of about 0.25. Tests of the
Euler equation can be modified to take account of this property--it implies
particular coefficients for lagged consumption and invalidates the most
recent observation on real ircome in the test regression. Hall (1987)
treated the time aggregation problem at some length, but neither he nor
any other author has repeated the Euler equation tests to take account of
time aggregation. Estimation problems with time-aggregated data are
discussed in detail in Hansen and SIngleton (1986).




                               11
Findings for cotttries other tku the United States

   Daly and Hadjimatheou (1981) repeated Hall's basic Euler equation test
using data for the United Kingdom. They foini sthstantial predictive
power for lagged disposable income and lagged liquid assets; they rejected
the exclusion of tFKse variables from the Euler equation tnambiguusly.
Their work was criticized by Cuddington and Hurd (1981) on the groirids
that they presented only the final results of an extensive search for
successful predictors. However, Muellbauer (1983) fouxl a similar
rejection for the U.K. using only consumption lagged once and income
lagged once and twice.
    Cirldington (1981) examined Canadian data and foud significant
predictive power for real money balances, real private wealth, real GNP,
and the zmployment rate.
   JoFU-Lson (indated) rejected the Euler equation optimization condition
with Australian data. He foizxi predictive power for certain measures of
lagged income and the unemployment rate.



Findings in cross-sectional data

   In principle, variations in income and consumption experienced by
individual families sFuld provide more powerful tests of models of
corsinnption. However, some of the advantages of the proliferation of
observations available in cross sections are lost because of measurement
problems. In the U.S., for example, there is ro body of data that reports
on the total consumption of families in sxcessive years. Much of the
                               12
research on U.S. data has been done with data on income and food
consiwnptlon from the Panel Study of Irxome Dynamics.
   Hall and MlsFidn (1982) examIned this body of data within the
framework of a rational expectations theory of consumption. Their model
hypothesizes that consumption at the level of the Individual family has a
transitory measurement error or other source of noise not explained by the
theory. In the presence of such an error, the simple regression test of the
Euler equation is restricted: It must Impose a unit coefficient on lagged
consumption and cannot use further lags of consumption as candidates for
failure of the hypothesis of unpredictability. Hall and Mishkin regressed
the first difference of food consumption on the lagged change In income
and found a coefficient of -.0 10 with a standard error of .002. The
rejection of optimization is strong statistically, though the magnitude of
the departure from the theoretical value of zero is small.
    Hall and Mishkin also estimated a structural model of consumption
similar to Flavin's. Their model departs from hers in two ways. First,
it permits current consumption to respond to the immediate future
innovation in income. This modification is suggested by the timing of the
data and also by the possibility that families have some advance
Information about income changes. The results confirm that such advance
information is available to families. Second, the model permits a fraction
of consumption to move in proportion to actual current Income instead of
permanent income. If a fraction of the sample is liquidity constrained,
their income will move in this way. The results sest that about 20
percent of consumption is linked to current rather than permanent income.
With these two modifications, the model is successful in explaining the
entire pattern of covariances of income and food consumption found in the
                               13
data.
   Hayashi (1985) studied a panel of Japanese households in a similar
framework. In addition to food consumption, the panel reports data on four
other categories of consumption. Hayashi fouxi that lagged Income has
significant predictive power for the change in consumption, in
contradiction to the Euler equation characterization of optimization. He
formulated a more general model to explain the predictive power of
income, which included the possibility of liquidity constraints and also the
possibility that consumption in one period provides satisfaction in
succeeding periods. He incorporates the latter effect by making the utility
function depend on a distributed lag of past expenditures. His results show
that the durability of consumption is an important part of the explanation
of the failure of the simple Euler equation. After taking account of
durability, he found a sharp estimate that 15 percent of households are
liquidity constrained.
   Altonji and Siow (1987) considered the problem of errors in
measuring income in panel studies. They show that income measurement
errors are important quantitatively, but that the generally favorable
findings in panel studies of the life cycle-permanent income model are
confirmed when the errors are considered explicitly.
   Working with highly detailed data from a Norwegian panel, Mork and
Smith (1986) found results generally favorable to the life cycle-permanent
income model.




                               14
Restrictions imposed by the rational expectations permonevi income model
on the joiii behavior & income and conswnpticn

   Sargent (1978) was the first to Investigate the problem of formulating
optimal consumption behavior as a restriction on a genaral time-series
model of income and consumption. However, as pointed out by Flavin
(1981), Sargent's version of the permanent Income model did not take
account of the fact that current saving finances future consumption. As a
result, the restrictions he derived arxl tested were rot a satisfactory
characterization of optimal consumption. Flavin derived the restrictions
implied by the standard permanent income model. The cross-equation
restrictions on the coefficients of lagged variables turn out to be exactly
those tested by Hall (1978)--the exclusion of all variables other than
lagged consumption in the autoregressive representation for consumption.
She showed that there are no restrictions operating across the
coefficients of the two autoregressions. However, if one interprets the
univariate time series model of Income literally, In the sense that no
lagged variable other than Income is useful in forecasting income, the
model also implies an important restriction on the covariance matrix of
the imovations of consumption and income. That matrix Is singular; the
two innovations are proportional to one another and the theory relates
their constant of proportionality to the coefficients of the Income process.
Sargent did not consider the restrictions on the covariance matrix.
Flavin argued that the singularity should rot be expected in actual data,
where a more elaborate model would be appropriate. In that model,
constners use Information to forecast future income that is rot conveyed
by the current and past levels of Income. Then the imovation in
                                15
qconsumption is not perfectly correlated with the innovation in income, nor
does theory prescribe the numerical relation between the two Innovations.
If people respond to the Information contained in other variables In
addition to income, the measured correlation of the Innovations In income
and in consumption should be less than one. It Is tempting to interpret
the residual In an income autoregression as proportional to the innovation
in permanent income. However, If people respond to variables in addition
to the ones in the econometrician's right-hand variables, the residual In
an income equation will be an error-ridden measure of the innovation in
permanent Income. Flavin's analysis of the covariance matrix of the
income and consumption residuals indicates that the magnituie of the
measurement error is far from negligible.
    The issue of the singularity of the covariance matrix of a set of
variables u-xler certain information assumptions with rational expectations
was also considered at a more general level by Hansen and Sargent
(1981). Campbell (1986) consIdered the restrictions imposed by optimal
consumption behavior on a three-variable system comprising consumption,
labor income, and capital income (the latter defined as the constant
expected real interest rate times the level of assets). He showed that the
restrictions implied by theory can be stated as parameter restrictions on a
vector autoregression. The first restriction is that capital income
evolves according to the Intertemporal budget constraint with constant
expected real interest rate (the actual return ex post can be random). This
restriction is a statement about the technology, not about consumption
behavior. The second restriction is that either the change In consumption,
or, equivalently, the statistic


                               16
   s-    z x - (1 + r) s_j

(where s is saving and x is labor income) is zpredictable. This
statistic Is the irrvation in consumption plus the irrcvation in capital
income, so it is upredictable for essentially the same reasons that the
change in consumption is uredictable.
    Campbell's test is close to a test of the upredictability of consumption
changes, and has the same partial character because he does not test the
constancy of expected real rates. The advantage of his framework is that
it can be used to assess the ql2ntitative importance for savings behavior
of deviations from the permanent income theory.
     Campbell also made the interesting observation that the level of
saving can be written as the present discoi.rited value of expected future
declines In non-capital Income. That is, the permanent income model
explains saving only through the income-smoothing motive, which makes
saving positive only when income exceeds Its permanent level and is
consequently expected to decline in the future. In fact, saving is higher on
average than the model predicts.
   The movements of saving also differ somewhat from those of the
optimal forecast of the decline in labor income, but the two variables
have about the same standard deviations. Campbell argued that if
consumption were excessively sensitive to income, then saving would have
a lower standard deviation than would the optimal forecast. He concluded
that the failure of the permanent income model should not be described as
excess sensitivity.
   Campbell and Clarida (1986) obtain results for Canada and Britain that
                               17
are quite similar to those for the U.S.


Liquidity constroirts

   The notion that consumption is more sensitive to income than is
consistent with the permanant income hypothesis has long been associated
with the idea that Fuseholds are inable to dissave during periods of
abrx)rmally low income. Instead of continuing a rx)rmal level of
consumption by drawing down financial assets or borrowing, they must
reduce consumption. Such Fuseholds face liquidity constraints because
they do not Ixld liquid assets or collateral suitable for borrowing.
   Hayashi (1985) has provided a very complete survey of the literature
on liquidity contraints. My remarks here are selective.
   Muellbauer (1983) and Zeldes (1985) developed the theory of the
response of consumers to liquidity constraints within the framework of
the rational expectations permarnt income model. As they noted, it is
an oversimplification to say that llquidity-constrainad consumers simply
spend all of their disposable income. Rather, the liquidity constraint has
a shadow price which fuctions as an interest rate. In circumstances
where an iriconstrainad consnner would maintain consumption by
dissaving, a consumer influenced by liquidity constraints will behave as if
he faced a higher interest rate. The consumer will substitute away from
current consumption because it is, in effect, more expensive. A1tFX)ugh an
Euler equation can be derived for the consumer facing a liquidity
constraint, it inclixles a term involving the shadow price of the
constraint. The determination of that shadow price involves a

                               18
consideration of the entire intertemporal planning problem of the
consumer and does not decompose in a simple way. Becaie the current
shadow price is almost certainly correlated with current and past lrxome,
tJ- simple Euler equation proposition of unpredictable changes in
consumption does not hold for the liquidity-constrained consumer.
    Runkle (1983) and Zeldes examined liquidity contrairits in panel data
for individual houaetx)lds. They applied the simple Euler equation test in
log form; that is, they test the hypothesis that the rate of growth of
consumption is unpredictable except for a term involving market interest
rates. They showed that for households with low net worth, who are
candidates for liquidity constraints, the hypothesis is rejected. Runkle
fo.rxf that the rate of growth of consumption is positively related to net
worth in families with assets below $1500, while Zeldes found that
consumption growth is negatively related to real disposable lrome. The
latter finding was also reported by Hall and Misbkin (1982) and other
authors who interpreted their findings as slç)porting liquidity constraints,
but without developing a formal model of the effect of the constraints.
   Flavin (1985) examined the issue of liquidity constraints in time
series data in an extended version of her earlier model. She considered
two explanations of her earlier finding that the Innovation in consi.rnption
Is excessively sensitive, to the irrvation In ircome. First, consumers
may be myopic--that is, they may behave as if they faced extremely high
interest rates at all times. Second, some consumers at some times may
face liquidity constraints. She noted that the two alternative explanations
can be distinguished by studying the relation of excess sensitivity to
variables that measure the inoldence of liquidity constraints. For this
purpose, she uses the iziemployment rate. In the riill hypothesis derived
                                19
from the rational expectations-permanent income hypothesis, the
unemployment rate helps predict future income, but has m direct
influence on consumption in the absence of liquidity constraints. Flavin
foiixl that when the unemployment rate is included in the model as an
additional variable to forecast income but Is constrained to have m direct
effect on consumption, the excess sensitivity of consumption to current
income is large and statistically significant, as before. However, when
the unemployment rate, interpreted as an indicator of liquidity constraints,
is permitted to have a direct impact on consumption, the measured excess
sensitivity of consumption to income falls substantially in magnitude and
becomes insignificant. Because of the high degree of correlation between
the unemployment rate and income, the empirical results do nct provide
clear-cut conclusions, but Flavin interpreted the results as providing some
stport for a role of liquidity constraints.
   Muellbauer and Bover (1986) developed a more elaborate model of
liquidity constraints in time series data and conclude that the model
provides a good description of U.S. data.
   Browning (1987) tested for liquidity constraints in a novel way.
Under the assumptions that married coles plan to have children sooner
or later, and that there is m shift of preferences for drinking and smoking
as a result of the arrival of children, life-cycle theory predicts that there
should be m change in alcohol and tobacco consumption when children
arrive. British panel data support this proposition.




                                20
aroble goods

    At the most basic level, the theory of durables consumption is no
different from the theory of non-durables. Households consume a flow of
services from durables and that flow should be determined in the same
way as the flow of other types of consumption. However, a number of
authors have gone beyond this simple statement to build and estimate
models that deal with the joint behavior of Income and the acquisition of
stocks of durables.
    Mankiw (1982) developed the most basic model in a time-series
setting. He noted that the stock of durables should evolve according to the
same Euler equation as the flow of consumption of non-durables. If the
deterioration of the stock of durables occurs at a constant rate, the
purchases of durables should obey a first-order autoregressive, first-order
moving average process; the. parameter of the moving average process
depends only on the rate of deterioration. He obtained strong rejection of
that hypothesis. He fotzxl that the stochastic process for durables
purchases is close to a random walk, which implies that the quarterly
deterioration rate for durabies is about 100 percent. Although he did not
pursue the Idea, he notes that it appears that a model with adjustment
costs would also be rejected by the data.
    Bemanke (1984) examined purchases of automobiles within a four-year
panel of households. He assumes that households choose an optimal stock
of autos through the standard rational expectations permanent income
model and then purchase autos at a rate given by a partial adjustment
process. He did not try to justify the partial adjustment assumption
through consideration of optimization, though a model of adjustment costs
                               21
probably could yield his model as the outcome of optimization. The
estimation metu! is similar to the ona used by Hall and Mishkin (1982).
His empirical findings reveal an adjustment rate of about 70 percent per
year. His most Interesting finding is that there Is r evidence of excess
sensitivity of auto purchases to transitory Income. It appears that partial
adjustment of consumption to current income is a competing explanation of
facts that lead other investigators to conclude that liquidity constraints are
important.
   Bernanke (1984) developed a complete model with adjustment costs.
Using quarterly U.S. data for dirables, rx)rxlurables, and income, he foind
substantial excess sensitivity of both durables and ncndurables within a
model that posits constant real interest rates.
   Mankiw (1985) studied durables In a framework that considers
substitution between durables arid nondurables arid also intertemporal
substitution. He fou-xI evidence of high elasticities of substitution in both
dimensions. As a result, movements of real interest rates are an
important influence making durables purchases depart from the predictions
of a model that assumes constant real interest rates. He was Lzlable to
reject the hypothesis that income and consumption have the relation
predicted by the simple rational expectations permanent Income model.
   Bar-han arid Blinder (1986) developed a theory of durables purchases
that. takes explicit accoirit of the lumpiness of durables. They showed that
individual households will determine a range for the stock of each type of
durable, and make purchases or sell existing durables if the stock falls
outside the range. They tackled the difficult problem of developing
implications of the model for aggregate data, with somewhat mixed
results.
                                22
    The effect of changes in interest rates on consumption and saving has
always been an Important topic of research on consumption. With the
exception of Boskin (1978), there has been relatively little research on the
traditional question of the role of the Interest rate In the consumption
function. The answer to that question Is complicated because changes In
the interest rate have both an income aix! a substitution effect. By
contrast, the Euler equation formulation that has dominated research since
the rational expectations revolution provides a way to measure the pure
substitution effect of changes in interest rates.
    The Euler equation for consumption with a variable real interest rate
first appeared in the finance literature. Rubinistein (1976) contributed
most of the basic model. The marriage of a constant-elasticity utility
function with log-normally distributed returns provides a first-order
condition in a highly tractable form. Breeden (1977, 1979) developed the
intertemporal consumption model in the form that has been employed by
countless authors in the past decade. The basic relation derived by
Breeden can be written as:

      Alogc =            + k +€

Here a Is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, rt is the mean of the
distribution of the log of the value in t+1 of a unit investment made at t,
Et is a normally distributed disturbance, and k is a constant related to the
covariance of rt and log c, to the variances of both variables, and to the
rate of time preference. Breeden and his stxcessors in the finence
literature (Grossman and Shiller (1982a, 1982b), Shiller (1982), Ferson
                               23
(1980), Breeden (1983), and many others, many cited in the last
reference) considered this equation to be part of a system with one
equation for each type of investment. They defined the consumption beta
of an investment as a normalization of the covariance of its return with
the change in the log of consumption. Most of the literature in finance in
this area has been devoted to measuring consumption betas and testing the
relations among the betas and the mean returns of different investments.
   Within the macroeconomic literature on consumption, the finance paper
that has had the greatest influence is Hansen and Singleton (1983).
They estimated both single equations and systems of equations for multiple
investments, using monthly consumption and returns data. Their estimates
of the coefficient of relative risk aversion, a, span a range centered on
unity. They also tested and rejected the restrictions among the constants
and the covariances, but this finding has more relevance for finance than
for consumption. Additional results along this line appear in Eichenbaum,
Hansen, and Singleton (1986).
   Hansen and Singleton's framework has been adopted by Summers
(1982), Manklw, Rotemberg, and Summers (1985), and Bean (1986)
with similar results. Browning (1986a) has reached a similar
specification by a somewhat different route. However, these subsequent
papers have interpreted the coefficient of the expected real interest rate,
rt, on the right-hand side of a consumption growth equation as dealing
with the propensity of consumers to substitute intertemporally from one
period to the next. That is, they think of the equation in the form,

      iMogc = cTr        + k
                               +€
Here 0   is the intert.emporal elasticity of subsitution. A one-percent
                                24
Here o is the intertemporal elasticity of subsitution. A one-percent
rise in the expected real interest rate, r, causes the consumer to
substitute o- percent of consumption from this year to the next. Formally,
the difference is just the replacement of the reciprocal of the coefficient
of relative risk aversion, 1/a, by o, but a large difference of
interpretation goes with that change.
    Hall (1987) considered the question of the relation between these
interpretations. The model underlying both the finance research and the
macroeconomic research is founded upon an intertemporally separable
utility function,

         e6 c a
The parameter a controls the curvature of the one-period utility function
and hence controls both the degree of risk aversion (the higher is a, the
less willing is the cons'..rner to substitute consumption among states of
the world) and the degree of intertemporal substitution (the higher is a,
the less willing is the consumer to substitute consumption among time
periods). It is known that additive separability of the utility function
together with the maximization of expected utility means that risk
aversion and intertemporal substitution are controlled together by the
curvature of the one-period utility function (Selden (1978)).
   Hall argued that the coefficient in an equation with the growth of
consumption on the left and the expected real return from a particular
investment on the right is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, riot
the reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Risk aversion
can be estimated in a system of two or more equations with investments of
different riskiness, in which case the coefficient of relative risk aversion
can be measured from the differenoes in the constants (as in Grossman and
Shiller (1982)).
   Hall's argtxnent on this point is not corlusive because there does not
seem to be a convenient class of utility ftrctions in which the two
parameters are cleanly separated, except In the special case of only two
periods. For the special case, Selden's results show that it is
unarnbigwusly the elasticity of intertemporal substitution and not the
reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk aversion that appears as the
coefficient of the expected real interest rate in the consumption growth
equation.
   Viewed In this light, the previous research has found intertemporal
elasticities of around one. Fluctuations In expected Interest rates are a
prime source of movements in consumption, according to the results.
However, Hall questiord the finding of a substantial elasticity. Through
the use of additional data for the interwar period and for the 1980s, when
fluctuations in expected real rates were larger, and through a choice of
instrumental variables that considers the timing of the data, he found
values of the intertemporal elasticity of close to zero, with reasonably
small standard errors.
   Muellbauer and Bover (1986) suggested a possible source of a
downward bias in estimates of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
They point out that aggregation may induce a negative correlation between
the constant in the consumption growth equation and the interest rate—
higher interest rate shift consumption toward groiçs, such as the elderly,
with lower values of the constant.
   Browning (1986) took a very different approach to intertemporal
                               26
substitution. He adapted ncn-pararnetric techniques developed by Varian to
test the hypothesis that the observed sequence of consumption and interest
rates are consistent with consumer choice under certainty. Under
Browning's null hypothesis, all variations in consumption are attributed to
intertemporal substitution and none to income surprises. He rejects the
hypothesis for Canadian, U.K., and U.S. data, but there are extended sub-
periods when the hypothesis cannot be rejected.




Transltcry consumpticn and shifts in preferences

   Flavin (1981), Hall and Mishkin (1982), aM numerous other authors
have noted that consumption may have a stochastic component not explained
by the permanent income hypothesis. In panel data, the evidence for su± a
component is overwhelming; the component accounts for more of the
variation of the first difference of consumption than does the component
associated with changes in permanent income. Further, in panel data,
there is a presumption that at least part of the component is truly
transitory consumption, because it arises from measuring consumption
over a fairly brief period, so that changes in household Inventories and the
lumpiness of many purchases influences measured consumption.
    In time series data, where a general equilibrium analysis is
mandatory, the diagnosis and treatment of transitory consumption is a
much more difficult issue. Gather and King (1984) pointed out just how
strong are the identifying assumptions needed to validate Euler-equation
models in time series data. In effect, shifts in preferences or other
                               27
sources of changes in consumption other than changes in income or wealth
mist either be assumed away, or special and questionable assumptions
must be made about their stochastic properties. The easiest assumption,
though very special, is that shifts in preferences occur as a rarxlom walk,
so that the corresponding stochastic comporrit in the first difference of
consumption is unpredictable Then the Euler equation has an extra
stochastic term that satisfies the assumptions already made about the
term that comes from the innovation in income or wealth. MaCurdy
(1987) has set up a framework for studying consumption and labor supply
in the presence of stochastic shifts of a very general type.
    If shifts in preferences are anything but a random walk, then the Euler
equation is probably not identified. Certainly the methods generally used
for estimating the Euler equation are no longer valid. If shifts in
preferences are stationary, though possibly serially correlated, then the
first difference of consumption will have a component that is negatively
serially correlated. The disturbance in period t will include the innovation
in preferences in period t-1 and possibly earlier as well. Because the
earlier innovation shifted consumption, and a shift in consumption feeds
back into income, variables dated t-1 are no longer incorrelated with the
disturbance. In simple regression tests of the Euler equation with a fixed
real interest rate, lagged Income is no longer an appropriate regressor.
The finding of significant coefficients for lagged income is no longer
evidence against the rational expectations permanent income model. In
more elaborate tests with variable expected real returns, lagged income is
no longer eligible as an instrumental variable.
    Hall (1986) attacked this problem by using an irstriiment that he
considers truly exogenous: military spending. His objective was to
                               28
isolate shifts In consumption associated with preference shifts from those
associated with changes in well-being. He reasoned that changes in well-
being cause movements along an expansion path for consumption of goods
and leisure. The slope of the expansion path is revealed by the changes In
the two variables broht about by changes in military spending. Then
random shifts In preferences cause the two variables to depart from the
expansion path. In other words, the residuals in the estimated
consumption-work effort relation are a measure of the stochastic
component of consumption associated with preference shifts. He found that
the residuals are a dominant source of fluctuations in consumption itself,
and account for an important but not dominant fraction of fluctuations in
total GNP. The only support In the work for the Euler equation approach
is that the random shifts are at least approximately a random walk.



Conclusions


    It is reasonably well established that the simple conclusion from the
rational expectations permanent Income model with constant expected real
interest rate is Inconsistent with the data: The rate of change of
consumption can be predicted by past values of real income and past
values of a number of financial variables. Much of the recent literature
on the macroeconomics of consumption can be seen as attempts to explain
this finding.
    Durable goods and the durability of consumption seem to explain the
finding reasonably well. Hayashi's model with durable consumption leaves


                              29
only a small role for liquidity constraints, and Mankiw's and Bemanke's
models with durable goods accept the hypothesis of no explanatory
power from lagged income.
   Liqwdlty canstruiris can also explain the finding in a reasonably
convincing way. Not only is the predictive power of income rationalized
by only a modest incidence of liquidity constraints, but ancillary tests give
reasonable results as well—for example, the predictive power of lagged
income is concentrated among houselxilds with few liquid assets, according
to Runkle and Zeldes, and unemployment displaces income as a predictor,
according to Flavin. However, a model combining liquidity constraints and
durable goods assigns all of the explanation for the predlcitve power of
lagged income to durability and none to liquidity constraints, according to
Bemanke.
   Intertemporczl substztuticn does not seem to be an important part of the
explanation of the predictive power of lagged income and other variables.
It is a controversy whether the lntertemporal elasticity of substitution is
large enough to make changes in expected interest rates an important
factor in fluctuations in consumption growth. However, no author has been
to show that the predictive power of other variables disappears when
intertemporal substitution Is considered.




                               30
References

Ando, Albert and Modigliani, Franco. "The Life—Cycle Hypothesis
     of Saving; Aggregate Implications and Tests". American
     Economic Review, v. 53, pp. 55—84, 1963.
Altonji, Joseph, and Aloysius Siow, "Testing the Response of
     Consumption to Income Changes with (Noisy) Panel Data"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 102 (1987):293—328.
Bar—hart, Avner, and Blinder, Alan S. "The Life—Cycle
     Permanent—Income Model and Consumer Durables" Working Paper
     2149, National Bureau of Economic Research, February 1987
Bean, Charles, "The Estimation of 'Surprise' Models and the
     'Surprise' Consumption Function," Review of Economic
     Studies, Vol. 53, (1986):497—516.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, "Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation of
     Theory and Evidence," forthcoming in the NBER Macroeconomics
     Annual, 1987
Bernanke, Ben S. "Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Expenditure on
     Automobiles: Evidence from Panel Data" Quarterly Journal
     of Economics. Vol. 99. No. 3. (August 1984):587—614.

_______________ "Adjustment Costs, Durables, and Aggregate
     Consumption" Journal of Monetary Economics. Vol. 15
     (January 1985) :41—68.

Boskin, Michael J. "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest"
     Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 86. No. 2.
     (l978):S3S27.
Breeden, Douglas T. "Changing Consumption and Investment
     Opportunities and the Valuation of Securities". Ph.D.
     Dissertation. Stanford Graduate School of Business.
     December 1977.

______________, "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with
     Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities".
     Journal of Financial Economics. Vol. 7 (1979):265—296.
_____________   "Consumption, Production and Interest Rates:
     A Synthesis". Unpublished Paper. February 1983.
Browning, Martin, "Eating, Drinking, Smoking, and Testing the
     Life—cycle Hypothesis," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
     102, 329—345 (1987).
_____________ "The Intertemporal Allocation of Expenditure of
     Non—Durables, Services, and Durables," McMaster University,
     August 1986a
_____________  "Testing Intertemporal Separability in Models of
     Household Behaviour," McMaster University, August 1986b

______________ "A Non—Parametric Test of the Life—Cycle Rational
     Expectations Hypothesis," McMaster University, September
     1986c
Campbell, John Y. "Does Saving Anticipate Declining Labor Income?
     An Alternative Test of the Permanent Income Hypothesis"
     Princeton University, August 1986
_____________, and Richard H. Clarida, "Household Saving and
     Permanent Income in Canada and the United Kingdom," 1986
Campbell, John Y., and Angus Deaton, "Is Consumption Too Smooth?"
     Working Paper 2134, National Bureau of Economic Research,
     January 1987
Chang, Fwu—Rang, "A Theory of the Consumption Function with Wage
     Fluctuations," Indiana University, January 1987
Christiano, Lawrence J., "Is Consumption Insufficiently Sensitive
     to Innovations in Income?" Working Paper 333, Research
     Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, January
     1987

______________, "The Effects of Aggregation over Time on Tests of
     the Representative Agent Model of Consumption," University
     of Chicago and Carnegie—Mellon University, December 1984

_____________, Martin Eichenbaum, and David Marshall, "The
     Permanent Income Hypothesis Revisited," Working Paper 335,
     Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
     January 1987
Cuddington, John T. "Canadian Evidence on the Permanent Income —
     Rational Expectations Hypothesis", Canadian Journal of
     Economics. Vol. 15. No. 2 (May 1982):331—335.
Cuddington, John T. and Hurd, Michael D. "Valid Statistical Tests
     of the Permanent Income — Rational Expectations Hypothesis".
     Unpublished paper. December 1981.
Daly, Vince and Hadjimatheou, George. "Stochastic Implications
     of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income Hypothesis: Evidence for
     the U.K. Economy". Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 89.
     No. 3. (June 1981):596—599.
Darby, Michael R. "The Allocation of Transitory Income Among
     Consumers' Assets". American Economic Review. Vol. 62
     No. 4.(December 1972):928—941.
Deaton, Angus "Life—Cycle Models of Consumption: Is the Evidence
      Consistent with the Theory?" N.B.E.R. Working Paper No.
      1910. April 1986.

 Eichenbaum, Martin S., Lars Peter Hansen, and Kenneth J.
      Singleton, "A Time Series Analysis of Representative Agent
      Models of Consumption and Leisure Choice under Uncertainty,"
      Working Paper 1981, National Bureau of Economic Research,
      July 1986
Evans, Owen. "The Life Cycle Inheritance: Theoretical and
     Empirical Essays on the Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving".
     Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Pennsylvania. 1982.
Ferson, Wayne. "Consumption, Inflation, and the Term Structure of
     Interest Rates". Unpublished paper. October 1980.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Merrick, John J. Jr. "Nonstationarity and
     Stage—of—the_Business_Cycle Effects in Consumption—Based
     Asset Pricing Relations". Journal of Financial Economics,
     forthcoming
Flavin, Marjorie A. "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing
     Expectations about Future Income". Journal of Political
     Economy. Vol. 89, No. 5 (October, 1981): 102—1037.
Flavin, Marjorie A. "Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Current
     Income: Liquidity Constraints or Myopia?" Canadian Journal
     of Economics, Vol. 18, pp. 117—136, February 1985
Friedman, Milton "The Role of Monetary Policy", American Economic
     Review, Vol. 58, pp. 1—17, 1968.
Garber, Peter   and King, Robert. "Deep Structural Excavation? A
     Critique   of Euler Equation Methods". Presented at N.B.E.R.
     Research   Program on Economic Fluctuations Macro Conference.
     July 13,   1984.

Goodfriend, Marvin, "Information—Aggregtion Bias: The Case of
     Consumption," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and
     University of Rochester, October 1986
Grossman, Sanford J. and Shiller, Robert J. "The Determinants of
     the Variability of Stock Market Prices". American Economic
     Review. Vol. 71. No. 2 (May 1982a):222—227.

_____________ and _____________, "Consumption Correlatedness and
      Risk Measurement in Economies with Non—Traded Assets, and
     Heterogeneous Information". Journal of Financial Economics.
     Vol. 10. No. 2 (July 1982b):l95—210.

Grossman, Sanford J.; Melino, Angelo, and Shiller, Robert J.
     "Estimating the Continuous Time Consumption Based Asset
     Pricing Model". N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 1643. June
     1985.
Hall, Robert E. "Stochastic Implications of the Life
     Cycle—Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence".
     Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 86, No. 6 (December,
     1978): 91T—987.

_____________ "The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations"
     in Robert J. Gordon, ed. The American Business Cycle:
     Continuity and Change. (CETEago: University of Chicago
     Press), l98Tpp. 237—255.
____________, "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption",
     Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

_____________ and Mishkin, Frederic S. "The Sensitivity of
     Consumption to Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data
     on Households" Econometrica. Vol. 50. No. 2. (March 1982):
     461—481.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Singleton, Kenneth J. "Stochastic
     Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
     Stock Market Returns" Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 91.
     No. 2. (April 1983):249—265.

___________ and _____________ , "Efficient Estimation of Linear
     Asset Pricing Models with Moving Average Errors," University
     of Chicago, Harvard University, and Carnegie—Mellon
     University, November 1986
Hansen, Lars Peter, Richard, Scott F., and Singleton, Kenneth J.
     "Econometric Implications of the Intertemporal Capital Asset
     Pricing Model". Unpublished Paper. November 1981.
Hayashi, Fumio "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and Consumption
     Durability: Analysis based on Japanese Panel Data,"
     Quarterly Journal of _________
                          Economics, Vol. 100, 1083—1113,
     November 1985. —
Hayashi, Fumio "Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical
     Survey and Some New Observations" in Truman Bewley (ed.)
     Advances in Econometrics, Fifth World Congress, Cambridge
     University Press, forthcoming
Jacobson, Robert. "Testing the Implications of the Life Cycle—
     Permanent Income Hypothesis". Unpublished paper. August
     1981.

Johnson, Paul. "Life—Cycle Consumption Under Rational
     Expectations: Some Australian Evidence". Unpublished paper.
Kormendi, Roger C. and Laura LaHaye, "Cross—Regime Tests of the
     Permanent Income Hypothesis," Working Paper, University of
     Michigan, 1986
 Lucas, Robert E. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique" in
      Carnegie—Rochester Series on Public Policy, eds. Karl
      Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, Vol. 1. Amsterdam:
      North—Holland Publishing Co. (1976).
 MaCurdy, Thomas E., "Modeling the Time Series Implications of
      Life—cycle Theory," Stanford University, February 1987
 Mankiw, Gregory N. "Hall's Consumption Hypothesis and Durable
      Goods" Journal of Monetary Economics. Vol. 10. No. 3.
      (1982) :417—425.

_____________  "Consumer Durab].es and the Real Interest Rate"
     The Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 67. No. 3
     TXiigust 1983T:353—362.

              Rotemberg, Julio and Summers, Lawrence.
     "Intertemporal Substitution in Macroeconomics". Quarterly
     Journal of Economics. Vol. 100. No. 1. (February 1985):
     225—251.

____________ and Shapiro, Matthew D. "Risk and Return:
     Consumption Beta Versus Market Beta". Cowles Foundation
     Discussion Paper No. 738. January 4, 1985.
____________ and ____________, "Trends, Random Walks, and Tests
     of the Permanent Income Hypothesis". Journal of Monetary
     Economics. Vol. 16. No. 2.(September 1985):163174.

Marsh, Terry A. "On Euler—Equation Restrictions on the Temporal
     Behavior of Asset Returns". Working Paper #1619—84. Alfred
     P. Sloan School of Management. December 1984.
Miron, Jeffrey A., "Seasonal Fluctuations and the Life
     Cycle—Permanent Income Model of Consumption," Journal of
     Political Economy, vol. 94, pp. 1258—1279, December 19
Mork, Knut A. and V. Kerry Smith, "Another Test of the Life—Cycle
     Hypothesis, but with Much Improved Panel Data," Vanderbilt
     University, November 1986
Muellbauer, John, "Surprises in the Consumption Function,"
     Economic Journal, vol. 93 supplement, pp. 34—40, 1983
_____________ and Olympia Bover, "Liquidity Constraints and
     Aggregation in the Consumption Function under Uncertainty,"
     Oxford Institute of Economics and Statistics, Discussion
     Paper 12, 1986
Muth, John, "Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted
     Forecasts," Journal of the American Statistical Association.
     Vol. 55, 299—306, 19.
Nelson, Charles R. "A Reappraisal of Recent Tests of the
     Permanent Income Hypothesis". Journal of Political Economy,
     forthcoming, August 1987
Rubinstein, Mark. "The strong Case for the Generalized
     Logarithmic Utility Model as the Premier Model of Financial
     l976):55l—57I
                            —
     Markets". The Journal of Finance.
                               ________ Vol. 31. No. 2. (May

Runkle, David "Liquidity Constraints and the Permanent Income
     Hypothesis: Evidence from Panel Data". Unpublished paper.
     1983.

Sargent, Thomas J. "Rational Expectations, Econometric
     Exogeneity, and Consumption". Journal of Political Economy.
     Vol. 86. No. 4. (August 1978):673—700.
Sargent, Thomas 3. and Hansen, Lars P. "Formulating and
     Estimating Dynamic Linear Rational Expectations Models" in
     Rational Expectations and Econometric Practice. Ed. Robert
     Lucas and Thomas Sargent, Vol. 1, 91—125. Minneapolis:
     University of Minnesota Press. (1981).
Selden, Larry "A New Representation of Preferences over 'Certain
     X Uncertain' Consumption Pairs: The 'Ordinal Certainty
     Equivalent' Hypothesis," Econometrica. Vol. 46. (September
     1978) : 1045—1060.

Shiller, Robert J. "Consumption, Asset Markets and Macroeconomic
     Fluctuations". Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on
     Public Policy. Vol. 17 (Autumn 1982):203—238.
Sims, Christopher, Stock, James H., and Watson, Mark W.
     "Inference in Linear Time Series Models with Some Unit
     Roots". Hoover Working Papers in Economics E—87—l.
     Stanford: Hoover Institution. 1987.
Stock, James H. and Kenneth D. West, "Integrated Regressors and
     Tests of the Permanent Income Hypothesis," Harvard
     University, Princeton University, Stanford University, and
     the NBER, February 1987
Summers, Lawrence "Tax Policy, the Rate of Return, and Savings".
     NBER Working Paper 995. September 1982.
West, Kenneth D., "The Insensitivity of Consumption to News about
     Income," Princeton University, December 1986
Working, Holbrook "Note on the Correlation of First Differences
     of Averages in a Random Chain". Econometrica. 28, 916—918,
     1960.

Zeldes, Stephen "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An
     Empirical Investigation" Rodney L. White Center for
     Financial Research Paper No. 24—85. November 1985.
_________ "Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income:
Deviations from Certainty Equivalence," University of
 Pennsylvania, 1986
