                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     UNDEREMPLOYMENT IN THE EARLY CAREERS OF COLLEGE GRADUATES
                 FOLLOWING THE GREAT RECESSION

                                        Jaison R. Abel
                                        Richard Deitz

                                     Working Paper 22654
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22654


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




Prepared for NBER/CRIW conference on “Education, Skills, and Technical Change: Implications
for Future U.S. GDP Growth.” We thank Chuck Hulten, Valerie Ramey, Till von Wachter, and
the CRIW participants for helpful comments. The views and opinions expressed here are solely
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jaison R. Abel and Richard Deitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Underemployment in the Early Careers of College Graduates Following the Great Recession
Jaison R. Abel and Richard Deitz
NBER Working Paper No. 22654
September 2016
JEL No. I23,J23,J24,J62

                                         ABSTRACT

Though labor market conditions steadily improved following the Great Recession,
underemployment among recent college graduates continued to climb, reaching highs not seen
since the early 1990s. In this paper, we take a closer look at the jobs held by underemployed
college graduates in the early stages of their careers during the first few years after the Great
Recession. Contrary to popular perception, we show that relatively few recent graduates were
working in low-skilled service jobs, and that many of the underemployed worked in fairly well
paid non-college jobs requiring some degree of knowledge and skill. We also find that the
likelihood of being underemployed was lower for those with more quantitatively oriented and
occupation-specific majors than it was for those with degrees in general fields. Moreover, our
analysis suggests that underemployment is a temporary phase for many recent college graduates
as they transition to better jobs after spending some time in the labor market, particularly those
who start their careers in low-skilled service jobs.


Jaison R. Abel
Research and Statistics Group
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
jaison.abel@ny.frb.org

Richard Deitz
Research and Statistics Group
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
richard.deitz@ny.frb.org
                      “Welcome to the Well-Educated Barista Economy”
                                           --The Wall Street Journal, April 2014



I.       INTRODUCTION

         The image of a young newly minted college graduate working behind the counter

of a hip coffee shop has become a hallmark of the plight of college graduates following

the Great Recession. Indeed, although economic conditions steadily improved through

the recovery, significant slack remained in the labor market, and many recent graduates

were not finding jobs commensurate with their education. The underemployment rate for

recent college graduates—that is, the share working in jobs that typically do not require a

college degree—continued to climb for several years following the Great Recession,

topping out at nearly 50 percent, a level not seen since the early 1990s.

         While underemployment among recent college graduates has attracted wide

attention in the media and among policymakers, very little is actually known about the

nature of college underemployment or what seems to make some college graduates more

prone to being underemployed than others. 1 In this paper, we examine the plight of

college graduates in the aftermath of the Great Recession. We examine in detail the types

of jobs underemployed college graduates hold, and explore some of the factors associated

with a greater likelihood of being underemployed.




1
     For example, a 2012 Associated Press article with the headline “Half of New Grads are Jobless or
     Underemployed,” reignited an intense debate about the value of a college degree. Headlines such as
     “College Grads May Be Stuck in Low-Skill Jobs,” (WSJ, 2013) and “Welcome to the Well-Educated
     Barista Economy,” (WSJ, 2014) became commonplace after the Great Recession.



                                                   1
       We conclude that while there is some truth behind the popular image of the

college-educated barista, this picture is not an accurate portrayal of the typical

underemployed recent college graduate. Contrary to popular perception, we show that

only a small fraction of recent graduates worked in a low-skilled service job following

the Great Recession. Instead, we find that underemployed recent graduates held a wide

range of jobs, and while most are clearly not equivalent to jobs that require a college

degree, some are fairly skilled and well paid. In addition, we find that underemployed

college graduates were more likely to be working in these higher paying non-college jobs

than similarly aged young workers without a college degree. Still, we find that roughly 9

percent of recent graduates—or about one-fifth of the underemployed—start their careers

working in a low-skilled service job.

       We then explore the characteristics of underemployed recent college graduates,

and examine correlates associated with being underemployed or working in a low-skilled

service job. We find that men are more likely to be underemployed than women, though a

larger share of underemployed men work in the highest-paying non-college jobs. Further,

we show that underemployment is far more likely for recent graduates with some college

majors compared to others. For example, those with majors in Liberal Arts or General

Business are two to three times more likely to be underemployed than those with

Engineering or Nursing majors. The patterns we uncover suggest that those recent

graduates who major in more quantitatively oriented and occupation-specific fields tend

to have much lower underemployment than those with majors that are more general.

Finally, our analysis suggests that underemployment is a temporary phase for a good

number of recent graduates, particularly among those who start their careers working in a




                                           2
low-skilled service job, as many transition to better jobs after spending a few years in the

labor market.

       Though underemployment appears to have become increasingly prevalent in the

labor market, particularly among college graduates, only a small body of research on the

subject currently exists. Much of this research focuses on underemployment among re-

employed workers following layoffs, or those who work in part-time or temporary

positions (see, e.g., Feldman, 1996 and McKee-Ryan and Harvey, 2011). In addition,

much of the existing underemployment literature emphasizes the emotional and

psychological effects of underemployment, rather than its economic consequences. An

early exception is Feldman and Turnley (1995), who study underemployment among a

small sample of recent college graduates with business degrees, and more recently, Abel,

Deitz, and Su (2014) provide some historical context by examining underemployment

among recent college graduates over the past few decades. Our work builds on this small

body of research by providing a more detailed analysis of the types of jobs held by

underemployed graduates in the early stages of their careers, and by identifying the

factors that make some graduates more prone to underemployment than others.

       One strand of the literature that is closely related to underemployment examines

over-education in the labor market (see, e.g., Hersch, 1991; Chevalier, 2003; Chevalier

and Lindley, 2009; and Green and Zhu, 2010). However, unlike our work, this research

typically relies on self-reported measures of whether there is a match between a worker’s

education and job to assess the extent and economic effects of over-education.

       Our work is also related to a small but growing literature documenting the

economic consequences of graduating from college during recessions (see, e.g., Kahn,




                                             3
2010; Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz, 2012; and Altonji, Kahn, and Speer, 2016).

This research indicates that adverse labor market conditions in the early careers of

college graduates can have significant long-term effects on earnings, and shows that these

negative effects differ greatly by college major and ability. These studies generally do not

directly examine the types of jobs graduates obtain in the early stages of their careers.

However, differences in the quality of the initial placement of graduates with more

challenging college majors or higher ability is believed to be an important contributor to

differences in longer-term employment outcomes. Our work provides some support for

this explanation by documenting that recent graduates with college majors that provide

technical training and quantitative skills are far less likely to be underemployed in the

early stages of their careers than those with majors that tend to be less quantitative in

nature.

          Indeed, the role of college major in finding a good job has become of

considerable interest in recent years given the weak labor market following the Great

Recession. Recent research has documented significant heterogeneity in the labor market

outcomes of college graduates with different majors (see, e.g., Altonji, Blom, and

Meghir, 2012 and Altonji, Kahn, and Speer, 2014, 2016), and information on labor

market outcomes by major has been shown to influence the choices students make while

in college (see, e.g., Betts, 1996; Zafar, 2013; and Wiswal and Zafar, 2015a, 2015b). Our

work adds to this body of research by providing new information about how one’s

college major is associated with an understudied labor market outcome—the likelihood

of being underemployed upon graduation. Further, we are able to examine labor market

outcomes for a more detailed set of college majors than has previously been studied.




                                             4
II.       THE LABOR MARKET FOR COLLEGE GRADUATES FOLLOWING THE
          GREAT RECESSION

          The Great Recession was the deepest downturn experienced in the United States

in the postwar era, and its effects on the labor market were swift and severe. Though

labor market conditions started to improve in early 2010, the recovery that followed was

slow and uneven, resulting in a large amount of slack that persisted for an extended

period of time (see, e.g., Elsby et al., 2010, 2011 and Şahin et al., 2014). Those unlucky

college graduates who started their careers in the aftermath of the Great Recession

struggled to find jobs, let alone jobs that utilized their degrees. Much of this difficulty can

be traced to relatively weak labor demand for college graduates during the recovery.

A.        Unemployment Among College Graduates

          Though college graduates generally weathered the economic storm better than

those without a degree, they were not immune from its effects. As Figure 1 shows,

unemployment rose sharply during the Great Recession and continued to climb in the

early stages of the recovery to levels not seen in decades. Figure 1 also shows the

unemployment rate for recent college graduates. For the purposes of our analysis, we

define recent college graduates as those with at least a bachelor’s degree who are 22 to 27

years old. We select this group to capture college graduates within their first five years

after graduation who are at the beginning of their careers. 2




2
      The typical age at which people earn a bachelor’s degree in the United States is 22. While some
      graduates receive their degree at ages beyond their early twenties, data limitations do not allow us to
      identify these older graduates. We exclude those in the military and individuals enrolled in school,
      whether full-time or part-time, to avoid confusion about whether someone’s employment status is
      influenced by whether they are attending school.




                                                      5
         Unemployment among recent college graduates, who are often more susceptible

to cyclical changes in the labor market than college graduates as a whole, doubled from

about 3.5 percent before the recession to a peak of more than 7 percent in 2011.

However, unemployment among recent college graduates began to fall in late 2011, and

generally continued to trend down thereafter. Even with this progress, unemployment

among recent college graduates fell less steeply than for college graduates as a whole,

underlying the more negative effects of labor market conditions for recent graduates

compared to their more seasoned counterparts.

B.       Underemployment Among College Graduates

         While the unemployment rate has declined, such a statistic reveals only part of the

story about the plight of recent college graduates following the Great Recession. Indeed,

the weak labor market prompted widespread concern that recent graduates were

underemployed—that is, working in jobs that typically do not require a college degree

(see, e.g., Fogg and Harrington, 2011; Yen, 2012; and Vedder, Denhart, and Robe, 2013).

         We measure the underemployment rate as the share of employed college

graduates working in jobs that do not require a college degree. To distinguish between

college jobs and non-college jobs, we rely on the Department of Labor’s O*NET

database. 3 O*NET contains occupation-level data for hundreds of occupations collected

via interviews of incumbent workers and input from professional occupational analysts

on a wide array of job-related requirements. We use the following question from the

O*NET Education and Training Questionnaire to determine whether an occupation


3
     We use O*NET Version 18.1 for our analysis, see http://www.onetcenter.org/ for more information.
     The O*NET database is discussed in detail by Peterson et al. (2001).



                                                  6
requires a college degree: “If someone were being hired to perform this job, indicate the

level of education that would be required?” (emphasis added). Respondents then select

from twelve detailed education levels, ranging from less than a high school diploma to

post-doctoral training. We consider a college education to be a requirement for a given

occupation if more than 50 percent of the respondents working in that occupation

indicated that at least a bachelor’s degree was necessary to perform the job. 4

        We show the underemployment rate in Figure 2 for both recent college graduates

and college graduates as a whole. The underemployment rate for recent college graduates

consistently holds well above the rate for all college graduates, which has hovered at

around one-third for at least the past 25 years, reflecting the challenges faced by newly

minted graduates as they enter the labor market. Focusing on the period following the

Great Recession, apart from a brief dip in early 2011, the underemployment rate for

recent college graduates continued to climb well into 2014, rising to more than 46

percent, a level not seen since the early 1990s. This divergence between falling

unemployment and rising underemployment among recent college graduates between

mid-2011 and mid-2014 suggests that more graduates were finding jobs during this time,

just not necessarily good ones.

        Of note, underemployment is not a new phenomenon facing young graduates in

recent years. Indeed, underemployment among recent college graduates was on an

upward trend for several years before the Great Recession. While there appears to be a

cyclical component to underemployment among recent college graduates, the broader V-

4
    We selected this threshold because it indicates that the majority of respondents believe that at least a
    bachelor’s degree is required to perform a given job. In practice, however, few occupations are
    clustered around the 50 percent threshold. For most occupations, respondents either overwhelmingly
    believe that a bachelor’s degree is required for the job or not.



                                                     7
shaped pattern in the underemployment rate over the past 25 years is also consistent with

recent research by Beaudry, Green, and Sand (2014, 2016) arguing that there has been a

reversal in the demand for cognitive skills since 2000. According to this research,

businesses ramped up their hiring of college-educated workers in an effort to adapt to the

technological changes occurring during the 1990s. However, as the information

technology revolution reached maturity, demand for cognitive skill fell accordingly. As a

result, during the first decade of the 2000s, many college graduates were forced to move

down the job ladder to take jobs typically performed by lower-skilled workers. From this

perspective, the relatively low underemployment rates among recent college graduates at

the peak of the technology boom around 2000 may in fact be an outlier, while the rise in

underemployment since then represents a return to more typical conditions.

C.       The Demand for College Graduates After the Great Recession

         To gain a better understanding of what is behind recent patterns in both

unemployment and underemployment among college graduates, we measure the

availability of college jobs and non-college jobs around the Great Recession. We use data

on online job postings from The Conference Board’s Help Wanted OnLine (HWOL)

database, which provides information on the full universe of online job postings during

this period and serves as a comprehensive measure of labor demand. 5 We use monthly

data measuring total advertised job postings. Importantly, for our purposes, the HWOL

database assigns a detailed occupation code to each advertised posting. We use these

5
     Advertised job vacancies are collected from more than 16,000 online job boards, including corporate
     job boards, and efforts are made to remove duplicate postings. See https://www.conference-
     board.org/data/helpwantedonline.cfm for more information on the HWOL database. Because the
     earliest available HWOL data start in 2005, we are not able to examine the extent to which the demand
     for college graduates started to decline around 2000, as suggested by Beaudry, Green, and Sand (2014,
     2016).



                                                    8
occupation codes to distinguish between college jobs and non-college jobs using the

O*NET classification defined previously.

       The trend in job postings for both types of jobs is shown in Figure 3. Although

postings for college jobs and non-college jobs rebounded at roughly the same pace

immediately following the Great Recession, by 2011 the demand for college graduates

began to fall behind. In fact, postings for college jobs leveled off around 2013, and even

declined slightly through mid-2014, while postings for non-college jobs continued to rise

at a fairly steady clip throughout the recovery.

       The steady growth of non-college jobs, coupled with the relatively soft demand

for college graduates during this three-year period, appears to have forced many recent

college graduates to take jobs not commensurate with their education. With the demand

for college graduates rising again beginning in mid-2014, underemployment also started

to come down. However, even with this modest improvement, 44.6 percent of college

graduates—nearly one in two—found themselves underemployed in the early stages of

their careers following the Great Recession. However, these data reveal little about the

types of jobs these underemployed workers were performing.

III.   ARE ALL UNDEREMPLOYED COLLEGE GRADUATES WORKING AS
       BARISTAS?

       To provide a deeper understanding of the types of jobs held by underemployed

recent college graduates in the years following the Great Recession, we turn to the

American Community Survey (ACS), a nationally representative one percent sample of

the population conducted on an annual basis (Ruggles et al., 2015). These data include a

variety of detailed economic and demographic information for individuals, including a




                                              9
person’s occupation, wage, and education. We pool annual data for the years 2009 to

2013, leaving us with a roughly 5 percent random sample of the U.S. population.

         Our sample of recent college graduates contains nearly 180,000 observations

representing more than 20 million individuals during the 2009 to 2013 period. For

comparison purposes, we also construct a parallel sample of young workers aged 22 to 27

without a college degree. This sample contains roughly 346,000 observations

representing about 44 million individuals over this same period. Because men and

women may choose different career paths or have different experiences in the labor

market, we perform all of our analyses overall and separately by gender.

A.       Types of Jobs Held by Underemployed College Graduates

         What types of jobs are underemployed recent graduates performing, and how

common is it for such workers to be stuck in a low paying job, such as a coffee house

barista? To address these questions, we create ten underemployed occupation categories

from the hundreds of detailed occupation codes identified in the data. In forming these

occupation categories, we attempted to create groups with a reasonably comparable set of

knowledge and skill requirements based on the nature of the work performed. In some

cases, we also used average wages earned in these detailed occupations to assign them to

these categories. Table 1 displays these groupings together with the average wage paid to

all workers in each group, not just recent college graduates. 6




6
     We focus on the average wages of all workers in these occupation categories to give a general sense
     about the relative differences in skill levels across the categories we create. While recent college
     graduates tend to earn less than these figures, largely because such workers are in the early stages of
     their careers, the pattern for recent graduates is similar to that for all workers.



                                                    10
       These occupation categories fall into six tiers based on how well jobs in each

group tend to pay. The first tier contains two groups of relatively high paying jobs, where

workers on average earn more than $55,000 per year. The highest-paying occupation

category, Information Processing and Business Support, tends to emphasize cognitive

skills, and workers in these jobs typically work with technology, use or produce

information in their jobs, and often play a supporting role to others within their line of

business. Examples of the kinds of jobs included in this category are human resource

workers, computer support specialists, web developers, computer network architects, and

paralegals. The next highest paying category is Managers and Supervisors, which

includes workers who have direct oversight of other employees within their organization,

and are often responsible for managing part of a business. Some decision making is

typically required in these types of jobs, but such decisions are often fairly limited in

scope. Examples of jobs that fall within this category include first-line supervisors of

various types of workers (e.g., retail sales, administrative support, and production) and

food service managers.

       The second tier of underemployed occupation categories tend to pay between

$50,000 and $55,000 per year, and includes Public Safety and Sales jobs. Jobs in the

Public Safety category emphasize a combination of physical and cognitive skills, and

workers in these types of jobs tend to protect and serve the public. Examples of the kinds

jobs included in this category are police officers, detectives, security guards, and

firefighters. Jobs in the Sales category tend to require strong interpersonal skills and the

ability to interact with customers. Workers in these jobs are responsible for selling a wide

array of goods and services, ranging from physical products found on the shelves of retail




                                            11
stores to insurance policies and real estate. Examples of the kinds of jobs included in this

category are sales representatives, insurance agents, real estate brokers, as well as retail

salespersons. 7

        The third tier of underemployed occupations pays, on average, around $48,000,

and includes Arts and Entertainment and Skilled Trades. Workers in these jobs are often

highly skilled, but these are not the types of skills typically developed by earning a

college degree. Examples of the types of jobs captured in this tier include professional

athletes, musicians, actors, and dancers, as well as electricians, machine repairers,

plumbers, and welders.

        The fourth tier has average annual earnings ranging between $35,000 and

$40,000. This tier includes two groups. First, Office and Administrative Support, which

tends to emphasize clerical knowledge, oral and written communication skills, and basic

proficiency with computers. While some cognitive skills are required, the demands are

typically below what is required of workers in Information Processing and Business

Support jobs. Examples of jobs in this category include secretaries, customer service

representatives, and office clerks. Second, this tier includes Healthcare Technicians and

Assistants. Workers in these jobs provide care for others, but typically in a role that

supports a healthcare practitioner. Many of these jobs require an associate’s degree or

some other type of training certificate. Examples of the jobs in this category are medical

assistants, nursing aides, diagnostic technicians, and dental hygienists.




7
    While retail sales jobs might be viewed as similar to low-skilled service jobs, retail sales jobs tend to
    require more skill, particularly in the areas of communication and persuasion, and pay significantly
    higher wages, even for young college graduates.



                                                    12
        The fifth tier consists of Physical Laborers. Jobs in this category tend to

emphasize the physical dimension of a worker’s skill set, such as strength, agility, and

dexterity. Examples of jobs in this category include construction laborers, truck drivers,

roofers, and highway maintenance workers.

        Finally, the lowest-paying tier consists of Low-Skilled Service jobs, which tend to

pay around minimum wage. 8 These are the types of jobs that, rightly or wrongly, have

become the poster child for underemployed young college graduates in recent years.

Examples of the kinds of jobs found in this category are waiters and waitresses, cashiers,

bartenders, cooks, and, yes, baristas.

        While demand in the non-college segment of the labor market doubled in the

years following the Great Recession, this growth was not merely in low-paying jobs. We

turn back to the HWOL database to provide estimates of the number and growth of

monthly job postings for each of the occupation categories identified above between 2009

and 2013, also shown in Table 1. The Managers and Supervisors category had the largest

number of job postings after the Great Recession, followed closely by Office and

Administrative Support. The two lowest-paying categories, Physical Laborers and Low-

Skilled Service, saw large increases in demand, as did Skilled Trades and Managers and

Supervisors. These figures suggest that while many low-skilled service jobs were

available during this time, there were plenty of opportunities in jobs that tended to pay

higher wages. Next, we examine which jobs both underemployed college graduates and

those without college degrees took.



8
    Autor and Dorn (2013) demonstrate that growth in these types of jobs has been strong in recent
    decades, which has contributed to the polarization of the U.S. workforce.



                                               13
B.       What Jobs Did Underemployed Graduates Take?

         Table 2 shows the share of underemployed recent college graduates across the ten

occupation categories in the years following the Great Recession. Contrary to popular

perception, most underemployed recent college graduates were not working in low-

skilled service jobs. Indeed, nearly half were working in relatively high-paying jobs, with

more than 10 percent each working in the Information Processing and Business Support,

Managers and Supervisors, and Sales categories. At 25 percent, the largest share of

underemployed workers were employed in the Office and Administrative Support

category. While these jobs may not be as desirable as the typical college job, which pays

around $78,500 annually, they are significantly better than low-skilled service jobs. That

said, about one-fifth of underemployed recent college graduates—roughly 9 percent of all

recent graduates—were working in a low-skilled service job. 9

         Comparing the distribution of underemployed college graduates to young workers

of the same age without a college degree yields some important insights about the value

of a college degree for underemployed workers. Those with a college degree were much

more likely to be working in higher paying jobs than those without. This pattern is

particularly evident in the highest-paying occupation categories that tend to emphasize

cognitive skills and decision making, such as the Information Processing and Business

Support and Managers and Supervisors categories. While around 40 percent of recent

college graduates were employed in the two highest paid tiers of non-college

occupations, only 18 percent of young workers without degrees held these types of jobs.


9
     As an alternative to the Low-Skilled Service category, we also measured the share of all
     underemployed workers earning around the minimum wage. We estimate this share to be roughly 20 to
     25 percent, comparable to the share working in a low-skilled service job.



                                                  14
By contrast, among those working in these occupational categories, more than half of

young workers without a college degree were working in the low-paying Physical

Laborers and Low-Skilled Service occupation categories, double the share for recent

college graduates. Moreover, though not shown in the table, we also find that

underemployed recent college graduates tend to earn more than similarly aged young

workers without a college degree within each occupation category.

       While the same general patterns hold between the genders, there are some notable

differences, as shown in Table 3. Underemployed men are more likely to be working in

the highest-paying occupation categories, including Information Processing and Business

Support and Managers and Supervisors. The male-female ratio is also particularly large

for jobs in the Public Safety and Skilled Trades categories, both of which tend to

emphasize physical skills. By contrast, underemployed women are much more likely to

be working in Office and Administrative Support jobs, and, to a lesser extent, the

Healthcare Technicians and Assistants category. In terms of the lower-paying categories,

underemployed men are more likely than women to be working in jobs in the Physical

Laborers category, while underemployed women are more likely to be working in jobs in

the Low-Skilled Service category.

IV.    WHICH GRADUATES ARE MORE PRONE TO UNDEREMPLOYMENT?

       We next turn to the question of which recent college graduates are more likely to

be underemployed. We use probit regressions to reveal which characteristics of recent

college graduates are associated with a higher probability of being underemployed, with a

particular focus on college major. Because men and women may choose different career

paths or have different experiences in the labor market, we estimate our regression



                                           15
models using aggregate data and separately by gender. We wish to emphasize that our

models are not meant to imply causation, but rather to uncover some of the correlates to

the likelihood of being underemployed based on the characteristics of workers we are

able to identify in the data we employ.

A.     Estimation Approach

       Because our measures of underemployment are binary variables, we use probit

models to estimate the likelihood of underemployment among recent college graduates.

Specifically, letting UNDERi represent the underemployment of individual i located in

state j during year t, the probability that an individual is working in a job that does not

require a college degree can be expressed as:

       Prob (UNDERi = 1) = Φ (βXi + δMi + φj + φt)                            (1)

where Xi is a vector of individual-level worker characteristics, Mi is a vector of dummy

variables denoting an individual’s college major, φj is a state-level spatial fixed effect, φt

is an annual time fixed effect; and β and δ are parameters to be estimated. Φ (∙) is a

normal cumulative distribution function, and the estimated parameters are chosen to

maximize the sum of the log likelihoods over all observations. We estimate our models

using two different measures for UNDERi, one that broadly includes graduates working

in any non-college job, and a second more narrowly-defined measure of

underemployment for those working in the Low-Skilled Service category.

       Of particular interest for our purposes, the ACS began to include information on

an individual’s undergraduate degree major starting in 2009. Specifically, the ACS

provides information for more than 170 detailed degree major categories. Since many of




                                              16
these detailed majors contain relatively few observations, we collapse this list into 73

majors to preserve large enough sample sizes to obtain meaningful results.

         To explore how differences in worker characteristics, Xi, are related to the

likelihood of underemployment, our probit models include a wide range of individual

level characteristics such as gender, age, marital status, the presence of children, race and

ethnicity, and disability status. 10 In addition, when collecting information about college

major, the ACS allows individuals to list up to two majors. We consider those individuals

who listed two majors as having graduated with a double major, which we control for,

and count the first listed as that person’s college major. As another control, we are also

able to identify recent college graduates who have earned a graduate degree. 11

         Table 4 provides descriptive statistics for the worker characteristics included in

our study for three groups: all recent college graduates, those who are underemployed,

and those working in a low-skilled service job. Interestingly, there are more

underemployed women (55 percent) than men (45 percent). This differential partly

reflects the fact that there are now more women college graduates than men in the overall

population, though men seem to be slightly overrepresented among the underemployed.

By contrast, men are underrepresented among low-skilled service workers. About 20

percent of the underemployed are married, 8 percent have children, 12 percent graduated

with a double major, and 6 percent earned a graduate degree. Proportionally fewer recent




10
     To allow for non-linear effects from gaining experience in the labor market, we follow the convention
     in wage studies and include both age and age-squared in our models.
11
     The ACS indicates whether an individual holds a master’s degree, professional degree, or doctoral
     degree, but does not provide information about the type of graduate degree (e.g., MA, MBA, JD, MD)
     or course of study while in graduate school.



                                                   17
college graduates working in a low-skilled service job were married, had children,

graduated with a double major, or earned a graduate degree.

         To account for differences in local economic conditions across time and space

which may influence the likelihood of being underemployed, we include state-level

spatial fixed effects, φj, and annual time fixed effects, φt, in our models. 12 In all of our

analysis, we report robust standard errors clustered at the state level, which tends to

increase standard errors but does not affect the point estimates themselves.

         Despite our efforts to control for differences in local economic performance and a

wide range of individual worker characteristics, care must be taken when interpreting our

findings. Most significantly, in part, students sort into their chosen field of study based on

their ability to complete the required coursework (see, e.g., Arcidiacono, 2004 and Zafar,

2011, 2013). Thus, not all majors are feasible for every college student, and graduates

with different majors likely differ in other important ways that we are unable to measure,

such as intelligence, perseverance, or motivation. Indeed, recent research has shown that

graduating with a math or science major is more difficult than other fields of study

(Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2014). In addition, our results represent average

outcomes for graduates within each of the 73 college majors we analyze. Thus, by

definition, some individuals within each major will have better or worse outcomes than




12
     For example, Mian and Sufi (2010, 2011) show that the most pronounced effects of the Great
     Recession were concentrated in the ‘Sand States,’ and that the pace of recovery generally differed
     across states. Further, Abel and Deitz (2015) show that local labor market conditions can influence the
     likelihood and quality of the match between an individual’s education and job. We also estimated a
     model using spatial fixed effects at the local labor market area, which we defined as metropolitan areas
     and the rural portion of each state. Results were nearly identical to those reported in the paper, but
     small sample sizes within many local labor markets prevented us from estimating models using
     underemployed graduates working in low-skilled service jobs.



                                                     18
our results suggest. Nonetheless, examining the typical experience within each major can

provide useful insights into the correlates of the likelihood of underemployment.

B.      Estimation Results

        Because of the difficulties associated with interpreting raw coefficient estimates

obtained via probit analysis, we instead present the corresponding average marginal

effects and predicted probabilities obtained from our analysis. As such, our estimates can

be interpreted as the average percentage point change in the probability of either being

underemployed or working in a low-skilled service job. We first describe how the

probability of being underemployed is correlated with the worker characteristics we are

able to identify, and then turn to the role of college major.

        i. Worker Characteristics

        Table 5 presents the average marginal effects associated with the worker

characteristics included in our analysis. Columns (1)-(3) show results using

underemployment in general as the dependent variable, while Columns (4)-(6) show

results using Low-Skilled Service jobs only. Our results show that the likelihood of

college underemployment differs significantly across a wide range of worker

characteristics.

        Regarding gender differences, our analysis indicates that male graduates are 1.2

percentage points more likely to be underemployed in the early stages of their careers

than their female counterparts. Specifically, men have a predicted probability of 45.3

percent compared to 44.1 percent for women—a gap that represents about a 3 percent

difference between these groups. This difference may stem in part from the recent

success women have enjoyed relative to men while in college, but it could also reflect the



                                              19
fact that underemployed men tend to be more represented in the higher-paying non-

college occupation categories, and, therefore may have less incentive to seek a college

job. 13 Indeed, women graduates are 1.1 percentage points (9.1 percent compared to 8.0

percent) more likely to be working in a low-skilled service job than men—a difference of

more than 12 percent. For both men and women, the likelihood of being underemployed

or working in a low-skilled service job declines sharply as workers age from 22 to 27.

         In terms of family considerations, graduates who are married are less likely to be

underemployed (41.5 percent compared to 45.6 percent) or working in a low-skilled

service job (6.6 percent compared to 9.2 percent), and this is particularly true among

married men. In addition, those graduates with children are more likely to be

underemployed (47.4 percent compared to 44.4 percent). Women with children, in

particular, are more likely to be working in a low-skilled service job. One potential

explanation for these findings is that those who are married or without children have a

greater ability to search for better jobs because they have more resources available, or

face fewer constraints, and that these factors reduce the likelihood of being

underemployed. However, more research is needed to disentangle the potentially

complex relationships between gender, family, and the likelihood of underemployment.

         Underemployment following the Great Recession also varied significantly across

racial and ethnic groups. Compared to white graduates, who have a 44.1 percent

likelihood of being underemployed, black and American Indian graduates are 17 percent

more likely to be working in a non-college job, while Asian graduates are 5 percent less

13
     Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko (2006) show that women are now much more likely to enroll in and
     complete college than men, reversing the college gender gap. Fortin, Oreopoulos, and Phipps (2015)
     demonstrate that the relatively strong academic performance of women compared to men in recent
     decades stems, in large part, from being better prepared for and focused on college.



                                                  20
likely. Our estimates also indicate non-white graduates are more likely to be working in

low-skilled service jobs, though these differences are generally not statistically

significant. Moreover, those of Hispanic origin are 10 percent more likely to be

underemployed and 31 percent more likely to be working in a low-skilled service job

than non-Hispanics. Looking across genders, the magnitudes of our estimates pertaining

to race and ethnicity tend to be larger for men than women. These findings are broadly

consistent with other research showing that minorities, particularly black and Hispanic

men, tend to suffer the most during recessions (See, e.g., Elsby et al., 2010, 2011;

Hoynes, Miller, and Schaller, 2012; and Nunley et al., 2015).

       Graduates with a disability are 4.2 percentage points—or 10 percent—more likely

to be underemployed than those who are not, and are 1.4 percentage points—or 16

percent—more likely to be working in a low-skilled service job. In both cases, the

estimated effects are larger for women than for men.

       Graduating with a double major or earning a graduate degree are both associated

with a lower likelihood of being underemployed or working in a low-skilled service job.

Graduates with a double major are 4.6 percentage points less likely to be underemployed

than those with a single major, and are 1.6 percentage points less likely to be working in

a low-skilled service job. Those with a graduate degree are 25.2 percentage points less

likely to be underemployed than those without, and are 5.2 percentage points less likely

to be working in a low-skilled service job. These results are expected as those with two

majors or a graduate degree tend to have built more skills, and especially for those with a

graduate degree, have developed occupation specific skills and training that may allow

them better access to employment opportunities. The reduced likelihood of college




                                            21
underemployment for those with a double major or graduate degree is similar for both

men and women.

         ii. College Major

         The role of college major in finding a good job has become of considerable

interest in recent years given the weak labor market following the Great Recession. While

not all students are willing and able to complete a degree in any major, some choice is

involved, making information about the success of those with certain majors relative to

others of value to students and parents. In Tables 6 and 7, we present the predicted

probabilities of being underemployed or working in a low-skilled service job,

respectively, by college major, holding constant the other variables in our model. Given

the large amount of information contained in these tables and the fact that the patterns do

not appear to differ widely by gender, we also plot the overall predicted probabilities by

college major in Figures 4 and 5. Though there are differences in the rankings of college

majors for each measure of underemployment, five broad themes emerge. 14

         First, it is clear that college major is a significant correlate with the probability of

being underemployed in the early careers of college graduates. While, on average, 44.6

percent of recent graduates work in a non-college job, underemployment rates range from

70 percent for graduates with a Criminal Justice major to 9.5 percent for those with a

Nursing degree. Similarly, while on average, only 8.6 percent of recent college graduates

work in a low-skilled service job, this figure ranges from 23.4 percent for those majoring

in Leisure and Hospitality to 1.7 percent for graduates with a Civil Engineering major.


14
     The Spearman rank correlation of the predicted probabilities of being underemployed and working in a
     low-skilled service job by college major is 0.57.



                                                   22
       Second, graduates with college majors that provide technical training and

quantitative skills are far less likely to be underemployed than those with majors that tend

to be less quantitative in nature. Indeed, for both measures of college underemployment,

graduates with majors in the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics

(STEM) fields tend to have some of the lowest predicted probabilities of working in a

non-college job. In particular, graduates with any type of engineering major generally

fared well in the labor market following the Great Recession. Outside of the traditional

STEM majors, those with majors that are quantitatively oriented, such as Accounting,

Business Analytics, Economics, and Finance, also tend to have relatively low

underemployment rates. By contrast, those with majors in less quantitative subjects such

as English Language, Communications, Ethnic Studies, Art History, or Anthropology

tend to have relatively high rates of underemployment.

       Third, graduates with college majors that provide occupation-specific training

tend to be less likely to be underemployed than those with majors providing a more

general education. For example, occupation-specific majors like education, engineering,

and health-related fields, tended to have much lower rates of underemployment than

those with majors in more general fields such as Liberal Arts, Philosophy, or History.

This pattern also emerges when examining the outcomes of graduates within a specific

academic discipline that may offer both occupation specific majors and majors that are

more general. The business field provides a case in point: those with a more targeted

major, such as Accounting or Finance, tend to have lower underemployment rates than

those with majors that are less directly connected to specific jobs, such as Business

Management or General Business.




                                            23
       Fourth, however, there are some college majors that offer occupation-specific

training that tends to be geared toward jobs that do not typically require a bachelor’s

degree, and graduates with these majors are more likely to be underemployed. For

example, those who major in Criminal Justice may be expecting to take jobs in Public

Safety (such as a police officer or detective) and those with a Fine Arts or Performing

Arts major may be expecting to take jobs in Arts and Entertainment (such as a

photographer or dancer). In addition, those with a Leisure and Hospitality major may be

trained for a number of jobs that do not to require a college degree, such as a restaurant

manager or health and wellness instructor. Further, while those with healthcare-related

degrees generally tend to have relatively low underemployment, those with a Medical

Technicians major, which likely prepares students to take jobs in the Healthcare

Technicians and Assistants category, have relatively high underemployment.

       Finally, graduates with college majors geared toward growing parts of the

economy are generally less likely to be underemployed. Indeed, the health and education

sectors in particular continued to grow through both the downturn and recovery alike,

creating job opportunities for people with skills oriented toward these types of jobs. As

such, the likelihood of underemployment was fairly low for those with healthcare-related

majors, such as Nursing, Pharmacy, and Treatment Therapy. Similarly, those with an

education-related major tend to experience below average underemployment in general,

though such graduates tend to have higher rates of working in low-skilled service jobs,

particularly those who major in Elementary or Early Childhood Education.




                                           24
V.     TRANSITIONING TO BETTER JOBS

       A key finding from our empirical analysis is that to some degree,

underemployment is a temporary phase for many recent graduates as they transition from

school to the labor market. This pattern is particularly evident for those who start their

careers working in a low-skilled service job. Indeed, such adjustment is not merely a new

phenomenon     resulting   from   the   Great    Recession—research     has     shown   that

underemployment typically falls as new graduates spend time in the labor market, and

that this pattern has been occurring for decades (Abel, Deitz, and Su, 2014).

       To illustrate this point, in Figure 6, we use estimates from our probit analysis to

plot the likelihood of being underemployed (top panel) and working in a low-skilled

service job (bottom panel) by age, overall and separately by gender. In both cases, we

identify a strong downward trend in the likelihood of working in a non-college job as

graduates gain more experience in the labor market. At age 22, when fresh out of college,

the likelihood of being underemployed is nearly 50 percent, but this figure falls to around

42 percent by age 27—a 15 percent decline. Not only are women generally less likely to

be underemployed than men at any age, the decline in underemployment is also more

pronounced for women than for men. The transition out of low-skilled service jobs is

even more striking. At age 22, the predicted probability of working in such a job is about

13 percent, but this figure falls to 6.7 percent by age 27—a nearly 50 percent decline. The

likelihood of working in a low-skilled service job declines at a similar pace for men and

women.

       To examine more of the details of this transition, in Table 8 we compare the jobs

held by Younger Recent Graduates (aged 22 to 23 in 2009) to Older Recent Graduates of




                                            25
the same cohort (aged 26 to 27 in 2013). Consistent with our analysis above, a larger

share of graduates worked in college jobs in their mid-twenties (59 percent) compared to

their early twenties (48 percent). In addition, the composition of jobs held by recent

graduates changed within the underemployed occupation categories as these workers

aged. The share employed in the lowest paying Low-Skilled Service group drops by half,

suggesting that these jobs are temporary for a good number of recent graduates: by the

age of 26 or 27, only 6.6 percent are still working in these types of jobs. The other two

groups with the most significant declines include Office and Administrative Support and

Sales. Though we cannot identify which jobs graduates tend to move into since our data

are cross-sectional in nature—that is, workers may be shifting into other non-college jobs

or into college jobs—these figures suggest that many underemployed graduates,

particularly those who start in a low-skilled service job, are able to transition to better

jobs as they gain more experience in the labor market.

       Table 9 presents this same information by gender. In general, these patterns

continue to hold when looking at men and women separately. However, while a larger

share of women transition out of underemployment to college jobs by their late twenties

than men, we find that the share of underemployed graduates working in the high paying

Managers and Supervisors occupation category tends to increase more for men than for

women. This share rose about one and a half percentage points for men, but edged up

only slightly for women. There was also a slight increase in the share of women working

in the highest paid category of Information Processing and Business Support, while men

experienced almost a full percentage point decline.




                                            26
       Nonetheless, while underemployment appears to be a temporary phase for many

recent graduates who are able to transition to better jobs, a large share of college

graduates remain underemployed long after the initial transition into the labor market,

and this was particularly true following the Great Recession. Indeed, even in the best of

economic times, about one-third of all college graduates work in a non-college job. This

figure is fairly stable and does not appear to be particularly responsive to the business

cycle. This suggests that at least some college graduates may simply prefer to work in

such jobs, either because they like the nature of the work involved, or because of

geographic or family considerations, such as taking a lower-skilled job due to a dual

labor market search, or while raising children.

VI.    CONCLUSIONS

       With the Great Recession and weak labor market that followed in its wake, the

prevalence of underemployment among recent college graduates reached highs not seen

since the early 1990s. However, contrary to popular perception, our work reveals that

most of these newly underemployed workers were not forced into low-skilled service

jobs. In fact, many of the jobs such graduates took, while clearly not equivalent to jobs

that require a college degree, appeared to be more oriented toward knowledge and skill

when compared to the distribution of jobs held by young workers without a college

degree. Indeed, our analysis also suggests that underemployment is a temporary phase for

many young graduates when they enter the labor market, as it often takes time for newly

minted graduates to find jobs suited to their education.

       We also find that some college graduates have had much better luck finding a

college-level job than others. In particular, the likelihood of being underemployed is



                                             27
relatively low for those with quantitatively oriented and occupation-specific majors, and

much higher for those with degrees in more general fields. Those with STEM and

healthcare-related majors have done particularly well in recent years.

       These findings raise some interesting questions about the relative supply and

demand for specific skill sets obtained in college, and about the value of some majors

relative to others in today’s economy. While we do not present our findings in the context

of a formal supply and demand model, our work does suggest that certain skills have a

higher demand relative to supply than others—such as those majors related to the STEM

fields and healthcare. Our findings also raise the specter that degrees in some majors,

particularly those that are broad based such as Liberal Arts and General Business, may be

less sought-after than others. Further, graduates with some majors seem to more easily

fall into jobs that typically do not require their degrees, such as Leisure and Hospitality

and Criminal Justice.

       Why are graduates with certain majors faring so poorly upon graduation? Is high

underemployment for those with these particular majors a consequence of the quality of

the students who choose these majors, the quality of the programs and the skills that are

developed (or not developed), or is it that the skills that these majors provide are not as

valuable as others? More research is required to address these challenging questions.

       More generally, today’s high level of underemployment is concerning, and raises

a number of questions about why it has continued to rise for more than a decade despite

ongoing improvement in the labor market. No doubt, the depth of the Great Recession

and the relatively lackluster demand for college graduates through the recovery has been

a contributing factor. However, there are lingering questions about whether this soft




                                            28
demand is a long-term phenomenon, as opposed to cyclical in nature. Indeed, recent

research suggests that structural changes in the economy may have reduced the demand

for college graduates starting as early as 2000 (Beaudry, Green, and Sand, 2014, 2016).

On the supply side, there are questions about whether the quality of students graduating

from college has deteriorated in recent years, with some research suggesting that many

students gain little knowledge or skill from a college education (Arum and Roksa, 2011,

2014). Our work suggests that these questions are complex, particularly since college

graduates with certain skill sets seem to be doing much better in the labor market than

others. Further research into these questions would be particularly valuable.

       While this work provides more detailed information about the nature of

underemployment than has previously been available, it does have its limitations. The

most significant limitation is that we cannot fully account for potential unobserved

heterogeneity across individuals, such as our inability to control for college grades or the

quality of the educational institution attended. In particular, attendance at for-profit

colleges increased dramatically during the Great Recession, which may have altered the

composition of students graduating during the period we study. Further, we do not have

information about innate ability, and so we do not know the value that a college degree is

adding relative to one’s baseline skill, or how ability factors into which college major

people choose. Any of these factors could be contributing to the patterns we observe. In

addition, it would be desirable to follow the same individuals over time to capture

measures of ability and to track career progression. However, we are not able to do so

with the datasets we employ, so we leave these issues for future research. Nonetheless,

we believe this work takes an important step forward by providing a more complete




                                            29
picture of underemployment in the early careers of college graduates following the Great

Recession.




                                          30
REFERENCES

Abel, Jaison R. and Richard Deitz. 2015. “Agglomeration and Job Matching Among
       College Graduates,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 14-24.

Abel, Jaison R., Richard Deitz, and Yaqin Su. 2014. “Are Recent College Graduates
       Finding Good Jobs?” FRBNY Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Vol. 20,
       No. 1, pp. 1-8.

Altonji, Joseph G., Erica Blom, and Costas Meghir. 2012. “Heterogeneity in Human
        Capital Investments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers,”
        Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 4, pp. 185-223.

Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer. 2014. “Trends in Earnings
        Differentials Across College Majors and the Changing Task Composition of
        Jobs,” American Economic Review, Vol. 104, No. 5, pp. 387-393.

Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer. 2016. “Cashier or Consultant?
        Entry Labor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success,” Journal of
        Labor Economics, Vol. 34, No. S1 (Part 2), pp. S361-S401.

Arcidiacono, Peter. 2004. “Ability Sorting and the Returns to College Major,” Journal of
       Econometrics, Vol. 121, No. 1-2, pp. 343-375.

Arum, Richard and Josipa Roksa. 2011. Academically Adrift: Limited Learning on
      College Campuses, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Arum, Richard and Josipa Roksa. 2014. Aspiring Adults Adrift: Tentative Transitions of
      College Graduates, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Autor, David H. and David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the
       Polarization of the US Labor Market,” American Economic Review, Vol. 103, No.
       5, pp. 1553-1597.

Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. 2014. “The Declining Fortunes
      of the Young Since 2000,” American Economic Review, Vol. 104, No. 5, pp. 381-
      386.

Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. 2016. “The Great Reversal in the
      Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 34,
      No. S1 (Part 2), pp. S199-S247.

Betts, Julian R. 1996. “What Do Students Know About Wages?” Journal of Human
        Resources, Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 27-56.

Casselman, Ben. 2013. “College Grads May Be Stuck in Low-Skill Jobs,” The Wall
       Street Journal, March 26.



                                          31
Chevalier, Arnaud. 2003. “Measuring Over-Education,” Economica, Vol. 70, No. 279,
       pp. 509-531.

Chevalier, Arnaud and Joanne Lindley. 2009. “Overeducation and the Skills of UK
       Graduates,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 172, No. 2, pp. 307-337.

Elsby, Michael W., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2010. “The Labor Market in the
       Great Recession,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 1-48.

Elsby, Michael W., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta. 2011. “The
       Labor Market in the Great Recession—An Update to September 2011,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 353-384.

Feldman, Daniel C. 1996. “The Nature, Antecedents and Consequences of
      Underemployment,” Journal of Management, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 385-407.

Feldman, Daniel C. and William H. Turnley. 1995. “Underemployment Among Recent
      Business College Graduates,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 16, No.
      S1, pp. 691-706.

Fogg, Neeta P. 2011. “Rising Mal-Employment and the Great Recession: The Growing
      Disconnection between Recent College Graduates and the College Labor
      Market,” Continuing Higher Education Review, Vol. 75, pp. 51-65.

Fortin, Nicole M., Philip Oreopoulos, and Shelly Phipps. 2015. “Leaving Boys Behind:
        Gender Disparities in High Academic Achievement,” Journal of Human
        Resources, Vol. 50, No. 3, pp. 549-579.

Galston, William A. 2014. “Welcome to the Well-Educated Barista Economy,” The Wall
       Street Journal, April 29.

Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F. Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. “The Homecoming of
       American College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap,” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, Vol. 20, No. 4, pp. 133-156.

Green, Francis and Yu Zhu. 2010. “Overqualification, Job Dissatisfaction, and Increasing
       Dispersion in the Returns to Graduate Education,” Oxford Economic Papers, Vol.
       62, No. 4, pp. 740-763.

Hersch, Joni. 1991. “Education Match and Job Match,” Review of Economics and
       Statistics, Vol. 73, No. 1, pp. 140-144.

Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas L. Miller, and Jessamyn Schaller. 2012. “Who Suffers During
      Recessions?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 26, No. 3, pp. 27-48.

Kahn, Lisa B. 2010. “The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from
      College in a Bad Economy,” Labour Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 303-316.



                                           32
McKee-Ryan, Frances M. and Jaron Harvey. 2011. “‘I Have a Job, But …’: A Review of
     Underemployment,” Journal of Management, Vol. 37, No. 4, pp. 962-996.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2010. “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007 to
      2009,” IMF Economic Review, Vol. 58, pp. 74-117.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2011. “Household Debt and the Weak U.S. Recovery,” Federal
       Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, 2011-02, January, pp. 1-5.

Nunley, John M., Adam Pugh, Nicholas Romero, and R. Alan Seals. 2015. “Racial
      Discrimination in the Labor Market for Recent College Graduates: Evidence from
      a Field Experiment,” The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, Vol. 15,
      No. 3, pp. 1093-1125.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz. 2012. “The Short- and Long-
      Term Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession,” American Economic Journal:
      Applied Economics, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 1-29.

Peterson, Norman, Michael Mumford, Walter Borman, Richard Jeanneret, Edwin
       Fleishman, Kerry Levin, Michael Campion, Melinda Mayfield, Frederick
       Morgeson, Kenneth Pearlman, Marilyn Gowing, Anita Lancaster, Marilyn Silver,
       and Donna Dye. 2001. “Understanding Work Using the Occupational Information
       Network (O*NET): Implications for Practice and Research,” Personnel
       Psychology, Vol. 54, No. 2, pp. 451-492.

Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek.
      2015. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable
      database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

Şahin, Ayşegül, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. “Mismatch
       Unemployment,” American Economic Review, Vol. 104, No. 11, pp. 3529-3564.

Stinebrickner, Ralph and Todd R. Stinebrickner. 2014. “A Major in Science? Initial
       Beliefs and Final Outcomes for College Major and Dropout,” Review of Economic
       Studies, Vol. 81, No. 1, pp. 426-472.

Vedder, Richard, Christopher Denhart, and Jonathan Robe. 2013. “Why Are Recent
      College Graduates Underemployed?” Center for College Affordability and
      Productivity Policy Paper, January.

Wiswall, Matthew and Basit Zafar. 2015a. “Determinants of College Major Choice:
      Identification Using and Information Experiment,” Review of Economic Studies,
      Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 791-824.

Wiswall, Matthew and Basit Zafar. 2015b. “How Do College Students Respond to Public
      Information about Earnings?” Journal of Human Capital, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 117-
      169.



                                        33
Yen, Hope. 2012. “Half of New Grads are Jobless or Underemployed,” Associated Press,
      April 24.

Zafar, Basit. 2011. “How Do College Students Form Expectations?” Journal of Labor
       Economics, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 301-348.

Zafar, Basit. 2013. “College Major Choice and the Gender Gap,” Journal of Human
       Resources, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 545-595.




                                        34
Table 1: Occupation Categories of Underemployed College Graduates

                                                      Average Wage,
                                                                         Average Monthly       Percent Growth
              Occupation Category                       Full-Time
                                                                           Job Postings          in Postings
                                                         Workers
     Information Processing and Business Support          $59,059             188,000                  63
                       Managers and Supervisors           $55,415             359,200                 122

                                     Public Safety        $52,567              31,300                  76
                                             Sales        $52,474             293,700                  66

                           Arts and Entertainment         $48,765              29,000                   9
                                   Skilled Trades         $47,268             158,000                 162

               Office and Administrative Support          $37,207             351,000                  57
            Healthcare Technicians and Assistants         $36,223             220,500                  34

                                Physical Laborers         $33,006             275,200                 285

                              Low-Skilled Service         $23,584             271,100                 133


Note: Average wages are calculated for all workers aged 22 to 65 who usually work at least 35 hours per week for
40 or more weeks per year. Average Monthly Job Postings are calculated for the years 2009 to 2013. Percent
Growth in Postings is calculated from mid-2009, the end of the Great Recession, through mid-2014.



Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013; The Conference Board, Help Wanted
Online; U.S. Department of Labor, O*NET.
Table 2: Share of Underemployed Recent College Graduates by Occupation Category

                                                        Share of
                                                                          Share of Young
                                                     Underemployed
              Occupation Category                                        Workers Without a
                                                     Recent College
                                                                          College Degree
                                                       Graduates
     Information Processing and Business Support            11.4                   2.0
                       Managers and Supervisors             13.1                   7.8

                                    Public Safety            3.7                   2.8
                                            Sales           11.7                   5.1

                          Arts and Entertainment             3.0                   0.7
                                  Skilled Trades             2.7                   8.2

               Office and Administrative Support            25.2                  15.0
            Healthcare Technicians and Assistants            4.7                   6.6

                               Physical Laborers             5.4                  24.1

                             Low-Skilled Service            19.3                  27.6


Note: Recent College Graduates are those aged 22 to 27 with a bachelor's degree or higher,
while Young Workers are those aged 22 to 27 without a bachelor's degree. All figures exclude
those in the military or currently enrolled in school.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013.
Table 3: Share of Underemployed Recent College Graduates by Occupation Category and Gender


                                                      Share of Underemployed Recent     Share of Young Workers Without
               Occupation Category
                                                             College Graduates                  a College Degree

                                                         Male            Female              Male            Female
       Information Processing and Business Support       12.1             10.7                2.1              2.0
                         Managers and Supervisors        15.1             11.4                7.7              8.1

                                      Public Safety       5.9              1.9                3.9              1.3
                                              Sales      12.6             11.0                4.6              5.9

                            Arts and Entertainment        3.9              2.2                0.7              0.6
                                    Skilled Trades        5.0              0.8               13.1              1.0

                 Office and Administrative Support       17.8             31.3                9.3             23.4
              Healthcare Technicians and Assistants       2.4              6.5                1.9             13.6

                                 Physical Laborers        9.2              2.3               35.5              7.5

                               Low-Skilled Service       16.1             22.0               21.3             36.7


Note: Recent College Graduates are those aged 22 to 27 with a bachelor's degree or higher, while Young Workers are those
aged 22 to 27 without a bachelor's degree. All figures exclude those in the military or currently enrolled in school.



Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013.
Table 4: Characteristics of Recent College Graduates


                                All Recent Grads       Underemployed      Low-Skilled Service
         Variable               Mean      St. Dev.     Mean    St. Dev.     Mean     St. Dev.
Employment Status
         Underemployed          0.446      0.497       1.000    0.000       1.000     0.000
      Low-Skilled Service       0.086      0.281       0.193    0.395       1.000     0.000
Age and Gender
                       Age       25.1         1.5       24.9       1.5       24.6        1.6
                       Male     0.436      0.496       0.450    0.497       0.374     0.484
Family Background
                 Married        0.234      0.423       0.199    0.399       0.157     0.364
                Children        0.082      0.274       0.078    0.269       0.068     0.251
Race and Ethnicity
                     White      0.800      0.400       0.795    0.403       0.797     0.402
                      Black     0.070      0.255       0.085    0.279       0.076     0.265
            American Indian     0.003      0.052       0.003    0.057       0.003     0.053
                      Asian     0.083      0.275       0.064    0.244       0.061     0.239
                Other Race      0.045      0.207       0.053    0.223       0.063     0.243
                  Hispanic      0.079      0.270       0.092    0.289       0.108     0.310
Disability Status
                    Disabled    0.014      0.117       0.016    0.126       0.017     0.130
Education
              Double Major      0.121      0.326       0.117    0.321       0.107     0.309
            Graduate Degree     0.148      0.355       0.064    0.244       0.057     0.232

                          N        20,233,500            9,031,408             1,744,695


Note: Recent College Graduates are those aged 22 to 27 with a bachelor's degree or higher. All
figures exclude those in the military or currently enrolled in school.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013.
Table 5: Average Marginal Effects from Underemployment and Low-Skilled Service Probit Models


                                                      Underemployed                                        Working in Low-Skilled Service Jobs
                                        (1)                 (2)                   (3)                    (4)                 (5)                   (6)
                                    Overall                Male                 Female                Overall               Male                 Female
                                               ***                                                              ***
                     Male             0.012                       --                    --             -0.011                      --                    --
                                     (0.003)                      --                    --            (0.003)                      --                    --
                                               ***                     ***                   ***                ***                     ***                   ***
                      Age            -0.015                -0.013                -0.016                -0.011               -0.009                -0.012
                                     (0.001)              (0.001)               (0.001)               (0.000)              (0.001)               (0.001)
                                               ***                     ***                   ***                ***                     ***                   ***
                  Married            -0.040                -0.044                -0.039                -0.026               -0.033                -0.022
                                     (0.004)              (0.007)               (0.005)               (0.003)              (0.003)               (0.004)
                                               ***                     ***                   ***                **                                            **
                 Children             0.029                 0.044                 0.025                0.007                 0.004                 0.010
                                     (0.007)              (0.011)               (0.008)               (0.003)              (0.007)               (0.005)
                                               ***                     ***                   ***
                    Black             0.075                 0.081                 0.070                0.007                 0.011                 0.003
                                     (0.008)              (0.010)               (0.009)               (0.005)              (0.007)               (0.006)
                                               ***                                           **                                         ***
         American Indian              0.074                 0.058                 0.082                0.003                -0.036                 0.028
                                     (0.025)              (0.037)               (0.033)               (0.015)              (0.008)               (0.024)
                                               ***                     ***
                    Asian            -0.021                -0.035                -0.014                -0.002               -0.003                 0.004
                                     (0.006)              (0.009)               (0.009)               (0.008)              (0.008)               (0.008)
                                               ***                     ***                   ***                ***                     ***                   ***
              Other Race              0.039                 0.045                 0.034                0.018                 0.018                 0.019
                                     (0.011)              (0.017)               (0.010)               (0.005)              (0.007)               (0.007)
                                               ***                     ***                   ***                ***                     ***                   ***
                 Hispanic             0.045                 0.074                 0.023                0.026                 0.034                 0.019
                                     (0.009)              (0.012)               (0.009)               (0.005)              (0.007)               (0.004)
                                               ***                     *                     ***                *                                             *
                 Disabled             0.042                 0.030                 0.054                0.014                 0.004                 0.022
                                     (0.012)              (0.017)               (0.019)               (0.008)              (0.006)               (0.013)
                                               ***                     ***                   ***                ***                     ***                   ***
            Double Major             -0.046                -0.051                -0.042                -0.016               -0.013                -0.019
                                     (0.005)              (0.009)               (0.004)               (0.002)              (0.003)               (0.003)
                                               ***                     ***                   ***                ***                     ***                   ***
         Graduate Degree             -0.252                -0.229                -0.263                -0.054               -0.040                -0.063
                                     (0.006)              (0.007)               (0.006)               (0.002)              (0.003)               (0.003)
                                               ***                     ***                   ***                ***                     ***                   ***
  Log Pseudo Likelihood         -12,227,478            -5,401,846            -6,792,684            -5,503,035          -2,115,863             -3,357,967

       Pseudo R-squared               0.121                 0.112                 0.131                0.074                 0.090                 0.068

              Weighted N        20,233,500             8,818,586             11,414,914            20,233,500           8,818,586             11,414,914


Note: Robust standard errors, clustered at the state level, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and
0.10 levels, respectively. Models also include the following controls (coefficients not reported for brevity): individual's college major (73 degree fields),
state, and year. Marginal effects for dummy variables represent discrete change from 0 to 1.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013.
Table 6: Probability of Underemployment Among Recent College Graduates by Major


                 Major                       Overall    SE          Male          SE    Female    SE
                         Criminal Justice    0.700     (0.011)      0.752     (0.017)   0.646    (0.013)
                          Performing Arts    0.663     (0.013)      0.654     (0.025)   0.669    (0.012)
                  Leisure and Hospitality    0.640     (0.019)      0.669     (0.026)   0.613    (0.016)
                            Anthropology     0.624     (0.019)      0.617     (0.026)   0.624    (0.024)
                               Art History   0.621     (0.021)      0.736     (0.047)   0.592    (0.023)
                  Public Policy and Law      0.618     (0.029)      0.547     (0.052)   0.674    (0.030)
                   Business Management       0.601     (0.006)      0.592     (0.011)   0.613    (0.007)
                                 Fine Arts   0.591     (0.009)      0.604     (0.012)   0.580    (0.012)
                                   History   0.575     (0.011)      0.581     (0.013)   0.573    (0.016)
              Animal and Plant Sciences      0.572     (0.019)      0.548     (0.031)   0.587    (0.024)
             Miscellaneous Technologies      0.554     (0.020)      0.553     (0.023)   0.579    (0.027)
                         Communications      0.554     (0.007)      0.595     (0.012)   0.529    (0.009)
                              Liberal Arts   0.553     (0.022)      0.611     (0.018)   0.519    (0.030)
                        General Business     0.551     (0.013)      0.550     (0.014)   0.558    (0.014)
                         Political Science   0.548     (0.011)      0.538     (0.013)   0.562    (0.012)
                                Marketing    0.545     (0.007)      0.543     (0.012)   0.544    (0.010)
                                Sociology    0.541     (0.017)      0.573     (0.030)   0.524    (0.016)
                              Mass Media     0.539     (0.013)      0.563     (0.022)   0.522    (0.019)
                       Foreign Language      0.538     (0.013)      0.561     (0.027)   0.525    (0.017)
                               Philosophy    0.537     (0.018)      0.563     (0.016)   0.507    (0.026)
                        English Language     0.534     (0.009)      0.571     (0.019)   0.513    (0.013)
                               Agriculture   0.533     (0.030)      0.550     (0.032)   0.515    (0.042)
        Advertising and Public Relations     0.511     (0.011)      0.547     (0.042)   0.493    (0.010)
                    Medical Technicians      0.507     (0.027)      0.470     (0.055)   0.512    (0.030)
                  Environmental Studies      0.504     (0.021)      0.553     (0.020)   0.446    (0.032)
                               Psychology    0.503     (0.009)      0.537     (0.013)   0.488    (0.010)
                     International Affairs   0.502     (0.024)      0.511     (0.033)   0.495    (0.026)
                Interdisciplinary Studies    0.501     (0.018)      0.498     (0.021)   0.502    (0.024)
                  Theology and Religion      0.500     (0.019)      0.495     (0.025)   0.510    (0.031)
                            Ethnic Studies   0.498     (0.014)      0.486     (0.029)   0.497    (0.017)
                 General Social Sciences     0.492     (0.035)      0.524     (0.068)   0.463    (0.032)
                          Health Services    0.488     (0.013)      0.537     (0.029)   0.475    (0.014)
       Miscellaneous Biological Sciences     0.478     (0.013)      0.482     (0.026)   0.473    (0.018)
                               Geography     0.469     (0.030)      0.482     (0.045)   0.453    (0.036)
                                   Biology   0.448     (0.009)      0.448     (0.011)   0.446    (0.011)
                           Earth Sciences    0.446     (0.034)      0.438     (0.039)   0.463    (0.063)
               Engineering Technologies      0.445     (0.020)      0.444     (0.022)   0.492    (0.049)
                       Nutrition Sciences    0.442     (0.025)      0.546     (0.068)   0.421    (0.025)
   Information Systems and Management        0.441     (0.016)      0.440     (0.019)   0.474    (0.031)
         Family and Consumer Sciences        0.440     (0.017)      0.453     (0.063)   0.431    (0.016)
        Miscellaneous Physical Sciences      0.428     (0.042)      0.398     (0.047)   0.467    (0.056)
                               Journalism    0.425     (0.012)      0.452     (0.020)   0.406    (0.015)
     Commercial Art and Graphic Design       0.419     (0.011)      0.403     (0.017)   0.419    (0.014)
                               Economics     0.413     (0.021)      0.425     (0.021)   0.408    (0.027)
                             Biochemistry    0.402     (0.022)      0.373     (0.044)   0.428    (0.026)
                      Treatment Therapy      0.394     (0.015)      0.483     (0.031)   0.358    (0.017)
                              Architecture   0.392     (0.017)      0.424     (0.021)   0.351    (0.021)
                      Business Analytics     0.376     (0.015)      0.382     (0.019)   0.382    (0.024)
                                Chemistry    0.371     (0.016)      0.406     (0.021)   0.339    (0.026)
                                   Finance   0.370     (0.015)      0.368     (0.015)   0.388    (0.018)
                           Social Services   0.357     (0.016)      0.424     (0.050)   0.347    (0.016)
                             Mathematics     0.330     (0.015)      0.350     (0.021)   0.311    (0.020)
                                Pharmacy     0.322     (0.037)      0.312     (0.045)   0.325    (0.039)
                                   Physics   0.318     (0.025)      0.356     (0.032)   0.238    (0.034)
              Miscellaneous Engineering      0.287     (0.016)      0.292     (0.019)   0.294    (0.026)
                    Secondary Education      0.280     (0.014)      0.311     (0.017)   0.260    (0.017)
                   Construction Services     0.275     (0.028)      0.289     (0.027)   0.233    (0.081)
                     General Engineering     0.263     (0.020)      0.267     (0.023)   0.277    (0.035)
                               Accounting    0.263     (0.009)      0.259     (0.014)   0.267    (0.010)
                       Computer Science      0.262     (0.017)      0.260     (0.015)   0.316    (0.029)
                       General Education     0.245     (0.013)      0.290     (0.024)   0.231    (0.015)
                   Industrial Engineering    0.230     (0.023)      0.236     (0.032)   0.224    (0.038)
              Early Childhood Education      0.227     (0.018)      0.341     (0.083)   0.218    (0.019)
                Miscellaneous Education      0.223     (0.015)      0.249     (0.035)   0.209    (0.015)
                  Aerospace Engineering      0.218     (0.028)      0.245     (0.036)   0.110    (0.044)
                   Elementary Education      0.215     (0.013)      0.262     (0.024)   0.207    (0.013)
                   Electrical Engineering    0.205     (0.012)      0.209     (0.011)   0.211    (0.028)
                Mechanical Engineering       0.203     (0.014)      0.211     (0.017)   0.176    (0.025)
                   Chemical Engineering      0.189     (0.021)      0.205     (0.025)   0.165    (0.028)
                        Civil Engineering    0.187     (0.014)      0.188     (0.017)   0.191    (0.021)
                  Computer Engineering       0.180     (0.018)      0.179     (0.019)   0.236    (0.044)
                       Special Education     0.153     (0.020)      0.173     (0.066)   0.147    (0.020)
                                   Nursing   0.095     (0.012)      0.159     (0.026)   0.087    (0.010)


Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013.
Table 7: Probability of Working in a Low-Skilled Service Job Among Recent College Graduates by Major


                 Major                       Overall      SE          Male        SE         Female     SE
                  Leisure and Hospitality     0.234      (0.010)      0.240      (0.019)      0.227    (0.011)
                          Performing Arts     0.206      (0.017)      0.181      (0.037)      0.224    (0.013)
                                 Fine Arts    0.165      (0.009)      0.143      (0.012)      0.178    (0.009)
                            Anthropology      0.155      (0.011)      0.161      (0.020)      0.155    (0.015)
                       Nutrition Sciences     0.152      (0.019)      0.310      (0.060)      0.135    (0.020)
         Family and Consumer Sciences         0.152      (0.009)      0.128      (0.039)      0.158    (0.009)
                              Liberal Arts    0.135      (0.009)      0.155      (0.017)      0.125    (0.011)
              Animal and Plant Sciences       0.134      (0.012)      0.135      (0.021)      0.132    (0.014)
                                   History    0.129      (0.007)      0.116      (0.008)      0.143    (0.012)
                               Philosophy     0.126      (0.016)      0.129      (0.017)      0.118    (0.019)
              Early Childhood Education       0.125      (0.013)      0.068      (0.049)      0.129    (0.012)
                       Foreign Language       0.123      (0.011)      0.124      (0.030)      0.126    (0.012)
                 General Social Sciences      0.122      (0.015)      0.093      (0.019)      0.145    (0.027)
                  Theology and Religion       0.121      (0.015)      0.112      (0.019)      0.137    (0.020)
                           Earth Sciences     0.119      (0.029)      0.099      (0.028)      0.145    (0.059)
                        English Language      0.119      (0.006)      0.128      (0.011)      0.117    (0.007)
                               Psychology     0.118      (0.005)      0.108      (0.007)      0.124    (0.006)
                  Environmental Studies       0.114      (0.012)      0.105      (0.016)      0.124    (0.019)
                           Social Services    0.109      (0.010)      0.130      (0.039)      0.111    (0.009)
                                Sociology     0.108      (0.006)      0.111      (0.012)      0.109    (0.008)
                               Art History    0.106      (0.015)      0.227      (0.055)      0.090    (0.013)
       Miscellaneous Biological Sciences      0.106      (0.009)      0.085      (0.010)      0.121    (0.012)
                      Treatment Therapy       0.105      (0.010)      0.170      (0.027)      0.080    (0.009)
                            Ethnic Studies    0.102      (0.012)      0.093      (0.017)      0.109    (0.016)
                   Elementary Education       0.100      (0.008)      0.086      (0.015)      0.103    (0.008)
                Interdisciplinary Studies     0.099      (0.007)      0.070      (0.010)      0.118    (0.011)
                    Secondary Education       0.095      (0.007)      0.090      (0.011)      0.099    (0.009)
                       Special Education      0.093      (0.017)      0.090      (0.038)      0.096    (0.020)
                         Communications       0.092      (0.004)      0.089      (0.006)      0.096    (0.006)
                              Mass Media      0.092      (0.011)      0.104      (0.017)      0.080    (0.014)
                       General Education      0.091      (0.007)      0.076      (0.014)      0.098    (0.009)
        Miscellaneous Physical Sciences       0.091      (0.018)      0.076      (0.027)      0.106    (0.035)
                                   Biology    0.088      (0.004)      0.085      (0.007)      0.091    (0.007)
                          Health Services     0.087      (0.006)      0.087      (0.009)      0.091    (0.007)
                         Criminal Justice     0.085      (0.004)      0.068      (0.006)      0.105    (0.007)
                               Geography      0.084      (0.015)      0.086      (0.018)      0.080    (0.020)
                         Political Science    0.083      (0.007)      0.089      (0.010)      0.074    (0.008)
                   Business Management        0.082      (0.005)      0.076      (0.005)      0.088    (0.006)
        Advertising and Public Relations      0.078      (0.007)      0.065      (0.014)      0.084    (0.008)
     Commercial Art and Graphic Design        0.077      (0.005)      0.062      (0.008)      0.085    (0.007)
                               Journalism     0.077      (0.006)      0.075      (0.011)      0.079    (0.008)
                        General Business      0.077      (0.005)      0.070      (0.006)      0.082    (0.008)
                                Pharmacy      0.073      (0.017)      0.073      (0.023)      0.073    (0.027)
                              Architecture    0.072      (0.008)      0.074      (0.014)      0.066    (0.013)
                Miscellaneous Education       0.070      (0.010)      0.049      (0.021)      0.080    (0.011)
                     International Affairs    0.070      (0.008)      0.081      (0.014)      0.063    (0.008)
                             Biochemistry     0.068      (0.011)      0.052      (0.022)      0.083    (0.016)
                               Agriculture    0.068      (0.010)      0.065      (0.014)      0.073    (0.017)
                             Mathematics      0.062      (0.009)      0.056      (0.010)      0.066    (0.013)
                                Marketing     0.061      (0.004)      0.061      (0.007)      0.061    (0.005)
                  Public Policy and Law       0.060      (0.011)      0.025      (0.010)      0.089    (0.018)
                                Chemistry     0.056      (0.009)      0.054      (0.012)      0.059    (0.016)
             Miscellaneous Technologies       0.054      (0.009)      0.043      (0.007)      0.074    (0.023)
                                   Physics    0.049      (0.016)      0.059      (0.021)      0.016    (0.009)
                               Economics      0.046      (0.006)      0.043      (0.005)      0.046    (0.008)
   Information Systems and Management         0.045      (0.007)      0.036      (0.009)      0.068    (0.014)
               Engineering Technologies       0.041      (0.007)      0.031      (0.007)      0.083    (0.028)
                               Accounting     0.038      (0.003)      0.033      (0.004)      0.043    (0.004)
                     General Engineering      0.036      (0.006)      0.030      (0.006)      0.056    (0.019)
                                   Finance    0.036      (0.003)      0.036      (0.004)      0.033    (0.004)
                   Chemical Engineering       0.034      (0.010)      0.037      (0.013)      0.024    (0.014)
                     Medical Technicians      0.034      (0.009)      0.032      (0.021)      0.035    (0.010)
                   Electrical Engineering     0.029      (0.008)      0.024      (0.008)      0.044    (0.013)
                       Computer Science       0.027      (0.004)      0.018      (0.004)      0.065    (0.015)
                  Computer Engineering        0.027      (0.006)      0.023      (0.007)      0.041    (0.023)
                      Business Analytics      0.025      (0.005)      0.019      (0.005)      0.038    (0.012)
                   Construction Services      0.025      (0.007)      0.019      (0.005)      0.080    (0.053)
                                   Nursing    0.025      (0.004)      0.054      (0.011)      0.022    (0.004)
                   Industrial Engineering     0.024      (0.009)      0.019      (0.011)      0.033    (0.016)
              Miscellaneous Engineering       0.024      (0.005)      0.019      (0.006)      0.033    (0.008)
                  Aerospace Engineering       0.021      (0.009)      0.021      (0.010)      0.010    (0.009)
                Mechanical Engineering        0.019      (0.004)      0.019      (0.004)      0.016    (0.006)
                        Civil Engineering     0.017      (0.004)      0.016      (0.004)      0.015    (0.008)


Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013.
Table 8: Share of Younger and Older Recent College Graduates by Occupation Category


                                                         Share of Underemployed Recent College
                Occupation Category
                                                                     Graduates, All

                                                               Younger                 Older
       Information Processing and Business Support               5.5                    5.3
                         Managers and Supervisors                5.1                    5.8

                                        Public Safety            1.4                    1.6
                                                Sales            6.5                    4.4

                              Arts and Entertainment             1.4                    1.5
                                       Skilled Trades            1.1                    1.6

                  Office and Administrative Support             12.7                   10.1
               Healthcare Technicians and Assistants             2.4                    2.1

                                    Physical Laborers            2.9                    2.2

                                 Low-Skilled Service            12.6                    6.6

                                         College Jobs           48.4                   59.0


Note: Younger Recent College Graduates are those aged 22 to 23 with a bachelor's degree or
higher in 2009, while Older Recent College Graduates are those aged 26 to 27 with a bachelor's
degree or higher in 2013. All figures exclude those in the military or currently enrolled in school.



Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009 and 2013.
Table 9: Share of Younger and Older Recent College Graduates by Occupation Category and Gender


                                                      Share of Underemployed Recent         Share of Underemployed Recent
              Occupation Category
                                                         College Graduates, Male              College Graduates, Female

                                                        Younger             Older             Younger             Older
     Information Processing and Business Support           6.3                5.4                5.0               5.1
                       Managers and Supervisors            5.0                6.4                5.2               5.3

                                     Public Safety         2.7                2.5                0.6               0.8
                                             Sales         7.1                5.4                6.1               3.5

                           Arts and Entertainment          2.3                2.1                0.8               0.9
                                    Skilled Trades         2.2                3.1                0.4               0.4

               Office and Administrative Support           9.8                6.9               14.6              12.6
            Healthcare Technicians and Assistants          1.4                1.3                3.0               2.8

                                Physical Laborers          5.7                3.8                1.2               0.8

                              Low-Skilled Service         11.0                5.7               13.6               7.4

                                     College Jobs         46.4              57.4                49.7              60.4


Note: Younger Recent College Graduates are those aged 22 to 23 with a bachelor's degree or higher in 2009, while Older
Recent College Graduates are those aged 26 to 27 with a bachelor's degree or higher in 2013. All figures exclude those in the
military or currently enrolled in school.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009 and 2013.
Figure 1: Unemployment Among College Graduates

10%


  9%


  8%
                                                                                                                 All Workers

  7%


  6%
                                                                                                                     Recent
                                                                                                                College Graduates
  5%


  4%
                                                                                                                College Graduates

  3%


  2%


  1%


  0%
    1990                       1995                       2000                       2005                      2010                       2015

Note: Rates are calculated as a twelve-month moving average. Recent College Graduates are those aged 22 to 27 with a bachelor's degree or higher,
while College Graduates are those aged 22 to 65 with a bachelor's degree or higher. All Workers are those aged 16 to 65 regardless of education. All
figures exclude those in the military or currently enrolled in school. Shaded area indicates period designated recession by the NBER.



Source: U.S. Census Bureau and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Population Survey.
Figure 2: Underemployment Among College Graduates

50%




45%

                                                                                                                               Recent
                                                                                                                          College Graduates

40%




35%
                                                                                                                          College Graduates



30%




25%
   1990                         1995                       2000                       2005                       2010                       2015


Note: Rates are calculated as a twelve-month moving average. Recent College Graduates are those aged 22 to 27 with a bachelor's degree or higher,
while College Graduates are those aged 22 to 65 with a bachelor's degree or higher. All figures exclude those in the military or currently enrolled in
school. Shaded area indicates period designated recession by the NBER.

Sources: U.S. Census Bureau and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Population Survey; U.S. Department of Labor, O*NET.
Figure 3: The Demand for College Graduates Through the Great Recession

 Index (December 2007 = 100)
180


160
                                                                                            Non-College Jobs

140


120


100                                                                                            College Jobs


  80


  60


  40


  20


   0
    2006         2007          2008        2009         2010           2011   2012   2013         2014         2015


Note: Shaded area indicates period designated recession by the NBER.

Source: The Conference Board, Help Wanted Online; U.S. Department of Labor, O*NET.
Figure 4: Probability of Underemployment Among Recent College Graduates by Major

                      Criminal Justice
                      Performing Arts
               Leisure and Hospitality
                         Anthropology
                            Art History
               Public Policy and Law
                Business Management
                              Fine Arts
                                History
           Animal and Plant Sciences
          Miscellaneous Technologies
                      Communications
                           Liberal Arts
                     General Business
                      Political Science
                             Marketing
                             Sociology
                           Mass Media
                    Foreign Language
                            Philosophy
                    English Language
                            Agriculture
     Advertising and Public Relations
                  Medical Technicians
               Environmental Studies
                           Psychology
                  International Affairs
             Interdisciplinary Studies
               Theology and Religion
                        Ethnic Studies
              General Social Sciences
                       Health Services
    Miscellaneous Biological Sciences
                            Geography
                                Biology
                        Earth Sciences
            Engineering Technologies
                    Nutrition Sciences
Information Systems and Management
      Family and Consumer Sciences
     Miscellaneous Physical Sciences
                            Journalism
  Commercial Art and Graphic Design
                            Economics
                         Biochemistry
                   Treatment Therapy
                           Architecture
                   Business Analytics
                             Chemistry
                                Finance
                       Social Services
                          Mathematics
                             Pharmacy
                                Physics
           Miscellaneous Engineering
                 Secondary Education
                Construction Services
                  General Engineering
                           Accounting
                    Computer Science
                    General Education
                Industrial Engineering
           Early Childhood Education
             Miscellaneous Education
               Aerospace Engineering
                Elementary Education
                Electrical Engineering
             Mechanical Engineering
                Chemical Engineering
                     Civil Engineering
               Computer Engineering
                    Special Education                                           Overall: 44.6 percent
                                Nursing
                                          0%    10%          20%    30%   40%      50%         60%      70%   80%


Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013.
Figure 5: Probability of Working in a Low-Skilled Service Job Among Recent College Graduates by Major

               Leisure and Hospitality
                      Performing Arts
                              Fine Arts
                         Anthropology
                    Nutrition Sciences
      Family and Consumer Sciences
                           Liberal Arts
           Animal and Plant Sciences
                                History
                            Philosophy
           Early Childhood Education
                    Foreign Language
              General Social Sciences
               Theology and Religion
                        Earth Sciences
                    English Language
                           Psychology
               Environmental Studies
                       Social Services
                             Sociology
                            Art History
    Miscellaneous Biological Sciences
                   Treatment Therapy
                        Ethnic Studies
                Elementary Education
             Interdisciplinary Studies
                 Secondary Education
                    Special Education
                      Communications
                           Mass Media
                    General Education
     Miscellaneous Physical Sciences
                                Biology
                       Health Services
                      Criminal Justice
                            Geography
                      Political Science
                Business Management
     Advertising and Public Relations
  Commercial Art and Graphic Design
                            Journalism
                     General Business
                             Pharmacy
                           Architecture
             Miscellaneous Education
                  International Affairs
                         Biochemistry
                            Agriculture
                          Mathematics
                             Marketing
               Public Policy and Law
                             Chemistry
          Miscellaneous Technologies
                                Physics
                            Economics
Information Systems and Management
            Engineering Technologies
                           Accounting
                  General Engineering
                                Finance
                Chemical Engineering
                  Medical Technicians
                Electrical Engineering
                    Computer Science
               Computer Engineering
                   Business Analytics
                Construction Services
                                Nursing
                Industrial Engineering
           Miscellaneous Engineering
               Aerospace Engineering
             Mechanical Engineering                                 Overall: 8.6 percent
                     Civil Engineering
                                          0%            5%          10%                    15%    20%   25%


Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013.
Figure 6: Employment Outcomes of Recent College Graduates by Age

(a) Underemployed

55%




50%




45%




40%



                                                  Overall       Male        Female


35%
               22                 23                  24               25            26   27


(b) Low-Skilled Service

20%




15%




10%




 5%



                                                 Overall      Male     Female


 0%
               22                 23                  24               25            26   27


Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2009-2013.
