NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LONG-RANGE GROWTH:
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN THE GLOBAL NETWORK OF AIR LINKS
Filipe Campante
David Yanagizawa-Drott
Working Paper 22653
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22653

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

We thank Abhijit Banerjee, Leo Bursztyn, Fred Finan, Ed Glaeser, Tarek Hassan, Ben Olken,
Gautam Rao, Andrei Shleifer, and Noam Yuchtman for helpful conversations, seminar
participants at Bocconi, Columbia, Harvard, the 2016 AEA meeting (San Francisco), the Harvard
Cities Mini-Conference, and the Barcelona GSE Political Economy of Conflict and Development
workshop for valuable comments, Laura Alfaro. Michele Coscia, and Irfan Mahmud for their
generous help with data collection, and Jonah Rexer for truly outstanding research assistance. We
gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the Weatherhead Center for
International Affairs at Harvard, the Harvard Kennedy School Dean's Research Fund, and the
Taubman Center for State and Local Government. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Filipe Campante and David Yanagizawa-Drott. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Long-Range Growth: Economic Development in the Global Network of Air Links
Filipe Campante and David Yanagizawa-Drott
NBER Working Paper No. 22653
September 2016
JEL No. F15,F21,F23,F63,O11,O18,O19,O47,R11,R12,R40
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of international long-distance flights on the global spatial allocation of
economic activity. To identify causal effects, we exploit variation due to regulatory and
technological constraints which give rise to a discontinuity in connectedness between cities at a
distance of 6000 miles. We show that these air links have a positive effect on local economic
activity, as captured by satellite-measured night lights. To shed light on how air links shape
economic outcomes, we first present evidence of positive externalities in the global network of air
links: connections induce further connections. We then find that air links increase business links,
showing that the movement of people fosters the movement of capital. In particular, this is driven
mostly by capital flowing from high-income to middle-income (but not low-income) countries.
Taken together, our results suggest that increasing interconnectedness generates economic
activity at the local level by inducing links between businesses, but also gives rise to increased
spatial inequality locally, and potentially globally.

Filipe Campante
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
filipe_campante@harvard.edu
David Yanagizawa-Drott
Department of Economics
University of Zurich
Schönberggasse 1
Zurich, 8001
Switzerland
and NBER
david.yanagizawa-drott@econ.uzh.ch

A Online Appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22653

1

Introduction

It is often said, to the point of being cliché, that we are living through an age of globalization. One
key aspect of that is certainly a marked reduction in transportation costs of goods, of information,
of people: a globalized world is an interconnected world, in all these dimensions. However, understood as such globalization is obviously far from new. Previous episodes of global integration,
such as in the late 19th century, also witnessed a steep reduction in transportation costs over long
distances, as steamships and railways sharply increased trade and migration across borders.
The current episode is unique, however, in that it is now far cheaper and faster than ever to
transport people, and this has made it possible to travel back and forth between distant places. This
is the direct consequence of the explosion in air travel. Of course, it was possible to travel long
distances before air travel, but the cost was so high that few actually did, and those who did, for the
most part, would not travel frequently. Now, for the first time in human history, the whole world is
effectively connected in a global network of air travel, enabling a constant flow of people between
countries and continents far apart.
This paper studies the impact of direct long-distance air links, to present the first evidence of
causal effects of that transformation on economic development. A long intellectual tradition has
posited that proximity – and in particular its most fundamental aspect, face-to-face contact – is a
key driver of the transmission of knowledge and information (Storper and Venables 2004, Glaeser
2011), which in turn underpins the increases in productivity without which sustained economic
growth is impossible. While people have been able to move from Shanghai to London or New
York for a long time, and goods have been moving for just as long, now people can, unlike ever
before, go back and forth between these places. This opens up new possibilities of exchange and
interaction, with potentially transformative effects for development.
How important might these possibilities be? Consider Shanghai and Jakarta, cities that, as
of the early 1990s, would seem at a similar level of economic development. In the two decades
between 1990 and 2010, Jakarta added 13 new direct (at least weekly) long-distance flight connections, which is a lot, but Shanghai added 34. Over that period, Jakarta grew substantially, but
Shanghai grew substantially more.
Yet of course this does not tell us whether or how much of Shanghai’s extra growth was caused
by those additional connections. There are myriad differences between those two cities, and in
what happened to them over this period, which might entail differences in economic performance.
It could just as well be performance driving connections: lots of people want to go to and interact
with prosperous and/or fast-growing places. Perhaps “investment goes to cities that are attractive
in their own right, rather than because they are easy to get to” (The Economist 2015).
We tackle this empirical challenge by establishing and exploiting a key feature of the network

1

of air links: cities that are just under 6000 miles apart are distinctly more likely to have direct
air links, as compared to cities slightly above that threshold. This is the result of an interaction
between flight regulations and the evolution of airplane technology. Regulatory requirements on
things like maximum flight time and crew accommodations increased costs substantially for flights
of more than 12 hours, which corresponds to a distance of 6000 miles – a little over what separates
London from Shanghai, or Istanbul from Jakarta. On the technological side, the introduction of
two landmark long-range airplane models (Boeing’s 747-400, in 1989, and Airbus’s A330 and
A340, in 1993-94) made that discontinuity increasingly meaningful.
This discontinuity grants us a strategy to identify the causal effect of air links, using a sample
of 819 cities with major airports. We implement this strategy on two levels: first, we compare pairs
of cities that are just below 6000 miles apart (such as Shanghai and Milan, 5650 miles) to pairs that
are just above (Shanghai and Madrid, 6350). Second, we compare places near airports that happen
to have a large share of potential destinations just below the threshold, such as Shanghai, to those
near airports with relatively many just above it, as Jakarta.1 Since places and pairs arguably do not
differ systematically across the 6000-mile threshold, we have a source of exogenous variation in
the number of available air links. We show that this variation is not correlated with outcomes as of
circa 1989, when the discontinuity was weaker, underscoring its plausible exogeneity.
Using this strategy, we first show a set of basic, “first-stage” results: pairs of places like Shanghai and Milan (connected by a non-stop flight since 2003) are indeed more likely to be connected
than pairs like Shanghai and Madrid (no non-stop flight before 2016).2 Similarly, places with a
greater share of potential links just below the threshold indeed have a larger number of connections.
This sets the stage for our key question: do these connections matter for economic development? We show that they do. First of all, using granular data at the level of grid cells, we find
that places close to airports with a larger share of potential connections just below the 6000-mile
threshold grew faster, as captured by satellite-measured night lights, between 1992 (when the data
first become available) and 2010. This holds with different definitions of closeness, as well as
excluding the specific location of the airports, and is not driven by specific countries. The effect
is also economically significant: additional connections explain about 6% of the growth in night
lights over the period, for the median cell in our sample.
We exploit the spatial richness of the data to shed additional light on the nature of that effect.
First, we show that it is not driven by pure spatial reallocation of economic activity: while the
1 Specifically, over three out of four major international airports in our sample which are between 5500 and 6500
miles from Shanghai happen to be below 6000 miles. This places Shanghai in the top decile of the distribution. In
contrast, for the same range relative to Jakarta, about two in three are above 6000 miles, placing it in the bottom decile.
Note that this controls for the total number of destinations around the threshold, which captures broader patterns of
geographical location and isolation.
2 As we will discuss, there is reason to believe that the 6000-mile discontinuity is in the process of disappearing,
after regulatory changes implemented starting in 2014.

2

positive effect dissipates with distance to the airport, as expected, we find no evidence of a negative
net effect at longer distances. This means that connections induce spatial inequality, as the places
that get connected grow more, but they create economic activity, rather than merely shifting it
across space. On the other hand, the increase in economic activity is not matched by increased
population: we find essentially no effect on population at any distance from the airport, suggesting
that increased productivity may be translating into economic rents.
We then study how long-distance air links shape economic outcomes and development. Most
directly, we first show that a shock to air links over a specific distance range gets magnified because
connections induce further connections: there is a spillover to shorter distances and an increase in
the overall quality of air links, as additional long-haul links increase a city’s desirability for other
connections, as well as an increase in the total flow of passengers. These spillovers also show up
across airports in the network: we find a positive “medium-range” effect (2000 to 5500 miles) but
no evidence of significant effects at shorter distances, as positive and negative spillovers seem to
balance out.
We then focus on the role of businesses. There is widespread circumstantial evidence that
businesses care about ease of connection and the availability of flight links.3 Yet some would
argue that direct links do not matter so much for businesses, perhaps because “air travellers [sic]
do not mind having to connect flights in a foreign hub as much as they did in the past, because it is
now easier to work on the go” (The Economist 2015).
To answer this question we turn to data on business links. We start with firm-level information
on foreign direct investment (FDI) – more specifically, on majority ownership of companies across
different countries, where we would expect the possibility of face-to-face contact to be particularly
important. Using the Orbis database, we geolocate over half a million foreign-owned companies all
over the world, as well as their ultimate owners. For instance, our data allows us to find over three
times as many ownership links between Shanghai and Milan as between Shanghai and Madrid.
We show that this illustrates a general pattern, indicative of a causal impact of the availability
of direct flights in facilitating the emergence of connections between firms in different locations.
First, yet again we find a discontinuity right at the 6000-mile threshold – pairs of cities just below
6000 miles apart have substantially more business cross-ownership links. From this we estimate an
impact that implies that a given increase in connections generates about a similar proportional increase in ownership links. In addition, the evidence suggests that most of this increase constitutes
3 For instance: the effort exerted by airports, airlines, and countries in getting direct flights, often justified as a
way of attracting business investment; the fact that non-stop flights command higher prices, indicating that business
passengers, the least price-conscious kind of traveler, do value them; the fact that businesses. tend to locate disproportionately near airports (Bel and Fageda 2008, Stilwell and Hansman 2013, Kasarda 2016). Last but not least, there
is also growing empirical evidence of the business value of direct flight links (Giroud 2013, Bernstein, Giroud, and
Townsend forth.).

3

capital flowing from relatively richer to relatively poorer countries: 3/4 of the increase in business connections could be attributed to companies in high-income countries owning companies in
middle-income ones, and 1/4 in the opposite direction.
As a result, cities with a large share of potential connections just below the threshold end up
with more foreign-owned companies and owning more companies abroad. We also show that,
consistent with the pattern found for the network of flights, the increased cross-ownership links
arise precisely over a range of distances just below 6000 miles, with some spillovers in shorter
distances and no impact above that threshold. We also find similar patterns using alternative measures of business connections, based on geolocated business-related events mentioned in news
reports worldwide, as well as evidence that connections increase the likelihood of presence of
large-company headquarters.
In sum, our evidence suggests that increasing the number of direct connections between different places has a significant impact on development, as it increases economic activity at the local
level. This seems to be driven by an intensification of business links, consistent with the idea that
the ability to interact in person is crucial for the establishment of those links. In other words, the
movement of people fosters the movement of capital, even though there is no technological reason
why capital would need airplanes to move around. This suggests that policy interventions designed
to increase the number of connections could potentially spur development, though at the price of
increased spatial inequalities at the local level.
Yet our results also highlight the potential for affecting inequality on a larger scale. In particular, our first-stage relationship linking potential long-haul connections just below 6000 miles and
additional actual connections turns out not to hold for places too poor to begin with: Vientiane
(Laos) gets a good draw in terms of potential, but this does not translate into actual connections
when a place is too poor to be worth connecting to. As a result, low-income countries get shut
out of the increase in business links and capital flows, suggesting that a lack of connections can
be part of the explanation for the Lucas (1990) paradox of why capital does not flow from rich to
poor countries. In sum, globalization, in its long-range air dimension, has helped the Shanghais of
the world achieve convergence, but also increased the distance between them and the Vientianes.
Whether the overall effect increases inequality or decreases it depends on which of these two forces
is seen as more important from that perspective.
Our paper relates to the broad empirical literature on the effects of globalization on economic
outcomes (e.g. Frankel and Romer 1999; Dollar and Kraay 2004; Dreher 2006; Hummels 2007;
Bacchetta and Jensen 2011; Ortega and Peri 2014). In particular, some of the work in that vein have
looked at the effect of transportation technologies, such as steamships (Pascali 2015), railroads
(Donaldson (forth.); Donaldson and Hornbeck 2016), and airplanes (Feyrer 2009). This literature
has focused largely on the effects of trade and openness, and as such it is mostly at the cross-country
4

level, or else within one country. In contrast, we focus on a different aspect of globalization,
namely the movement of people through the network of air links, which also allows us to look at
economic outcomes at a global yet granular level. By doing so, we also shed light on the substantial
debate on globalization and inequality (e.g. Dollar 2005, Bourguignon 2015), which has focused
on the contrast between inequality decreasing between countries while increasing within. We show
that air links can contribute to that pattern, while also helping explain why some places end up left
behind (Collier 2007).
The idea that air links may have an impact on local development is quite natural, and it is
unsurprising that a literature has looked into the connection (e.g. Brueckner 2003; Green 2007;
Mukkala and Tervo 2013). However, the attempts to identify a causal impact have been limited,
given the empirical challenges involved. An exception is Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2011), who
look at the impact of hub airports on the location of industries, using the natural experiment from
the post-war division of Germany. Relatedly, others have looked at the impact of air travel and
proximity on collaboration and productivity in various domains, such as business (Giroud 2013,
Bersntein, Giroud, and Townsend 2016) or science (Catalini, Fons-Rosen, and Gaule 2016), using
the introduction of air links in the US a a source of variation, and also on trade (Cristea 2011;
Poole 2013; Yilmazkuday and Yilmazkuday 2014). We differ in that our approach allows for
causal identification at a global level, and for studying both the impact on economic activity and
the potential channels via business links.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the recent evolution of
long-haul air travel, to lay out the foundations of our identification strategy. Section 3 describes
the data and specifications that implement that strategy, as well as establishing the presence and
effect of our discontinuity. Section 4 contains the results establishing the key effects on economic
activity. Sections 5 and 6 focus on mechanisms: network spillovers and the flow of people, and
business links. Section 7 concludes.

2

Background on Long-Haul Air Travel

Ever since the advent of the so-called “Jet Age,” turbine-powered aircraft have made air travel
increasingly common and far reaching (Proctor, Machat, and Kodera 2010). The technological
evolution of commercial airplanes (Anderson 2002, ch.7) enabled greater and greater distances to
be covered: from the Boeing 707, which started flying transatlantic routes in 1958, to the Boeing
747 (aka “Jumbo Jet”), which enabled, for instance, the route between San Francisco and Sydney
which, at just under 7500 miles, became in 1976 the longest regularly scheduled non-stop flight in
the world.
The introduction of the Boeing 747, in 1970, brought about the era of “ultra long-haul” (ULH)
5

commercial aviation. There is no single definition of what constitutes ULH, but a common practical definition singles out flights that take longer than 12 hours. Given customary speeds, a 12-hour
flight translates into about 6000 miles, corresponding to the distance between London or Paris and
Tokyo.4 The distinction is apparent in the range of modern commercial aircraft by Airbus and Boeing: there is a clear distinction between aircraft designed to fly up to 4000 nautical miles (about
4600 miles), and those that fly at least 6000 miles.
The crucial import of the ULH distinction is not in the technical feasibility of flights by different
kinds of aircraft – in fact, the shorter-haul planes cannot fly the 9-12 hour range anyway.5 Instead,
the 12-hour threshold is meaningful because of its impact on the cost of a given flight, as very long
flights impose requirements on the availability of pilots and crew. For instance, the US Federal
Aviation Authority (FAA) had required since the 1950s that a two-pilot crew could fly at most 12
hours within a 24-hour period: flights above that limit require three (or more) pilots, as well as
an additional flight crew member, and “adequate sleeping quarters” on the plane (Code of Federal
Regulations, §121.485). Similarly, European regulators adopted in 1991 a daily maximum of 13
hours for a flight crew member’s “flight duty period” working in a basic (“unaugmented”) crew.
Since the regulator also imposed that pre- and post-flight duties included in that period could not be
less than one hour, there would necessarily be additional crew in any flight of more than 12 hours
(EU-OPS Subpart Q, Council Regulation (EEC) No 3922/91).6 This type of regulation entails
that ULH flights are discontinuously costly, and significantly so given that personnel constitutes a
4 Specifically,

the air distance between Heathrow and Narita airports is of 5966 miles (as per www.
airmilescalculator.com), and non-stop flight hours are estimated at 11:40 (as per a simple Google flight
search). By contrast, from Chicago O’Hare to Narita takes 6267 miles, and an estimated 13:15. More generally, while
we do not have information on flight duration in our data, we can plot distance versus duration for the set of longest
flights for each airline (as of 2016). As can be seen in the Online Appendix (Figure A1), the relationship is very tight,
and there are essentially no flights above 6000 miles under 12 hours. Note also that this benchmark can be applied
into the past, as there has been very little evolution in speed over time – the 747-100B, from 1970, reached Mach 0.84
(644 mph) cruise speed, compared to the Mach 0.85 (652 mph) of the modern Boeing 787, from 2011.
5 More broadly, the range of a given plane is not exactly a clear-cut number: there is a trade-off between so-called
“payload” (namely, the sum of passenger and cargo weight) and fuel, and an airplane typically becomes uneconomical
to fly way before it is technically infeasible to do so. The range numbers we use correspond to so-called MTOW
(maximum takeoff weight) range at maximum payload (i.e. with the plane carrying as much passengers and cargo
as possible). Planes can fly longer than that, if they are willing to reduce payload in order to have more fuel. (For a
discussion on this, see Clark (2012, ch.5).) In any case, given the capabilities of modern aircraft, range is no longer a
dominant concern in airline fleet selection (Clark 2012, p.31): the vast majority of city-pairs that could sustain direct
connections has been covered by existing aircraft since the 1970s.
6 See https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/14/121.485 and http://www.vcockpit.
de/fileadmin/dokumente/presse/2003/ECAFTLpositionFeb2002.pdf. The pattern holds beyond
these examples. For one, US regulations also have an impact elsewhere: for instance, in 1992 the Indian regulator
introduced its own rules (AIC 28) essentially adopting US standards. Other countries have very similar limits: daily
flight duty time is capped at 14 hours in Canada, Australia limits two-pilot crews to 11 hours extendable to 12, and
so on. For a comparative account, see the Report of the Zaidi Committee, written for the Indian Ministry of Civil
Aviation, available at http://dgca.nic.in/reports/Report\_FDTL.pdf

6

substantial share of the costs of a flight.7
How important is this discontinuity in practice? Using our sample of cities with major international airports from the International Civil Aviation Organization, which are shown in the map
in Figure 1, we can calculate the distance between all city pairs as well as the number of non-stop
flights between cities. (We describe the data in detail in Section 3.)
[FIGURE 1 HERE]
The discontinuity manifests itself clearly in Figure 2 (Panel A), which depicts the number of
city pairs connected to one another, defined as having at least weekly service between the cities, as
of 2014. Each dot in the figure corresponds to the number of pairs within a 200-mile bin in terms
of distance. We can see that, while the number of flights unsurprisingly declines with distance,
there is a substantial drop right at 6000 miles: there are substantially more connected city pairs in
which the two cities sit at a distance between 5800 and 6000 miles, say, than is the case for pairs
situated between 6000 and 6200 miles apart.
[FIGURE 2 HERE]
This discontinuity, however, has not always been quite this pronounced. In fact, Panel B in
Figure 2 displays the same information as in Panel A, except that it superimposes the data for
1989, and Panel C shows the change in connections from 1989 to 2014. It is apparent that the
decline in the number of connected city pairs with respect to distance is a lot smoother back in
1989. From a purely descriptive perspective, this is due to the fact that, while the number of
connections goes up between the two dates at just about any distance, the magnitude of the increase
is noticeably larger above 4600 miles. Panel D further clarifies that the discontinuity is not an
artifact of potential connections due to geography: there is no sharp drop in total city pairs (using
all possible permutations) around the same distance.
What explains this pattern? As it turns out, the late 1980s and early 1990s witnessed important
shifts in the long-haul civil aviation landscape, both in terms of technology and market structure.
The Boeing 747-400, which started commercial operations in 1989, was able to fly about 1000
miles longer than previous commercial airliners (up to almost 9000 miles). By 1990 there had
already been over 100 units delivered, and the model went on to become the best-selling subset in
the 747 family, with nearly 700 units sold over 20 years.8 A few years later, in 1993-94, Airbus
7 For instance, personnel salaries represents about 20% of the costs of a typical US domestic flight (Wall St. Journal
2012), second only to fuel. Unlike the latter, it is also a fixed cost, since a relatively empty plane can fly with less fuel,
but still requires the same number of pilots and crew. On top of that, additional crew and sleeping quarters imply less
space and weight available for carrying payload, thus reducing revenue potential.
8 A full list is available at https://www.planespotters.net/production-list/Boeing/747/
747-400.

7

introduced its A330 (up to 7300 miles) and A340 (up to 8400 miles) models, which made the
company into a serious competitor for Boeing. The combination of these very successful models,
coupled with the increased market competition, helped make long-haul flights commercially more
viable. The rise of long-haul flights, in turn, made the discontinuity around the ULH threshold
more meaningful over time, leading to the pattern that is apparent as of 2014.9
This evolution took place very rapidly, as can be seen when we break down the number of
routes by year and aircraft manufacturer, as we show in the Online Appendix (Figure A2). The
number of long-haul flights (above 4500 miles) goes up sharply right after 1989, and this is largely
pushed by the range below 6000 miles. This is in turn driven by Boeing aircraft, matching the
introduction of the 747-400. Airbus then enters the long-haul market in 1993, exactly as the A330
and A340 come into the picture, and the increase in its presence is overwhelmingly in the below6000 range as well.10
There is reason to believe that this discontinuity may be in the process of disappearing. Both
US and European regulators have adopted major revisions to flight time limit regulations in 2014
(known as FAR 117 and “new EU FTL”), which in the European case required compliance by early
2016 at the latest. These impose stricter limits: FAR 117 in essence implies that two-pilot crews
cannot fly for more than 9 hours, roughly speaking, whereas flight duty period in the new EU FTL
is generally capped between 11 and 12 hours (depending on start times).11
As it happens, the two-plus decades over which this discontinuity has existed provide us with a
unique window to identify the causal impact of long-haul connections. To the extent that cities that,
as of the late 1980s, happened to have many airports lying just below 6000 miles of distance, do
not differ systematically from cities that happened to have many airports just above that threshold,
this distinction constitutes a source of exogenous variation in the number of places to which a city
gets connected over the subsequent period.

3

Empirical Framework

Let us now describe how we implement this idea in practice. We start off with our key data sources,
and then discuss the empirical specifications we will use. Finally, we will establish more formally
the presence and impact of the 6000-mile discontinuity.
9 Interestingly,

if we break down the connections by the type of aircraft, it is clear that the same models are flying
below and above the threshold – consistent with the change in incentives introduced by the ULH range. For instance,
as of 2014, we see in the range between 5500 and 6000 miles (resp. 6000 to 6500): 84 A330 (resp. 18), 89 A340 (24),
14 A380 (3), 91 Boeing 747 (19), 48 Boeing 767 (3), 127 Boeing 777 (76), and 27 Boeing 787 (16).
10 The speed with which the increase takes place is not surprising: the 747-400 had been planned since 1984, and
many orders were in place by 1985, leaving plenty of time for immediate adoption right upon availability.
11 See
https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/14/part-117
and
https://www.
eurocockpit.be/sites/default/files/ftl_commission_regulation_83_2014.pdf

8

3.1
3.1.1

Data
Air Links

Our key source of data comes from the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Specifically, we use the “Traffic by Flight Stage” (TFS) dataset, which gives us, for the period between
1989 and 2014, annual traffic on-board aircraft on individual flight stages of international scheduled services, and includes information on aircraft type used, the number of flights operated, and
the traffic (passengers, freight and mail) carried. This dataset contains information on city and
country names, which we use to merge with information on the coordinates of major international
airports, from the “Airport Traffic” dataset.12
We are left with 819 cities with major international airports, from 200 different countries,
which are shown in the map in Figure 1. (Descriptive statistics can be found in Table A1 in the
Online Appendix.) We can see that the cities in our sample are spread all over the world, with some
concentration in Europe due to a combination of its level of development and small country size.
We use the definition of a “major” airport as given by the ICAO data, as we do not want to include
small airports that would distort the picture we are trying to build: for instance, the key reference
for a business located in Orange County, CA is most likely the Los Angeles (LAX) airport, even
though the local John Wayne Airport has a handful of international flights. Note that selection
into the major airport category being correlated with our source of variation does not appear to
be an issue: if that were the case and airports had been picked based on the number of potential
connections around the 6000-mile threshold, we would expect there to be a sharp discontinuity in
the number of airport pairs at that point, which Panel D in Figure 2 shows not to be the case.
For each city pair in our sample, we can flag whether the pair are connected in any given year.
Our baseline analysis defines two cities as being connected if they have at least weekly flights
between them.13 We can either consider the snapshot of whether there is a connection in a specific
year, or aggregate the information over a multi-year period, which we do by adding the number of
years within that period in which the two cities were connected to create a measure of connectionyears. We will study both measures, depending on whether the outcome of interest refers to a
specific point in time, or to changes over a longer period. We also compute the shortest distance
between the cities, using their coordinates.14
12 For

cities with more than one airport, we use the average coordinates of all airports in question. While keeping
that in mind, for simplicity we will use “airports” and “cities” interchangeably.
13 We define a weekly connection as having at least 52 flights back and forth in a year. We will show that the results
are essentially identical, qualitatively speaking, using alternative definitions, such as twice-weekly connections (104
flights) and daily (365). There is clear bunching in the data around these values, making them natural definitions.
14 Specifically, using the geodist command in Stata, we compute the geodesic distance: the length of the shortest
curve between two points along the surface of (a mathematical model of) the Earth. (This can be thought of as the
“great-circle” distance, except that the latter term refers to a perfect sphere, which the Earth is not.) This is not the

9

We can also aggregate the information to the level of cities. For each one of the cities in
our sample, we calculate the number of other cities to which it is connected in a given year, and
also the aggregate number of connection-years over a longer period. Similarly, we also compute
the total number of flights to/from the city, as well as the seats and passengers in them, and the
number of countries to which the city is connected. We focus on flights of more than 2000 miles,
in order to concentrate on the range over which airplanes are essentially the only relevant means
of transporting people.15
We can also summarize the quality of those links, with a measure of network centrality. We
will focus on eigenvector centrality, which is constructed as follows: we first describe the structure
of the network of air links with the “adjacency matrix” A, in which each entry aij takes a value
of 1 if cities i and j are connected, and 0 otherwise. We take the eigenvector associated with the
greatest eigenvalue of A, and the nth component of that eigenvector corresponds to the centrality
measure of city n. Intuitively, this procedure assigns relative scores to all cities in the network
while ensuring that connections to high-scoring cities contribute more to the score of a given city
than equal connections to low-scoring cities.
3.1.2

Economic Activity

To capture economic activity at the local level, on a global scale, we use the by now standard
information on light density measured by satellites at night, available from the National Centers
for Environmental Information at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NCEINOOA). This has become a widely used proxy for economic activity at the local level, as exemplified by a number of recent papers (Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil 2012; Bleakley and Lin
2012; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou 2013). We follow the data-cleaning procedure suggested
by Lowe (2014), then aggregate the data into grid cells of size 0.25 x 0.25 degrees. We focus on
growth over the two decades following the introduction of the Boeing 747-400 (and the start of our
sample of air links), so we compute average nights lights in the cell for 1992 (first year available)
and 2010. In the Online Appendix (Figures A3-A4) we map the distribution of night lights for
those years, around the world and in Asia (as an example for greater detail). One can clearly see
substantial growth, as well as changes in the geographical distribution of economic activity over
the intervening period.
We will also use data on population at the local level. This comes from the Gridded Population of the World (GPW) version 4, which we obtain from the PRIO-GRID website. We use the
first and last available years (1990 and 2010), and also grid-cell level variables to use as controls
actual flight distance, in practice, but the latter is obviously endogenous to economic and geopolitical factors, so we
choose to use the exogenous (and easily calculated) proxy.
15 Results are very similar if we use 3000 miles as the threshold instead.

10

(precipitation, temperature).
3.1.3

Business Links

In order to shed light on the potential effects on potential mechanisms behind the effect of air links
of economic activity, we will look at their impact on business links over long distances. For that,
we make use of three datasets with spatial information and global coverage.
Firm Ownership. We use the Orbis online data from Bureau van Dijk (BvD). Orbis is a database
of firms that contains detailed financial, ownership, employment, location and industry data on over
195 million firms in 229 countries. Our sample consists of all of the one and two-way business
ownership links between cities located in different countries and that are available in the online
database.
To construct the network of foreign ownership links at the city-pair level, we first consider the
universe of firms that are owned by a foreign Global Ultimate Owner (GUO). Here we define the
GUO of a given firm as any company that a stake of 50% or more in the firm in question and is
located in a country other than the one in which the firm is registered under by Orbis. The GUO is
also an ultimate owner, which implies that it is not in turn owned by another company.16
We identify approximately 1.1 million firms that have a foreign GUO. For each firm we collect
the following variables: name, BvD identification number, and spatial information (country, city)
and the same information for the owner. Out of the initial set, we were able to obtain coordinates
for 523,702 companies, in a total of 55,135 company cities in 181 countries, and 29,648 GUO
cities in 183 countries.17
Since the Orbis online database is continuously updated, our data captures a cross-section of
ownership as of the most recent update. The data was downloaded from April-June of 2016, and
hence reflects a snapshot of ownership patterns as of that point in time.
We again map the distribution of ownership links in space, as shown in the Online Appendix
(Figures A5-A7). The first panel in each figure captures the total number of foreign-owned companies located in a given grid cell; the second panel, in contrast, displays the total number of
16 We also have information on whether the firm is owned by a foreign Immediate Shareholder (ISH). The ISH of
a given firm is defined identically except that it may be owned by a GUO. For example a company in Sri Lanka may
have an ISH in India, whose GUO is a holding company in the Netherlands. The Dutch company is therefore the GUO
of both the Sri Lankan and the Indian companies. In 52% of the cases, the GUO and ISH are identical, and results are
very similar using the ISH definition of ownership instead.
17 Specifically, we georeferenced the list of firms to provide latitude and longitude points, using an algorithm that
searches inputted strings on Here Maps (https://maps.here.com/). By default, the search string describes a
city, and the search yields the center point of the city in question. If information about the firm location beyond city
was provided, the coordinates will identify specific districts, neighborhoods, or addresses within a city. In cases where
an administrative unit larger than a city was provided in the data, the center point of the appropriate sub-national unit
is used.

11

companies located abroad that are owned by individuals or firms located in that grid cell.18 It is
apparent, from the comparison between the two panels, that the latter is more geographically concentrated, indicating that owners are more unevenly distributed over space than the owned. This is
in itself unsurprising, but the extent seems striking nonetheless.
Major Business Events. We use the GDELT dataset, which identifies, classifies, and geolocates
events mentioned in broadcast, print, and web news reports worldwide. (For a more detailed
description, see Leetaru and Schrodt 2013, or Manacorda and Tesei 2016.) In particular, for each
each event there are two actors (“source” and “target”), with latitude and longitude coordinates
for each of them. We restrict our analysis to events that capture “material cooperation,’ where at
least one actor is a business entity (i.e. classified as BUS, “business,” or MNC, “multinational
corporation”), and where there were at least two separate articles reporting about the event. To
match across datasets, we collapse the spatial data to cell level (0.25 x 0.25 degrees), calculating
the sum of observations in each cell. The data are available between 1979 and 2014, which we will
aggregate into pre-2000 (1979-1999) and post-2000 sub-periods. We map the post-2000 events
in the Online Appendix (Figure A8), and from this it is apparent that these cooperation events
are more evenly distributed than the ownership links. This is consistent with the fact that they
represent weaker links between two businesses, and thus capture a different dimension of business
interaction across distances.
Headquarter Locations. We look at the location of corporate headquarters of companies in the
Forbes “Global 2000” list. This list compiles the 2000 largest publicly traded companies, and
the headquarters data is obtained from the World City Relational Data, made available by the
Globalization and World Cities (GaWC) Research Network. Specifically, we use their Data Set 26
(Global Command and Control Centres), with information for 2006, 2009, and 2012, based on the
2010 edition of the Forbes list. The companies are spread over 386 cities in 2006, 416 cities in
2009, and 433 cities in 2012.19

3.2

Identification Strategy and Specifications

In order to identify a causal effect of air links, we will rely on the discontinuity in the likelihood
of links as a function of the distance between two cities, at 6000 miles. We will now discuss how
we will use it to implement our empirical strategy, which we will break down, depending on the
18 We

show pictures for the full set of foreign-owned firms, as well as for the subset of firms located at least 3000
miles away from their owners. and again the case of Asia for greater detail.
19 The data excludes corporations with headquarters registered in the Cayman Islands, Bermuda and Liechtenstein.
It also assigns companies located in small towns that belong to a metropolitan area to the largest city in that area.

12

nature of our outcomes of interest, into two distinct levels of analysis: city pairs and grid cells. We
will discuss these in order.
3.2.1

City-Pair Analysis

As Figure 2 indicates, our identification strategy is based on the idea that the likelihood that two
cities get connected depends crucially on whether their bilateral distance happens to be just above
or just below 6000 miles. Since this variation is arguably as good as randomly assigned, this
strategy allows us to test whether long-haul flights affect economic activity in, and between, cities.
To test that more formally, we perform a regression discontinuity analysis at the city-pair level:
(1)

Yij = α + β ∗ Below6Kij + f ( Distanceij ) ∗ γ + ε ij ,

where ij denotes a city-pair, Yij is an outcome of interest, Distanceij is the distance in miles between the two cities (i.e. airports), and Below6Kij is a dummy equal to one if Distanceij is less
than 6000 miles. It is well known that higher order polynomials in f () can result in approximation errors due to over-fitting or biases at boundary points, so in the baseline specification we
use a parsimonious specification allowing for different linear slopes above and below the 6000
mile threshold. We also provide robustness tests using a second-order polynomial, as well as estimates using various sample bandwidths, including the optimal bandwidth that minimizes the mean
squared error of the point estimator, using the algorithm developed by Calonico, Cattaneo and
Titiunik (2014).20 Following Imbens and Lemieus (2008), we adopt robust standard errors as our
baseline specification. However, we also check robustness by showing standard errors clustered
at the country-pair level, thereby allowing for correlation between city pairs located in the same
country pair.
To test for a “first stage” relationship, we use an outcome variable indicating whether the citypair is connected or the number of connection-years between them, defined by at least weekly
flights. If the 6000-mile threshold is meaningful, we expect β to be positive. We then estimate
reduced form effects on other city-pair outcomes. Under the exclusion restriction that outcomes
around the threshold are affected only through a change in the likelihood of getting connected, we
will present scaled instrumental variable estimates – the marginal effect of getting connected on
outcomes – using a ‘fuzzy” regression discontinuity approach.
20 This

is implemented in Stata using the rdrobust routine.

13

3.2.2

Grid-Cell Analysis

To test whether connections affect economic activity, we expand the analysis beyond city-pair
outcomes and use data at the grid-cell level. The key identification assumption in this case boils
down to the idea that there is no reason why airports that happen to have relatively many major
airports sitting just under 6000 miles away should be systematically different from airports that
happen to have many just above that threshold. If that is the case, for any given airport in our
sample we can take the number of airports within a narrow window below 6000 miles – say, 500
miles – accounting for the number of airports within a similar window above the threshold, as a
source of variation in the number of long-haul connections that this airport will actually have.21
To implement this logic, we define our baseline instrument, ShareBelow6Ki , as the number of
airports 5500 to 6000 miles away from airport i, divided by the number of airports 5500 to 6500
miles away. (The list of top and bottom 50 cities, ranked by ShareBelow6K can be found in Table
A2 in the Online Appendix.) To build intuition for how this instrument is constructed, Figure 3
provides the graphical example of San Francisco (SFO).
[FIGURE 3 HERE]
Note that we will control, in all specifications, for the total number of airports in the range of
5500 to 6500 miles, which means that we will account for factors related to the general isolation
or broad location of the airport. The residual variation is what is arguably idiosyncratic. As an
example, Philadelphia and Boston will naturally have a similar number of airports located between
5500 and 6500 miles away (66 and 57, as it happens), because they are close to each other (about
280 miles). However, the share of those that happens to fall just below the 6000-mile threshold
is 64% larger for the former than for the latter, with Boston being in the bottom decile of that
distribution and Philadelphia just below the median.
We start with the following reduced-form specification:
(2)

Yic = α + β ∗ ShareBelow6Kic + Xic γ + ε ic ,

where c denotes a grid cell, i denotes the closest airport (within the same country) in our sample,
Yict is an outcome of interest (night lights, or population, in the cell), ShareBelow6Kic is the value
of the instrument at the closest airport, Xi is a vector of control variables. If connections foster
economic growth in areas close to the airport, we expect β to be positive.
All regressions will include in the vector X the total number of airports between 5500 and 6500
miles away, as discussed above, as well as the log distance in miles from the grid cell c centroid
to the airport i, and region fixed effects (as per the World Bank classification) to ensure that the
21 We

provide robustness tests showing that using alternative windows do not qualitatively alter the main results.

14

results are not driven by variation across regions. We will further control for grid-cell night lights
as of 1992 (earliest data available), as well as population as of 1990, to reduce residual variation
and increase the precision of our estimates, given persistence in the data over time.22 In addition,
we will use various predetermined covariates to ensure that the results are robust.
To estimate the magnitude of the effects in ways that are more easily interpretable, we can
then scale the reduced-form estimates with a first stage estimate using Two-Stage Least Squares
(IV/2SLS). This will result is an estimate that captures the marginal effect of additional international connections on local economic growth. In this case, the first stage specification is simply:
Connectionsic = α + β ∗ ShareBelow6Kic + Xic γ + ε ic ,

(3)

where Connectionsict is the number of cities the airport i is connected to (at least weekly flights),
and all other variables are defined the same as in equation (2).
We can also exploit the granularity of the data to uncover spatial patterns in our effects. Intuitively, we would expect the economic activity in cells around the airport to be affected, if at
all, only if they are relatively close by. Our estimations of equation (2) include grid-cells within
100 miles of the airport, as it seems plausible ex ante that such cells are potentially affected.23
However, since we would expect the effects on economic activity to depend on how close a cell is
to the airport, we can estimate the reduced-form effects as a function of the spatial distance to the
airport:
(4)

Yic = α + β 1 ∗ ShareBelow6Kic + β 2 ∗ ShareBelow6Kic ∗ Distanceic + Xic γ + ε ic ,

where Distanceic is the log distance in miles from the grid cell c centroid to the airport i.
This specification allows us to test whether any positive effects dissipate with distance and at
what rate. More precisely, β 1 captures the reduced form effect of connections for grid cells that
are located in the immediate vicinity of the airport – essentially cells in the city – since Distanceic
takes values around zero in those cases. By contrast, β 2 captures the marginal effect of distance to
the airport on the treatment effect. If connections result in positive effects that are maximized in
areas in and around the city, and dissipate with distance, we expect β 1 to be positive and β 2 to be
negative. The combination of the two estimates will, in turn, allow us to probe for at which distance
the effects are no longer positive. We also provide results using more flexible estimations of these
spatial relationships, which will enable probing for whether there is a point where the effects turn
22 Note

that these variables may have been themselves affected by our discontinuity, given the timing of the regulations and the entry of the Boeing 747-400, as we have discussed. However, we will show that our variation is
essentially uncorrelated with them, consistent with the idea that important effects would have taken some years to be
felt.
23 We will show robustness with respect to other thresholds.

15

negative, for example due to rural-urban reallocation of economic activity or population.
In all of our specifications, we will cluster the standard errors at the country level, to allow for
the possibility of correlated shocks across cities in the same country. We will also show robustness
to other approaches to computing the standard errors – namely, clustering at the level of airports
to deal explicitly with the fact that our key variation is at that level, and implementing the Conley
(1999) correction for spatial correlation.

3.3

Establishing the Discontinuity

Figure 2 has provided graphical evidence for the existence and evolution of the discontinuity in the
likelihood of connection between city pairs at a distance of 6000 miles. We now turn to the task of
establishing this more systematically.
The key evidence is in Table 1, implementing versions of (1) with both robust and country-pairclustered standard errors reported. We see a robust pattern where city pairs just over 6000 miles
apart are about 0.3-0.4 percentage points less likely to be connected by at least weekly flights, as of
2014, as compared to those separated by slightly less than 6000 miles. Since the overall likelihood
of a given pair in our sample being connected is around one percent, this entails a quantitatively
substantial difference.
[TABLE 1 HERE]
The result holds with a first-order polynomial for f ( Distanceij ) (Columns 1-4), as well as
with a second-order polynomial (Columns 5-6). It is not affected by different bandwidth choices
either: we start off with a narrow window of 500 miles (Column 1), which we expand to 1000
miles (Column 2), before presenting our optimal-bandwidth baseline (Column 3). Neither is it
substantially changed when we control for whether the pair was already connected in 1989, as well
as a set of 1989 covariates measuring the extent of connections between the two countries in the
pair (Column 4).
We further probe this result by running specifications where we arbitrarily impose “placebo”
discontinuity thresholds other than 6000 – specifically, every 50 miles between 4500 and 7500,
leaving aside the range between 5750 and 6250 miles as the match between the regulations and
the specific distance is an approximation.24 Figure 4 shows that the estimate at the 6000-mile
threshold is much larger, in absolute value, than the placebo alternatives, falling far to the left of
the distribution computed for the latter. This reassures us that the effect we pick up is unlikely to
be spurious.
24 Notably,

the absolute value of the coefficient is maximized precisely at 6000 (-0.0038), with the next-highest
value at -0.0023 for the discontinuity set at 6050. The specification here includes a first-order polynomial in distance,
and optimal bandwidth, as well as standard errors clustered at the level of country pairs.

16

[FIGURE 4 HERE]
We can also ask how the discontinuity evolved over time. Column (7) in Table 1 implements
the baseline specification, but with a dummy for the presence of a connection in 1989 as the
dependent variable. The coefficient is relatively small (p-value=0.099), indicating that, in the year
of the launch of the Boeing 747-400, the likelihood of connection just below the threshold was
perhaps higher, but not strongly so. The remainder of the table then aggregates the information
for the subsequent two decades, using connection-years as the outcome of interest. We see that
the effect is already strongly significant in the 1990s (Column 8), and gets stronger in the 2000s
(Column 9). All in all, the presence of connections over the entire period is markedly higher just
below the 6000-mile threshold (Column 10). In short, the discontinuity seems to have magnified
rapidly upon the technological developments of the late 1980s and early 1990s, becoming further
established over time.
Having established the presence of the discontinuity at the level of city pairs, we turn to how
it translates into the level of airports, which we will use for our grid-cell analysis. Put simply,
does the share of potential connections just below the threshold, ShareBelow6Ki , predict the total
number of connections that are actually available in airport i? Table 2 answers in the affirmative.
Columns 1-2 show the basic correlation for the total number of (at least) weekly connections as
of 2014, first with no controls at all and then controlling for the total number of airports in the
5500-6500-mile range, as well as region fixed effects. The magnitude of the effect is largely
unaffected, and precision greater, when we control for airport characteristics as of 1989, including
initial connections (Column 3). Connections in 1989 and 2014 are highly correlated, as would
have been expected, and this helps account for the increased precision.
[TABLE 2 HERE]
Interestingly, Columns 4-5 show that there was no significant correlation between our variation
and the total number of connections as of 1989. In fact, in the Online Appendix (Table A3) we
show that ShareBelow6K is not significantly correlated with any of the 1989 airport characteristics,
with quantitatively small standardized effects, again indicating that the effect of the discontinuity
was weak at best at the time of the introduction of the Boeing 747-400.
The remainder of Table 2 then considers the evolution of the pattern over time, by looking at
the total number of connection-years for the city. We see that cities with a large share of potential
connections just below the threshold already had a significantly higher number of connections in
the 1990s (Column 6), and even more so in the 2000s (Column 7), adding up to a strong effect over
the two decades.
The estimated magnitudes indicate a substantial effect. A coefficient of 4.88 (Column 2) entails
that going from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile in ShareBelow6K (0.488 and 0.640,
17

respectively) would translate into just under 0.75 additional long-haul connections. This compares
to an average of 2.83 connections as of 2014, and 1.39 additional connections between 1989 and
2014. Alternatively, that change translates into about 4.3 additional connection-years over the two
decades, again substantial as compared to the average value of 40.42 (Column 8).
It is also interesting to consider the sources of the variation being used in our estimation. The
graphical representation in Figure 5 displays the residual variation in ShareBelow6K after controlling for the total number of airports in the 5500-6500-mile range and region fixed effects. We can
see that the places with very high and very low draws in the “lottery” of potential connections just
below the threshold are spread all over the world. Also notably, we can see that there are places
with very positive and very negative shocks located very close to one another. This reassures us
that the variation is essentially idiosyncratic, and not driven by specific parts of the world.
[FIGURE 5 HERE]
Lastly, we also check that our resutls are robust to different ways of implementing our variation.
In particular, we show in the Online Appendix (Table A5) that they still hold when considering
the number of cities between 5500 and 6000 miles, instead of the share, as well as when we
define connections based on the presence of twice-weekly or daily flights, or when we construct
ShareBelow6K over different windows (5700-6300, 5200-6800).
In sum, city pairs that are just under 6000 miles apart are indeed more likely to be connected
than those just over the threshold, and the difference seems to have increased substantially starting
in the 1990s. This translates into the fact that airports with a large share of potential connections
just below the threshold have a larger total number of connections as of 2014, as well as of total
connection-years over the intervening decades, again essentially driven by an increase in connections after 1989.

4
4.1

Flying Economy: Air Links and Economic Development
Baseline Results

We now turn to studying the impact of air links on economic activity. Table 3 shows results using
grid-cell level night lights within a 100-mile radius of any of the 777 airports we can match to the
night lights data. We start with reduced-form results linking night lights to the share of potential
connections just below the 6000-mile threshold, controlling for the total number within 500 miles
of that threshold. Column 1 first shows the correlation without any additional controls other than
regional dummies, for night lights as measured in 1992. We see no significant correlation yet,

18

suggesting that the increase in long-haul connections unleashed by the introduction of new planes
was too recent for there to be a significant effect on economic activity.
[TABLE 3 HERE]
Column 2 shows that by 2010, in contrast, a significant correlation had emerged: places close to
lucky airports display greater levels of economic activity. Because there is substantial persistence
in levels of local economic development, we then look at the change in measured night lights
between 1992 and 2010 (Column 3), which in essence tests whether the difference between the
coefficients in Columns 1 and 2 is statistically significant. We find that it clearly is, showing that
those places saw larger increases in economic activity over those decades.
Column 4 then adds controls for the 1992 level of night lights, as well as population as of 1990,
in order to account for possible convergence effects and to increase precision. Columns 5-6 further
show that the result is essentially unaltered if we also control for baseline airport characteristics,
geographical controls and initial GDP at the country level. (In Table A4 in the Online Appendix
we show that ShareBelow6K is not correlated with the geographical characteristics either.) Note
in particular that the coefficient increases in magnitude as we add covariates.
We then turn to 2SLS specifications, scaling our reduced-form results so as to interpret their
implications in terms of the impact of long-haul connections on local economic activity. Columns
7-8 reproduce the sets of controls from Columns 5-6, showing a positive and statistically significant
effect of more connections, as measured by total connection-years.25 Columns 9-11 then show that
the picture that emerges if we focus on growth rates instead is similar across the board.
To make sense of the magnitudes, consider the baseline coefficients from Column 5. For the
reduced form, we find that going from the 25th from the 75th percentile in terms of the share of
potential connections just below the threshold explains about one-sixth of a standard deviation of
the distribution of the increase in night lights over the period, and about the same for the distribution
of growth rates. In the 2SLS context, the estimates imply that one additional connection-year
explains about 0.03 standard deviation of both distributions. Put another way, given that the airport
closest to the median cell in our sample had one connection-year added over the period, we can
explain about 3% of the growth rate of that median location.
Our 2SLS estimates mask considerable heterogeneity in the extent to which the link between
potential connections just below the threshold and actual connections materializes for different
places. This can be seen when we estimate the first stage separately for different subsamples, depending on how developed they were in 1992 (as measured by night lights over the 100-mile radius
25 Given the magnitudes of the first-stage F-statistics, we focus on Anderson-Rubin Wald test p-values, for weakinstrument-robust inference. Results are very similar with the Stock-Wright S-statistic, and with uncorrected p-values
as well, as can be seen by comparing coefficients and the corresponding standard errors.

19

around the airport). In our baseline specification (Column 6), the first-stage coefficient implies that
the impact of a unit change in ShareBelow6K on additional connection-years is 31.83. As it turns
out, the first-stage coefficient for the top quartile of airports is 201.85 (p-value=0.006); in contrast,
the one for the bottom half is a mere 2.26 (p=0.747).26 In other words, a place like Vientiane
(Laos) gets an excellent draw when it comes to the “lottery” around the 6000-mile threshold, but
that does not translate into more connections.
In sum, we see increased economic activity, over the period of analysis, in places that are
closer to airports that get additional flights induced by our exogenous variation in potential longhaul connections. This indicates a causal impact of air links on economic activity at the local level,
but one which is available only to places that were developed enough, to begin with, that they could
indeed get connected.
We further check the robustness of our main findings in a number of different ways. (For
brevity, all the results are shown in the Online Appendix, with our full set of controls.) We first
experiment with the different implementation of our key source of variation: the results remain if
we consider the number of cities between 5500 and 6000 miles, instead of the share (Table A6).
We then ask whether our results are reliant on specific places. We have shown that our variation,
controlling for the number of cities around the threshold, does not seem particularly concentrated
in a given region, and we control for region fixed effects throughout. Still, we go one step further
and redo the estimation dropping each country at a time. We plot the resulting distribution of 2SLS
coefficients in a histogram in the Online Appendix (Figure A9), and the coefficients are essentially
all within a tight window of the baseline estimate of 0.143, and all very much on the positive (and
sizable) side. Interestingly, the smallest coefficient comes when excluding China (0.081). This
smaller magnitude suggests that the effect of connections might be particularly strong in a context
of fast growth, in which a positive shock to potential links is more likely to materialize as others
will be inclined to seize on those links. In any case, we also show that the results excluding China
are still statistically significant (Table A7).
We further consider different subsamples, in the remainder of Table A7. We show that the
results are unaltered if we leave out, for each airport, the cell whose centroid is closest to the
airport coordinates, indicating that the effect on night lights is not being driven by the airport
itself, as opposed to a broader increase in economic activity. We also experiment with alternative
thresholds: our results still hold when we choose 50 or 150 miles instead.
Finally, we check robustness with respect to different ways of computing standard errors (Table
A8). First, our results remain qualitatively unaltered if we cluster standard errors at the level of
26 The threshold for the top quartile is St Louis, MO, while the median place is Cape Town. The typical (median)
city in that bottom half is Abidjan, and the subsample is disproportionately in Sub-Saharan Africa: the region has
about 10% of airports in our sample, but 20% of those in the bottom half.

20

airports. This deals specifically with the fact that the variation we use is at that level. Second, we
use the Conley (1999) approach allowing for spatial correlation across different cells, and again
the results hold, using thresholds of 100 or 500 miles.

4.2

Spatial Patterns

This basic result begs an important question: does this effect constitute a genuine increase in the
overall level of economic activity, or is it evidence of its spatial reallocation instead? In particular,
it could be the case that more connections lead business or individuals to relocate closer to the
airport, leaving other more distant locations that would then endure negative spillover effects. In
other words, the growth around the airport could be at the expense of the hinterland, which would
obviously have very different implications from a standpoint of policy or welfare.
We can study this question by exploiting the spatial richness and granularity in the available
data. Specifically, we do not have to restrict our attention to the immediate vicinity of the airports,
but rather examine how the impact of additional connections might change as we move away
from them. We start by considering a simple linear interaction specification for the reduced form,
where we regress the change in night lights on ShareBelow6K and its interaction with grid-cell
distance to the nearest airport in the country. Based on our previous results, we would expect a
positive coefficient for the main effect of ShareBelow6K, indicating the positive effect of potential
connections on economic activity around the airport. The interaction, however, could well be
negative, as the effect gets weaker with distance.
The results are in Table 4, and align with that intuition. Column 1 displays the increase in night
lights between 1992 and 2010 as the dependent variable, and controlling for Around6K, regional
dummies, the main effect of (log) distance to the airport, as well as the initial levels of night lights
and population. It shows a positive effect around the airport, which declines with distance. One
concern is that the results might be unduly affected by very remote places, which tend to be located
in only a few sparsely populated regions of territorially large countries – not many places will be,
say, 1,000 miles from the closest major airport in the country. Column 2 shows that the result is
essentially identical, and in fact somewhat stronger, when we restrict the analysis to grid cells at
most 500 miles away from the closest airport. Using the same sample, Columns 3 adds airport and
geographic controls, confirming the same message.
[TABLE 4 HERE]
The point estimates from Columns 2-3 imply that the effect turns negative at a distance of
just under 300 miles, which would seem to suggest that the potential for additional connections
could hinder the economic prospects of sufficiently remote places. This simple linear specification,
21

however, obviously imposes that this would be the case at some distance. To better assess the issue
of spatial reallocation, we then estimate the effect of distance on the potential impact in a more
flexible way. Specifically, we run our baseline regressions, as in Table 3, but restricting the sample
to the ranges of 100-250 and 250-500 miles from the closest airport. (For comparison, Column 4
reproduces the result from Table 3, within a 100-mile range.) As it turns out, the results in Columns
6-7 show precisely estimated zeros. Columns 8-10 establish that the same is true when we look at
growth rates instead.
This provides evidence against the hypothesis of pure spatial reallocation – at the very least,
any negative spillovers for more remote places are canceled out by positive ones. In that sense,
connections seem to generate new economic activity on net. However, it is still true that the effect is
to exacerbate inequalities over space, as connected cities grow faster relative to their hinterlands.27
That said, a more complete account of the spatial patterns requires us to take into account that
people can move across space. For that we turn to grid-cell level population as the outcome of
interest for our regression specifications, which we display in Table 5. Perhaps surprisingly, the
results display no evidence of an increase in population in the immediate vicinity of the airport
(Column 1). There do not seem to be significant changes in population farther away from the
airport either (Columns 2-3). The remainder of the table show that the same message is true when
considering the specification with the interaction with distance to the airport, both in terms of the
increase or growth rates.
[TABLE 5 HERE]
This suggests that the increased economic activity is not being matched by population movements, at least over the time frame of the analysis. Of course, it might be that those movements
take place over a longer horizon. Alternatively, to the extent that standard spatial equilibrium
arguments would require individuals and businesses to be indifferent across space (Glaeser and
Gottlieb 2009), this can be interpreted as evidence that higher incomes may be getting translated
into economic rents.
In sum, we find robust evidence of a causal impact of long-haul air links on economic activity
at the local level. This impact is not merely driven by spatial reallocation, though it does seem to
fuel inequality across space, which does not appear to be compensated by population moves, at
least over the time horizon we are able to study.
This begs the question of what underpins this impact. The key differential of air transportation
relative to other alternatives, as we have argued, is its implications for the ease of transporting
27 Note

that the comparison here is done with respect to distance to the closest major airport in the country. A
different but related question pertains to what happens to other major airports in response to shocks hitting a given
country. We will return to this question in the next section.

22

people over long distances – much more so than goods, as trade still flows mostly by sea. It stands
to reason that the impact of air links comes from fostering connections between people.
To understand how this plays out, we will first map out how the variation in long-haul connections spills over into different types of connections, thereby affecting a given airport’s position in
the network of air links, and how that translates into the actual flow of people. Then we will turn to
how the flow of people can foster the flow of capital, as connections might influence links between
businesses across long distances.

5

Connecting People: Network Spillovers and Passenger Flows

Our key source of variation affects directly the availability of air links over a specific range, yet
we have found effects on the total number of connections available at a given airport, and that this
in turn translates into an important impact on economic activity. We now ask how we can go from
that specific shock to these broad effects.
We start by looking at how a favorable draw in terms of ShareBelow6K affects connections in
the range around 6000 miles. The result is in Column 1 of Table 6. (All specifications in Table
6 control for the number of airports in the 5500-6500-mile range, region fixed effects, and 1989
airport controls.) We see that places with more potential connections just below the threshold
indeed add more connections over the 5500-6500-mile range.
[TABLE 6 HERE]
In Column 2 we consider the 2SLS estimate of the impact of an additional connection over that
range, and find evidence of important spillover effects: about 8 total long-haul connections overall.
In fact, the contrast between Columns 3-4 and Columns 5-6 shows that the spillovers are essentially
all coming from the shorter range between 2000 and 5500 miles. The effect is considerably smaller
above 6500 miles, which is unsurprising in light of the relatively low number of ultra-long-haul
flights. All in all, this is eminently consistent with the idea that having more direct flights increases
the value of an airport for others to connect to: connections induce further connections.
This pattern also manifests itself in spillovers across different airports in the network. We
present in the Online Appendix (Table A9) the results from running specifications that, in addition
to airport i’s own ShareBelow6Ki , include the average value of ShareBelow6K for all airports
within a given range from airport i – less than 1000 miles, 1000-2000 miles, 2000-5500 miles,
and above 6500 miles. We find evidence of significant positive spillovers in the 2000-5500-mile
range, and negative but small and statistically insignificant coefficients for the other ranges. In
short, it seems that, when airports that are within a medium-to-long-range distance from airport i
receive a positive shock to their number of long-haul connections, airport i increases its number
23

of connections: put simply, Milan’s connection to Shanghai can induce further connections in
New York (4000 miles away) or Lagos (2700 miles), as it becomes more appealing to fly to Milan.
While this could have had a negative diversion impact on closer airports such as Madrid, that seems
to be balanced out, arguably by Madrid’s own extra incentive to connect to Milan as well.
We can also show that the more numerous connections actually translate into a better position
in the network. This is what we see in Columns 7-8 of Table 6, in which the dependent variable
is a measure of (eigenvector) centrality of airport i. This is designed to capture the influence of
that specific node in the overall network: it assigns to each node a score, and connections to highscoring airports contribute disproportionately to the score of airport i. We find that more potential
connections below the threshold increases this measure, indicating that when airport i receives a
favorable shock, it manages to add flights to better connected airports.
Still, what ultimately matters is whether those extra flights increase the flow of people. Of
course, it would be rather surprising if that were not the case, and the last two columns in Table 6
confirm that intuition. The 2SLS estimate indicates that an extra (at least weekly) long-haul connection brings in 130 thousand additional passengers per year. For perspective on this magnitude,
this corresponds roughly to a standard Boeing 747-400 flying twice a week in and out of the airport
at full capacity (660 passengers).
Taken together, these results establish that the impact of a shock yielding more connections
within a relatively narrow range of distance is magnified by the ripple effect that this has over
shorter distances, with additional connections inducing yet more additional connections. This in
turn translates into a substantial increase in the flow of people going through a city.

6

Flying Business: Air Links, Business Links, and Capital Flows

What are these people bringing – be they locals flying abroad and returning, or outsiders flying in
– that could have the substantial effect on economic activity that we have found? We have argued
that the ability to interact face-to-face is at the heart of what flight connections make possible
It seems plausible that the ability to interact face-to-face could be particularly important for
business relationships.28 There are many pieces of circumstantial evidence suggesting that businesses care deeply about access to direct flights. First, there is the effort exerted by airports and
policy makers in obtaining such connections, often justified as a way of attracting businesses.29
28 Another

possibility is that the impact we find is driven by leisure tourism flows, but this sector seems too small
to justify the sizable impact we find. The World Travel and Tourism Council, an industry organ, claims that 9.8% of
world GDP corresponds to “Tourism and Travel,” but it stands to reason that business travel responds for a large part
of that. It would be interesting to investigate the impact of leisure tourism, but we do not have extensive data on that
at the level of cities and city-pairs.
29 The president of Alitalia captured the sentiment as he announced his airline’s new Italy-China ventures: “China

24

Then there is simply revealed preference: non-stop flights typically command a substantial premium over the alternatives.30 Those flights save time, of course, but they also reduce risk: no
chance of missed connections, one fewer aircraft to have technical issues, one fewer airport to
have logistical issues, etc. On the same vein, businesses tend to locate disproportionately close
to airports.31 Last but not least, there is also growing empirical evidence of the business value of
direct flight links (Giroud 2013, Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend forth.).
As a result, increasing the number and quality of direct air links to a given city could spur the
development of connections linking businesses in that city to other businesses elsewhere, which
would in turn foster economic activity at the local level, via increased productivity or access to
capital.

6.1

City-Pair Evidence

We start off by asking whether connecting two cities has an impact on the links between businesses
located in these cities. One straightforward kind of business link relates to foreign direct investment
(FDI).32 It is natural to expect that proximity and face-to-face contact would matter most when FDI
involves a majority stake, so we ask whether, given a pair of connected cities, we would see more
companies located in one being owned by companies or individuals based on the other.
For that we turn to the Orbis data recording companies with a foreign-based majority owner.
We first compute, for each company in the data, the distance between the airport in our sample that
is closest to its location and the one that is closest to the location of its owners. Figure 6 depicts
the total number of firms measured against distance, in 200-mile bins – Panel A with all firms, and
Panel B considering only those for which both company and owner are within 100 miles of one of
the airports in our sample. We see a substantial drop in the number of ownership links around the
6000-mile threshold: city pairs just below the threshold have, in total, about twice as many links
as those just above it. This naturally suggests the possibility of a causal impact of the availability
represents a fundamental market for our country, which must aim at growth of Chinese investments and tourism, [and]
I believe that the Milan-Shanghai flight (...) will establish a very important bridge.” (China Daily, May 5, 2015)
30 For instance, a simple Google flight search for a business-type Monday-Friday roundtrip between London and
Shanghai, for July 2016, yields $704 for the cheapest one-stop flight, against $1,365 for the cheapest non-stop alternative. The direct flight saves about 2 hours over the shortest connecting alternative – a difference of about one-sixth.
31 Stilwell and Hansman (2013, p.69) show that, in the US, the headquarters of over 50% of Fortune 500 companies,
as well as about 37% of corporate headquarters more broadly, are located within 10 miles of an airport hub – numbers
that go to 84% and 66% if we extend the radius to 20 miles. This compares to about 29% of all business establishments
and 26% of population within the 10-mile range. As noted by The Economist (2005), “with so much emphasis on justin-time manufacturing and some professionals needing to jump on planes almost daily, airports are becoming the
centres of cities of their own,” or “aerotropolises” (Kasarda 2016) – and this in spite of obvious drawbacks (noise,
traffic, height restrictions on buildings). See also Bel and Fageda (2008).
32 There is evidence that proximity matters for venture capital investors (Bernstein, Giroud and Townsend, forth.),
and that migration links matter for FDI across locations in the US (Burchardi, Chaney and Hassan 2015).

25

of direct air links on the businesses connections between cities.
[FIGURE 6 HERE]
In order to assess more systematically whether that is the case, we match the Orbis data to
all possible airport dyads in our data set. Specifically, focusing again on companies with both
parties within 100 miles of one of the airports in our sample, we attribute each company to the
corresponding airport dyad: a firm in Shanghai with a majority owner in Milan is attributed to the
Shanghai-Milan pair. We then add all the companies for each of the nearly 335 thousand possible
pairs.
This allows us to resort again to RD methods to estimate the reduced-form impact of distance
around the 6000-mile threshold on the number of ownership links. The results are in Table 7, where
we first consider a sharp RD design to study the “reduced-form” relationship between distance and
the number of cross-owned firms in an airport pair. Columns 1-6 show a consistent message: there
is a significant drop in the number of ownership links upon crossing the threshold, regardless of
whether we use different bandwidths, including the optimal bandwidth, a second-order polynomial, or cluster standard errors by country pair. We also run a test with “placebo” discontinuity
thresholds, similar to the one for the discontinuity in flight connections that we showed in Figure
4. As can be seen in the Online Appendix (Figure A10), it is once again the case that the estimate
at the 6000-mile threshold is a left outlier in the distribution computed for the placebo estimates.
Quantitatively, we estimate a drop of around 0.9 firms comparing the two sides of the discontinuity,
which corresponds to about 65% of the average, or 0.05 standard deviations.
[TABLE 7 HERE]
What is the magnitude of the impact we find, in terms of the effects of additional connections?
A simple visual comparison gives us a useful benchmark: Figure 2 shows a drop in the number of
connected city pairs, around the 6000-mile threshold, by a factor of roughly 1/3. Figure 6, in turn,
shows a drop in the number of ownership links by a factor of roughly 1/3. This suggests that a
given increase in connections generates about a similar proportional increase in ownership links.33
In absolute numbers, this translates into roughly 250 companies for an additional connected pair.
This is around the number of ownership links between London and Minneapolis in our data, and
an increase of that magnitude is comparable to taking this number to the level of links between
London and Malmo (Sweden).
33 To

use more precise numbers: there are 107 connected city pairs between 5500 and 6000 miles, and 34 between
6000 and 6500 (a factor of 0.32), against 27,964 and 10,229 ownership links (a factor of 0.36). Since 0.32/0.36 ≈ 0.9,
this means that increasing the number of connected pairs by 10% leads to an increase in ownership links by about 9%.

26

This is confirmed by Columns 7-8 in Table 7, which exploit a fuzzy RD design where the
independent variable of interest is a dummy that takes a value of 1 if the airport pair happened to
be connected via (at least) weekly flights in 2014. (Results are essentially identical if we consider
weekly connections at some point between 2005 and 2014.)
This pattern extends to other kinds of business interactions beyond ownership, and for that
we turn to the GDELT data on geolocated business collaboration events. This has the advantage
of going back in time, which will let us exploit the timing of the emergence of the 6000-mile
discontinuity in air links. We start off by constructing a plot analogous to Figure 6: we count
the number of events where each party is located within 100 miles of airports in our data set, and
plot the resulting totals against distance, in 200-mile bins. The results are in Figure 7, and show a
pattern that is very much consistent with the ownership data. The dark dots correspond to the sum
of events recorded between 2000 and 2014, and once again they suggest a substantial discontinuity
around the 6000-mile threshold. Interestingly, the white dots depicting the pre-2000 events are
very much in contrast with the subsequent period, displaying little sign of a discontinuity. Put
simply, we have yet another independent source of data displaying a pattern in line with a causal
effect of air links on business connections.
[FIGURE 7 HERE]
We can then pursue a similar RD-based exercise using the GDELT data. (Full results are left to
Table A10 in the Online Appendix, in the interest of brevity.) Not surprisingly in light of Figure 7,
the results mirror our findings using the ownership data, indicating a causal impact of air links. In
particular, pairs of cities just below 6000 miles apart have more instances of business collaboration
after 2000, and witnessed a larger increase relative to the pre-2000 period, compared to those pairs
just above the threshold.
In sum, we find substantial evidence that establishing direct air links between two cities has
a causal impact on the strength of the connections between businesses located in each of them,
consistent with the idea that an enhanced ability to engage in face-to-face interactions fosters those
connections.
6.1.1

Catching the Convergence Plane: Where Does Capital Flow To?

We can dig deeper into the nature of these business links, by turning back to the Orbis data and
considering, within a given city pair, the direction of each ownership link. In particular, we are
interested in whether the increase in cross-ownership is driven by a relatively richer party investing
in the relatively poorer one, or vice-versa. This seems particularly relevant if we want to understand
whether air links foster convergence or divergence across different places.

27

To study that question, we classify parties in each pair of airport as “richer” or “poorer” according to the relative (PPP-adjusted) income per capita of the country they are in, as of 2011, measured
by the Penn World Tables (version 8.0).34 We then focus our analysis on all pairs of airports such
that the countries in which they are located are in an asymmetric position, as measured by the
World Bank country classification of income groups (as of 2016): “High income,” “Upper middle
income,” “Lower middle income,” “Low income.” This way we can avoid flagging a German firm
opening a subsidiary in Luxembourg as an example of capital flowing from the poor to the rich.
The results are in Table 8. Columns 1-2 show that the impact of connections seems to be larger
for the number of companies owned by the richer country in the poorer country, rather than viceversa. (The p-value for Column 2 is around 0.12.) In fact, if we compare the magnitudes of the two
estimates, we can conclude that 3/4 of the effect on total cross-ownership links comes from capital
flowing from rich to poor. Columns 3-4 break it down further by focusing on pairs such that the
richer country is classified as ”High income.” The results are very much the same, indicating that
the flows are originating largely in that wealthiest tier.
[TABLE 8 HERE]
This suggests that the impact of air links on business connections operates as a force for convergence. We must qualify this statement, however, as Columns 5-6 show that the capital flows
in question are essentially taking place between “High income” and “Middle income” countries –
in other words, from rich countries to the Chinas and Indias and Brazils of the world. In contrast,
countries classified as “Low income” are essentially shut out of this process (Columns 7-8). In fact,
if we focus on the first-stage relationship between distance below 6000 miles and the existence of
a direct connection between the pair (Panel A), we see that the poorest countries do not benefit
from having potential connections. This again indicates that the payoff from that potential does
not materialize when one is too poor for there to be a demand for connecting in the first place.

6.2

Grid-Cell Evidence

We are also interested in whether the enhanced business links underlie the effect of air links on
economic activity at the local level. To shed further light on this question, we now ask whether
the city-pair evidence we have just presented aggregates up to a substantial effect on the ability of
businesses in a given location to connect with businesses elsewhere over long distances. For that we
once again turn to the rich spatial information afforded by our data. Both in the case of ownership
links and business events, we have detailed information that allows us to match companies and
events to specific locations at the global grid-cell level.
34 We

use 2011 to increase the sample size, as many countries do not have data for 1989 or before. Results are very
similar if we use 1989 instead.

28

We again start off with the ownership data. We first aggregate the data to the level of specific
locations as defined by latitude and longitude coordinates. This allows us to obtain, for each of
these locations, the number of firms that are located there and owned by foreigners, as well as
the number of foreign companies owned by individuals or firms located there. We match each of
the locations to the closest grid cell in our full spatial data, and aggregate numbers at the grid-cell
level. As a result, for each grid cell we have the information on the number of firms owned abroad
and owned by foreigners.
We then consider whether our key airport-level variable, ShareBelow6K, predicts the level of
connections established by businesses located close to a given airport, again focusing on locations
that are within 100 miles from one of the airports in our sample. The results are in Table 9, using
Poisson specifications.35
[TABLE 9 HERE]
Column 1 shows that indeed it is the case that locations surrounding airports with more potential links just below the discontinuity host more foreign-owned companies. Column 2 presents
the IV (GMM) estimate, using ShareBelow6K as an instrument for weekly connections in 2014.
We see a positive effect of air links on the presence of such companies. Columns 3-4 then show
that the effect is basically the same when it comes to companies owned abroad, showing that the
impact of air links is felt in both directions. Quantitatively, an extra weekly connection added over
the period is associated with a 4% increase in the number of firms in a grid cell.36
But where exactly are those foreign companies and owners? Our variation induces connections
just below the 6000-mile threshold, and we have seen that these spill over into shorter distances
as the new connections enhance a city’s position in the network. We can compute the measure of
foreign-owned and owned-abroad companies separately for different ranges of distance to a given
city, and check whether the pattern of ownership links matches what we would expect from the
pattern of connections. Columns 5-8 in Table 8 show that this is precisely what happens in the
case of foreign-owned companies. The strongest increase happens for owners located 5000 to
6000 miles away from the city (Column 7), with spillovers between 3000 and 5000 (Column 6)
and 1000 and 3000 (Column 5). In contrast, there is no increase in the number of foreign owners
located more than 6000 miles away, in line with the fact that, as we have seen, our variation does
35 Note

that almost 87% of cells in our sample (and 94% of the total cells) have no foreign-owned or owned-abroad
companies.
36 How does this magnitude compare with the extra 250 firms we estimated from an additional connection at the
city-pair level? If we aggregate cells to the city level, we have an average of 636 companies owned abroad, and
630 foreign-owned companies. A 4% increase would thus correspond to an extra 51 companies in total. The previous
estimate, however, was by definition a local estimate around the discontinuity. If we focus on the change in connections
around the threshold, at the city level, the estimated coefficient would entail a 27% increase, which would correspond
at the mean to an extra 342 companies.

29

not induce many connections over that range. Columns 9-12 then convey a similar message for
companies owned abroad, with the strongest increase over the 5000-6000-mile range, albeit with
weaker spillovers for shorter distances.
The evidence thus suggests a causal impact of increased air links, at the local level, and the
number of business links established by local companies, in terms of ownership. How about interactions as measured by geolocated business collaboration events? We reproduce our basic analysis
using the GDELT data, constructed analogously to what we have done with the Orbis data. (Full
results again left to the Online Appendix, Table A11.) We find a positive impact, indicating that
places close to airports that add more connections induced by our variation indeed record more
cooperation events linking local companies to businesses across long distances over the post-2000
period. In contrast, no such relationship exists for events recorded in the pre-2000 period, again
consistent with the increase in importance of our key discontinuity over time.
As a final piece of evidence on the effect of air links on the business environment at the city
level, we look at the location of corporate headquarters. It is, after all, generally understood that
multinational corporations appear to value being located in connected places.37 Similarly, the
enhanced business connections we have detected could also offer opportunities for the growth of
local firms.
With that in mind, we adapt our basic empirical exercise using the presence of “Global 2000”
corporations headquarters in a given location (grid cell) as the outcome variable of interest, in a
probit specification. The results (in the remainder of Table A12 in the Online Appendix) indicate a
positive impact of air links on that likelihood. We have data from 2006, 2009, and 2012, and for all
three years we find a positive and significant coefficient for ShareBelow6K in the reduced form.
The magnitude of the marginal effect is around one percentage point, implying that going from the
25th to the 75th percentile would increase the likelihood of presence of a corporate HQ by about
0.15 percentage points – for comparison, the average probability in our sample is 0.8%. We also
detect an effect of similar magnitude on the probability of there being an increase in the number of
corporate HQs in a given cell between 2006 and 2012.
It thus seems that connections also have an impact on the likelihood of presence of large corporate headquarters. That said, we cannot tell from the data the extent to which this would have been
driven by location decisions specifically, or by connections enabling the growth of local companies
that would then make their way into the global list.
37 See for instance Pred (1977, p.24): “There are tremendous savings in time, and hence costs, that accrue from the
clustering of organizational head offices and ancillary business services in major metropolitan areas [...] compounded
by the superior air-transport connections those places possess. [...] Centers which do not have a wide variety and great
number of daily nonstop flights to the leading metropolitan complexes with a given system of cities are not particularly
attractive [...] because they do not permit nonlocal personal contacts [...] to be carried out [...] efficiently.”

30

6.3

In Sum

The evidence shows that air links matter for business links: when two cities get connected, there is a
substantial increase in cross-ownership of companies, and in the number of business events involving the two cities, as recorded by news accounts. Consistent with that, cities that are well-placed
in terms of obtaining additional long-range air links end up with a greater number of business
connections abroad, and with an increased likelihood of presence of large corporate headquarters.
This suggests that the movement of people fosters the movement of capital: the ability to
establish face-to-face contact between people is an important factor buttressing the ability to do
business. This is in spite of the fact that there is no special technological reason why capital flows
should rely on airplanes: one can easily transfer resources and set up businesses at the touch of a
button, yet the ability to actually go somewhere induces the establishment of business links.
Our evidence shows that this matters over long distances, and that it can translate into a broad
economic impulse. This can work as a force for convergence, as the increase in business links is
mostly driven by capital flowing from relatively rich countries to middle-income ones. However,
this is predicated on the ability to actually connect: the poorest places are left out. As such, perhaps
a dearth of connections can be a contributing factor magnifying the relative lack of capital flows
from richer to poorer areas (Lucas 1990).

7

Concluding Remarks

The world is now connected in a global network of air links, through which people can travel back
and forth, and thus interact, across long distances as never before. We have found that having
more connections within this network has a causal impact on economic development: it increases
economic activity at the local level, and fosters business links and capital flows, presumably by
enhancing the possibilities for face-to-face contact over long distances.
This naturally leads us to the question of other possible effects beyond economic activity and
the business environment. For instance, more connections could have a direct impact on cultural
views and attitudes, which could in turn affect other relevant development outcomes, as well as
the potential indirect effect to the extent that those views and attitudes might also be affected by
the economic transformations. Would globalization, in this sense, affect political stability, or the
prevalence of conflict, or the spread of democracy? These are issues that we investigate in ongoing
research.
Still on the economic side, our evidence provides a potential rationale for policy interventions
designed to increase the number of connections available from a given airport, city, or country

31

– and even, to some extent, the existence of airline subsidies, flag carriers, and the like.38 This
interpretation, however, would require a lot of caution. First, the welfare impact can be called into
question, especially in light of the absence of an effect on the spatial distribution of the population: higher incomes may be getting translated into economic rents – though perhaps population
movements could take place over longer time horizons.
In addition, our results indicate that, while the expansion around the airport represents genuinely increased levels of economic activity, as opposed to pure spatial reallocation to the detriment of more distant areas, the fact of the matter is that those distant areas still get left behind. In
other words, more connections induce spatial inequality, which should be taken into account when
assessing the desirability of interventions designed to increase them.
Finally, another layer of inequality underlying our results is at the global level, as not all places
get to benefit even if they get a lucky draw in terms of potential long-range connections. We have
seen that, for those places that are too poor to begin with, there is no first-stage relationship between the share of potential connections just below the 6000-mile threshold and the actual increase
in the number of connections: it does not matter if a place got lucky in terms of potential connections, if very few would want to fly there anyway. This means that poor places also miss out on
the convergence potential induced by the increased business links and the capital flows that are
embedded in them.
This suggests that, while long-range connections can foster development, one has to be in a
position to catch that figurative plane. In its aerial dimension, at least, globalization can help some
places take off, but others seem to get left behind in the runway.

References
Anderson, John D. (2002). The Airplane: A History of Its Technology. American Institute of
Aeronautics.
Bacchetta, Marc and Marion Jansen (Eds.) (2011) Making Globalization Socially Sustainable.
ILO and WTO.
Bel, Germà and Xavier Fageda (2008). “Getting There Fast: Globalization, Intercontinental
Flights and Location of Headquarters.” Journal of Economic Geography 8: 471-495.
Bernstein, Shai, Xavier Giroud, and Richard R. Townsend (forth.). “The Impact of Venture
Capital Monitoring.” Journal of Finance.
38 See

headlines
such
as
“Africa’s
ailing
national
airlines
survive
on
USD2.5
billion
of
government
subsidy”
(http://centreforaviation.com/analysis/
africas-ailing-national-airlines-survive-on-usd25-billion-of-government-subsidy-not-sound“U.S. airline group: Subsidies give Gulf carriers an unfair edge” (http://www.travelweekly.com/
Travel-News/Airline-News/US-airline-group-Subsidies-give-Gulf-carriers-an-unfair-edge),
or “How much do taxpayers support airlines?”
(http://www.usatoday.com/story/travel/
columnist/mcgee/2015/09/02/how-much-do-taxpayers-support-airlines/71568226/)

32

Bleakley, Hoyt and Jeffrey Lin (2012). “Portage and Path Dependence.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 127(2): 587-644.
Bourguignon, François (2015). The Globalization of Inequality. Princeton University Press.
Brueckner, Jan K. (2003). “Airline Traffic and Urban Economic Development.” Urban Studies
40(8): 1455-1469.
Burchardi, Konrad, Thomas Chaney, and Tarek A. Hassan (2015). “Migrants, Ancestors,
and Foreign Investments.” University of Chicago (unpublished).
Catalini, Christian, Christian Fons-Rosen, and Patrick Gaule (2016). “Did Cheaper Flights
Change the Direction of Science?” CEPR Discussion Paper 11252.
Clark, Paul (2002). Buying the Big Jets. Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Collier, Paul (2007). The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries are Failing and What Can
Be Done About It. Oxford University Press.
Conley, T.G. (1999). “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal of Econometrics 92: 1-45.
Cristea, Anca D. (2011). “Buyer-Seller Relationships in International Trade: Evidence from
U.S. States’ Exports and Business-Class Travel.” Journal of International Economics 84(2):
207-220.
Dollar, David (2005). “Globalization, Poverty, and Inequality since 1980.” World Bank Research
Observer 20(2): 145-175.
Dollar, David and Aart Kraay (2004). “Trade, Growth, and Poverty.” Economic Journal
114(493): F22-F49.
Donaldson, Dave (forth.). “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure.” American Economic Review.
Donaldson, Dave and Richard Hornbeck (2016). “Railroads and American Economic Growth:
A ‘Market Access’ Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Dreher, Axel (2006). “Does Globalization Affect Growth? Evidence from a New Index of Globalization.” Applied Economics 38(10): .
Feyrer, James (2009). “Trade and Income: Exploiting Time Series in Geography.” NBER WP
14910.
Frankel, Jeffrey and David Romer (1999). “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic
Review 89(3): 379-399.
Giroud, Xavier (2013). “Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-Level Data.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 128(2): 861-915.
Glaeser, Edward L. (2011). The Triumph of the City. Macmillan.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Joshua D. Gottlieb (2009). “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration
Economies and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States.” Journal of Economic Literature
47(4): 983-1028.
Green, Richard K. (2007). “Airports and Economic Development.” Real Estate Economics 35:
91-112.
Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil (2012). “Measuring Economic
Growth from Outer Space.” American Economic Review 102(2): 994-1028.
33

Hummels, David (2007). “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of
Globalization.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(3): 131-154.
Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux (2008). “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
Practice.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 615-635.
Kasarda, John D. (2016). “Aerotropolis.” In: Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Urban and
Regional Studies. West Sussex UK: John Wiley & Sons Press.
Leetaru, Kalev and Philiip A. Schrodt (2013). “GDELT: Global Data on Events, Location and
Tone, 1979-2012.” International Studies Association Annual Conference.
Lowe, Matt (2014). “Night Lights and ArcGIS: A Brief Guide.” MIT (unpublished).
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1990). “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”
American Economic Review 80(2):92-96.
Manacorda, Marco and Andrea Tesei (2016). “Liberation Technology: Mobile Phones and
Political Mobilization in Africa.” Queen Mary University of London, unpublished.
Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou (2013). “Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and
Contemporary African Development.” Econometrica 81(1): 113-152.
Mukkala, Kirsi and Hannu Tervo (2013). “Air Transportation and Regional Growth: Which
Way Does the Causality Run?” Environment and Planning A 45(6): 1508-1520.
Ortega, Francesc and Giovanni Peri (2014). “Openness and Income: The Roles Of Trade and
Migration.” Journal of International Economics 92: 231-251.
Pascali, Luigi (2015). “The Wind of Change: Maritime Technology, Trade and Economic Development.” University of Warwick (unpublished).
Poole, Jennifer P. (2013). “Business Travel as an Input to International Trade.” UC Santa Cruz
(unpublished).
Pred, Allan (1977). City-Systems in Advanced Economies: Past Growth, Present Processes, and
Future Development Options. John Wiley and Sons.
Proctor, Jon, Mike Machat, and Craig Kodera (2010). From Props to Jets: Commercial Aviation’s Transition to the Jet Age 1952-1962. Specialty Pr Pub & Wholesalers.
Redding, Stephen, Daniel Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf (2011). “History and Industrial Location:
Evidence from German Airports.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3): 814-831.
Stilwell, Justin D. and R. John Hansman (2013). “The Importance of Air Transportation to
the U.S. Economy: Analysis of Industry Use and Proximity to Airports.” MIT International
Center for Air Transportation (ICAT) Report ICAT-2013-03.
Storper, Michael and Anthony J. Venables (2004). “Buzz: Face-to-Face Contact and the Urban
Economy.” Journal of Economic Geography 4(4): 351-370.
The Economist (2005). “Business on the Fly: How airports act as a hub for business development.” Nov 24, 2005.
The Economist (2015). “Do Hub Airports Boost Growth?” Dec 1, 2015, available at:
http://www.economist.com/blogs/gulliver/2015/12/economics-aviation-capacity
Wall St Journal (2012). “How Airlines Spend Your Airfare.” Jun 6, 2012,
available at: http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702303296604577450581396602106
Yilmazkuday, Demen and Hakan Yilmazkuday (2014). “The Role of Direct Flights in Trade
Costs.” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper No. 179.
34

Figure 1. Cities with Major International Airports

Notes: The map plots the locations of the 819 cities in the sample, all with major international airports as defined
by International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).

Figure 2. Connections Between City Pairs, by Distance
A: 2014

C: 1989-2014 Changes

B: 1989 & 2014

D: Potential Connections, Total City Pairs

Notes: A connected city pair (airport pair) is defined as having at least weekly non-stop flights between
the two cities. The data consists of the 819 cities in our baseline sample. Panel A displays the total number
of connected city pairs in 2014 by distance. Panel B adds connected pairs in 1989. Panel C shows the
change in connected pairs from 1989 to 2014. Panel D shows the total city pairs by distance, across all
possible permutations of city pairs. The x-axis bin size is 200 miles. In each bin, the dot represents the
number of city pairs in the preceding 200 miles. Together, the graphs show there is a clear discontinuity in
connections around 6000 miles in 2014, that this relationship is primarily driven by changes in
connections after 1989, and that there is no sharp discontinuity for potential connections around 6000
miles.

Figure 3. Constructing the Airport-Level Instrument, SFO Example

Notes: The thick red line is drawn 6000 miles from San Francisco International Airport (SFO). The buffer around
the thick line indicates which other airports (cities) that are located within 5500-6500 miles from SFO. For each of
the 819 observations, the airport-level instrument is the share of other cities within the buffer that are located
below 6000 miles.

Figure 4. Placebo Regression Discontinuity Estimates for Presence of Connections
between City Pairs, 2014

Placebo RD Estimates, Connections 2014

0

.05

Fraction
.1

.15

.2

4500-5750, 6250-7500 miles

-.002

-.001
0
.001
RD Estimate, Distance

.002

.003

Notes: Histogram (and kernel approximation) for regression discontinuity estimates computed using each 50-mile
point between 4500 and 5750 miles, and between 6250 and 7500 miles as distance thresholds. Specifications use
first-order polynomial and optimal bandwidth. Vertical line depicts estimate with 6000-mile threshold. The plot
shows that the estimate at the 6000-mile threshold is a clear outlier.

Figure 5. Identifying Variation, Airport-Level

Notes: The map depicts the identifying variation across the 819 airports. The identifying variation for each
airport/city is the OLS residual of the instrument, after controlling for region fixed effects and the number of other
airports in the 5500-6500 miles buffer. The map shows that there is meaningful variation within regions.

Figure 6. Number of Firms with Cross-Ownership Links, by Distance between Closest Airports
A: All Firms
Foreign Ownership Links, ORBIS

4000

Number of Firms
6000
8000
10000

12000

(All firms)

5000

5500

6000
Distance, Miles

6500

7000

B: Firms within 100 miles of Airport
Foreign Ownership Links, ORBIS

0

Number of Firms
5000
10000

15000

(within 100 miles of sample airport)

5000

5500

6000
Distance, Miles

6500

7000

Notes: This graph depicts the total number of firms with cross-ownership links as per the Orbis data,
according to the distance between the airport in our sample that is closest to the location of the company
and the airport in our sample that is closest to the location of the owner. Panel A includes all firms in our
data set of georeferenced companies and owners. Panel B restricts the attention to companies that are
within 100 miles of one of the 819 airports in our sample. The x-axis bin size is 200 miles. In each bin, the
dot represents the number of city pairs in the preceding 200 miles. The graphs show there is a clear
discontinuity in the number of cross-ownership links around 6000 miles.

Figure 7. Major Business Events (GDELT) Pre- and Post-2000,
by Distance between Closest Airports

Notes: This graph depicts the total number of major events in the GDELT data involving at least one party
(source or target) classified as “business” or “multinational corporation,” according to the distance
between the airport in our sample that is closest to the source and the airport in our sample that is closest
to the target of the event. “Post-2000” refers to events recorded after and including 2000, “Pre-2000”
refers to events recorded before 2000. The x-axis bin size is 200 miles. In each bin, the dot represents the
number of events in the preceding 200 miles. The graphs show there is a clear discontinuity in the number
of events linking locations around 6000 miles.

Table 1. Regression Discontinuity Regressions Around 6000 Miles, City-Pair Level

Bandwidth, Miles

Distance Below 6000 Miles
Robust S.E.
Cluster S.E.
Polynomial order
Baseline Covariates
Observations, Total
Observations, Effective
Dep. Var. Mean

Dep. Var.: Connected, Dummy
2014
2014
2014
Optimal
Optimal
Optimal
(3)
(4)
(5)

2014
500
(1)

2014
1000
(2)

0.0031
(0.0012)***
(0.0012)***

0.0035
(0.0008)***
(0.0009)***

0.0038
(0.0009)***
(0.0010)***

0.0030
(0.0008)***
(0.0008)***

1st
No
334,954
41,477
0.0103

1st
No
334,954
81,842
0.0103

1st
No
334,954
65,323
0.0103

1st
Yes
334,954
72,537
0.0103

Dep. Var: Years Connected
1990-2000 2000-2010 1990-2010
Optimal
Optimal
Optimal
(8)
(9)
(10)

2014
Optimal
(6)

1989
Optimal
(7)

0.0040
(0.0010)***
(0.0011)***

0.0030
(0.0009)***
(0.0009)***

0.0010
(0.0005)*
(0.0006)*

0.0139
(0.0042)***
(0.0044)***

2nd
No
334,954
113,565
0.0103

2nd
Yes
334,954
120,260
0.0103

1st
No
334,954
60,595
0.0057

1st
Yes
334,954
76,646
0.0678

0.0190
0.0347
(0.0073)*** (0.0111)***
(0.0076)** (0.0116)***
1st
Yes
334,954
73,974
0.0938

1st
Yes
334,954
75,619
0.1554

Local polynomial Regression Discontinuity estimates, using the rdrobust command in Stata (default options unless otherwise stated). Running variable is distance between airports, discontinuity at
6000 miles. Optimal bandwidth selected using one common MSE-optimal bandwidth selector. "Polynomial order" refers to order of the polynomial in distance. The dependent variable is a dummy
indicating whether the city pair had (at least) weekly flights in 2014. Standard errors in parentheses. "Cluster S.E." refers to cluster-robust nearest neighbor variance estimation at the country-pair level,
using a minimum of three nearest neighbors. The covariates are all measured in 1989 and consist of: a dummy for having weekly flights, log of total city pairs within the country-pair, log total
connections within the country-pair, and log total passengers within the country-pair, where the logged variables add one to deal with undefined log function at zero. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 2. Effect on Air Links, Airport Level

Dependent Variable:

Share of Cities Below 6000 Miles

Observations
R-squared
Controls
Number of Cities Around 6000 Miles
Region FE
Airport Controls, 1989
Dep. Var. Mean

Total
Total
Total
Total
Connected Connected Connected Connected Connected Connection- Connection- Connection- Connectio
Cities, 2014 Cities, 2014 Cities, 2014 Cities, 1989 Cities, 1989 Years, 90-00 Years, 00-10 Years, 90-10 Years, 90
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(8)
5.15**
(2.09)

4.88**
(2.28)

5.46***
(1.59)

-0.37
(1.52)

-0.46
(1.56)

11.23**
(4.88)

17.78**
(7.46)

28.37***
(10.89)

28.37***
(10.89)

819
0.01

819
0.06

819
0.61

819
0.00

819
0.02

819
0.94

819
0.86

819
0.91

819
0.91

No
No
No
2.83

Yes
Yes
No
2.83

Yes
Yes
Yes
2.83

No
No
No
1.44

Yes
Yes
No
1.44

Yes
Yes
Yes
18.04

Yes
Yes
Yes
24.14

Yes
Yes
Yes
40.42

Yes
Yes
Yes
40.42

A unit of observation is an airport/city. A connection is defined as weekly flights (at least) to and from the city. The outcome "Connected Cities" is the number of long-distance
connections, as or 2014 (columns 1-3) or 1989 (4-5). Total connection-years in columns 6-8 is the sum of connections during the specified time period. Airport Controls, 1989
includes: Numbers of weekly, twice-weekly, and daily flights, respectively; Number of connected cities; Number of connected countries (twice-weekly); Log of total number of
seats; Log of total number of passengers; Log of total number of flights; Eigenvalue centrality. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 3. Effect on Night Lights (100-mile radius), Grid-Cell Level
Dependent Variable: Night Lights

1992
(1)
RF

2010
(2)
RF

92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
Change Change Change Change Change Change Growth Growth Growth Growth
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(11)
RF
RF
RF
RF
2SLS
2SLS
RF
RF
2SLS
2SLS

Share of Cities Below 6000 Miles

1.91
(1.92)

6.76**
(3.00)

4.85***
(1.55)

4.32***
(1.36)

4.45***
(1.27)

4.68***
(1.35)

Total Connection-Years, 1990-2010

0.430*** 0.452***
(0.157) (0.167)
0.140** 0.143**
(0.069) (0.073)

0.014* 0.014*
(0.008) (0.008)

Anderson-Rubin p-value
Stock-Wright p-value

0.001
0.004

0.001
0.004

0.007
0.019

0.007
0.019

Angrist-Pischke first stage F-stat

6.10

5.65

5.65

5.65

Airports
Observations
R-squared
Controls
Number of Cities Around 6000 Miles
Region FE
Night Light in 1992
Population in 1990
Airport Controls, 1989
Geographic Controls
Country Real GDPpc, 1990 logs

777
39,487
0.27

777
39,487
0.30

777
39,487
0.22

777
39,487
0.30

777
39,355
0.32

734
37,766
0.32

777
39,487
NA

734
37,766
NA

777
39,487
0.170

734
37,766
0.203

734
37,766
NA

734
37,766
NA

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

A unit of observation is a grid cell, within 100 miles of the closest airport in the country. The independent variables refer to the nearest airport. A connection is defined
as weekly flights (at least) to and from the city. Total connection-years is the sum of long-distance connections during 1990-2010. All regressions include the main effect
of Log Distance to the closest airport in the country. Airport Controls, 1989 includes: Numbers of daily, twice-weekly, and weekly flights, Number of connected cities,
Number of connected countries (twice-weekly), Log of total number of seats, Log of total number of passengers, Log of total number of flights, Eigenvalue centrality.
Geographic controls: Average yearly precipitation 1980-2014, Average yearly temperature, 1980-2014. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country
level. Anderson-Rubin p-value refers to the weak instrument robust inference using the Anderson-Rubin Wald test (F-stat version), and the Stock-Wright p-value comes
from the LM S statistic. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 4. Effect on Night Lights, Spatial Patterns, Grid-Cell Level

Dependent Variable: Night Lights
Sample (miles from closest airport)

Share of Cities Below 6000 Miles
Share of Cities Below 6000 Miles X Log Distance

Airports
Observations
R-squared
Controls
Number of Cities Around 6000 Miles
Region FE
Night Light in 1992
Population in 1990
Airport Controls, 1989
Geographic Controls
Country Real GDPpc, 1990 logs

92-10
Change
All
(1)

92-10
Change
< 500
(2)

92-10
Change
< 500
(3)

92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
92-10
Change Change Change Growth Growth Growth
<100 100-250 250-500 <100 250-500 250-500
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

9.94***
(3.78)
-1.65**
(0.65)

13.36***
(4.26)
-2.36***
(0.76)

13.31***
(4.40)
-2.29***
(0.79)

4.68***
(1.35)

0.53
(0.32)

-0.36
(0.30)

0.45***
(0.17)

0.14
(0.09)

-0.06
(0.08)

777
229,382
0.34

777
166,012
0.35

734
157,223
0.36

734
37,766
0.85

734
61,513
0.84

734
57,944
0.73

734
37,766
0.20

734
61,513
0.18

734
57,944
0.11

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

A unit of observation is a grid cell. The independent variables refer to the nearest airport in the same country. The samples vary depending on the distance from the centroid
of the cell to the nearest airport, as denoted above. All regressions include the main effect of Log Distance to the closest airport in the country. All other variables are
defined the same as in in Table 3. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 5. Effect on Population, Spatial Pattern, Grid-Cell Level

Dependent Variable
Sample (miles from closest airport)

Share of Cities Below 6000 Miles

Pop.
Change
1990-10
<100
(1)

Pop.
Change
1990-10
100-250
(2)

Pop.
Change
1990-10
250-500
(3)

Pop.
Change
1990-10
<500
(4)

Pop.
Change
1990-10
All
(5)

Pop.
Growth
1990-10
<500
(6)

Pop.
Growth
1990-10
All
(7)

-32.39
(22.57)

-13.30
(9.19)

0.08
(1.91)

16.36
(77.73)
-5.95
(15.24)

-16.08
(53.38)
1.13
(9.56)

-0.57
(0.39)
0.06
(0.08)

0.10
(0.35)
-0.08
(0.07)

734
37,760
0.54

734
61,468
0.46

734
57,897
0.71

734
157,125
0.54

734
218,713
0.54

734
157,125
0.18

734
218,713
0.20

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Share of Cities Below 6000 Miles X Log Distance

Airports
Observations
R-squared
Controls
Number of Cities Around 6000 Miles
Region FE
Night Light in 1992
Population in 1990
Baseline Controls, 1989
Geographic Controls

A unit of observation is a grid cell. The independent variables refer to the nearest airport. Population change is measured in thousands. All regressions include the
main effect of Log Distance to the closest airport in the country. All other controls are defined the same as in in Table 3. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
clustered at the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 6. Network Spillovers, 2014, Airport Level
Dependent Variable:

Share of Cities Below 6000 Miles

Dep. Var. Number of Connected Cities, by Distance
5500-6500 miles
2000-5500 miles
>6500 miles
RF
2SLS
RF
2SLS
RF
2SLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.70***
(0.25)

Number of Connected Cities, 5500-6500 miles

4.05***
(1.15)
7.75***
(2.07)

0.45**
(0.20)
5.82***
(1.80)

Network Centrality,
Eigenvector
RF
2SLS
(7)
(8)

Total Passengers,
Millions
RF
2SLS
(9)
(10)

0.022***
(0.005)

0.719***
(0.246)

0.65**
(0.29)

0.031***
(0.008)

Number of Connected Cities

0.133***
(0.019)

Anderson-Rubin p-value
Stock-Wright p-value
Angrist-Pischke first stage F-stat
Observations
R-squared

819
0.69

0.0004
0.0009

0.0005
0.0009

0.0292
0.0311

0.0001
0.0004

0.0038
0.0047

7.78

7.78

7.78

7.78

7.78

819
NA

819
0.58

819
NA

819
0.51

819
NA

819
0.66

819
NA

819
0.75

819
NA

A unit of observation is an airport/city. All regressions control for Number of Cities Around 6000 Miles, Region fixed effects, and Airport Controls, 1989. Airport Controls, 1989 includes: Numbers
of daily, twice-weekly, and weekly flights (total and 2000-5500, 5500-6500, and above 6500 ranges), Number of connected cities, Number of connected countries (twice-weekly), Log of total
number of seats, Log of total number of passengers, Log of total number of flights, Eigenvalue centrality. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. Anderson-Rubin
p-value refers to the weak instrument robust inference using the Anderson-Rubin Wald test (F-stat version). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (using weak instrument robust inference when
applicable).

Table 7. Effect on Number of Cross-Owned Companies, Airport-Pair Level

Independent variable:

Below 6000
Miles
(1)

Below 6000
Miles
(2)

Dep. Var.: Number of Cross-Owned Companies
Below 6000
Below 6000
Below 6000
Below 6000
Miles
Miles
Miles
Miles
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

RD Estimate
Robust S.E.
Cluster S.E.

-0.604
(0.123)***
(0.212)***

-0.922
(0.197)***
(0.301)***

-0.899
(0.244)***
(0.353)**

-0.890
(0.330)***
(0.432)**

-0.926
(0.221)***
(0.326)***

-0.987
(0.220)***
(0.339)***

First Stage

RD Design
Bandwidth (miles)
Polynomial order
Observations, Total
Observations, Effective

Weekly Flight, Weekly Flight, Weekly Flight,
2014
2014
2014
(7)
(8)
(8)
257.3
(69.04)***
(82.70)***

291.8
(78.83)***
(89.76)***

291.8
(78.83)***
(89.76)***

-0.0036***
(0.0010)

-0.0034***
(0.0009)

-0.0034***
(0.0009)

Sharp
2000
1st

Sharp
1000
1st

Sharp
750
1st

Sharp
500
1st

Sharp
Optimal
1st

Sharp
Optimal
2nd

Fuzzy
Optimal
1st

Fuzzy
Optimal
2nd

Fuzzy
Optimal
2nd

334954
146,682

334954
81,842

334954
61,688

334954
41,477

334954
70,366

334954
134,799

334954
67,986

334954
135,505

334954
135,505

Local polynomial Regression Discontinuity estimates, using rdrobust command in Stata (default options unless otherwise stated). Running variable is distance between airports,
discontinuity at 6000 miles. Optimal bandwidth selected using one common MSE-optimal bandwidth selector. "Polynomial order" refers to order of the polynomial in distance.
The dependent variable is "Number of Cross-Owned Companies," the total number of companies within a 100-mile radius of one of the airports in the pair that are owned by
individuals/firms located within a 100-mile radius of the other airport in the pair. "Weekly Flight" is a dummy equal to one if there was an at least weekly flight between the two
airports in 2014. Standard errors in parentheses. "Cluster S.E." refers to cluster-robust nearest neighbor variance estimation at the country-pair level, using a minimum of three
nearest neighbors. The covariates are all measured in 1989 and consist of: a dummy for having weekly flights, log of total city pairs within the country-pair, log total connections
within the country-pair, and log total passengers within the country-pair, where the logged variables add one to deal with undefined log function at zero. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1

Table 8. Effect on Number of Companies Owned by City in Richer and Poorer Country, Airport-Pair Level

Sample Countries:
Outcome, Direction of the FDI:

Pairs: All
Richer ->
Poorer
(1)

Poorer ->
Richer
(2)

Dep. Var.: Number of Cross-Owned Companies
Pairs: High, Non-High
Pairs: High, Middle
Richer ->
Poorer
(3)

Poorer ->
Richer
(4)

Richer ->
Poorer
(5)

Poorer ->
Richer
(6)

Pairs: Low, Non-Low
Richer ->
Poorer
(7)

Poorer ->
Richer
(8)

Poorer ->
Richer
(8)

0.0019**
(0.0009)

0.0008
(0.0034)

0.0008
(0.0034)

0.0008
(0.0034)

Panel A: First Stage
Below 6000 Miles, Dummy

0.0017**
(0.0008)

0.0017**
(0.0008)

0.0021**
(0.0010)

0.0021**
(0.0010)

0.0019**
(0.0009)
Panel B: 2SLS

Connected 2014, Dummy

138.0**
(63.68)

45.78
(28.58)

131.1**
(60.10)

43.19
(28.17)

134.3**
(60.73)

43.11
(27.06)

17.26
(71.05)

-3.234
(8.244)

-3.234
(8.244)

Observations

179,355

179,355

138,240

138,240

153,868

153,868

25,487

25,487

25,487

Local polynomial Regression Discontinuity estimates, using triangular kernel function, optimal bandwidth (selected using one common MSE-optimal bandwidth
selector), and 1st order polynomial in the running variable. Running variable is distance between airports, discontinuity at 6000 miles. The sample in all columns is
restricted to airport pairs where the two countries are not in the same World Bank income classification ("High," "Upper Middle," "Lower Middle," "Low"), as of 2016.
(Argentina is "Not classified," but for our purposes we re-classify it as "Upper Middle.") The dependent variable is "Number of Cross-Owned Companies," the total
number of companies within a 100-mile radius of one of the airports in the pair that are owned by individuals/firms located within a 100-mile radius of the other
airport in the pair. "Richer -> Poorer" refers to companies located in the poorer of the two countries in the pair (as measured by real PPP-adjusted GDP per capita in
2011, as per the Penn World Table 8.0) that are owned by the individuals/firms located in the richer country; and conversely for "Poorer -> Richer". Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 9. Effect on Number of Companies Owned Abroad and by Foreigners, Grid-Cell Level

Dependent Variable:

Share of Cities Below 6000 Miles

Owned by
Owned by Foreigners, Owned
IV
Foreigners
Abroad
(1)
(2)
(3)
3.543***
(1.263)

Number of Connected Cities, 2014

First-Stage F-statistic
Distance (miles)
Airports
Observations

All
777
39,487

Owned
Abroad,
IV
(4)

3.685**
(1.863)

2.169**
(0.965)

0.024***
(0.003)

0.025***
(0.005)

8.76

8.76

All
777
39,487

All
777
39,487

Owned by Owned by Owned by Owned by
Foreigners Foreigners Foreigners Foreigners
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

All
777
39,487

3.001**
(1.179)

5.059***
(1.537)

1000-3000 3000-5000 5000-6000
777
777
777
39,487
39,487
39,487

-0.234
(0.982)

> 6000
777
39,487

Owned
Abroad
(9)

Owned
Abroad
(10)

Owned
Abroad
(11)

Owned
Abroad
(12)

Owned
Abroad
(12)

0.193
(1.768)

2.452
(2.257)

4.510**
(1.978)

0.209
(1.602)

0.209
(1.602)

> 6000
777
39,487

> 6000
777
39,487

1000-3000 3000-5000 5000-6000
777
777
777
39,487
39,487
39,487

Poisson estimates (IV estimated using GMM). A unit of observation is a grid cell, within 100 miles of the closest airport in the country. All regressions include the main effect of Log Distance to the closest airport in the
country, Number of Cities Around 6000 miles, Region fixed effects, Night Lights in 1992, Population in 1990. "Owned by Foreigners" is the number of companies in the cell that are owned by individual/firm located in
another country within a 100-mile radius of an airport. "Owned Abroad" is the number of companies within 100 miles of some other airport in our sample that are owned by individual/firm located in the cell. "Distance
(miles)" refers to the sample used in calculating the number of firms: for instance, "Owned Abroad, 1000-3000" counts the number of companies within 100 miles of some other airport in our sample that is between 1000
and 3000 miles away from the airport in question. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

