                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ZONING AND THE ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY OF CITIES

                                        Allison Shertzer
                                         Tate Twinam
                                        Randall P. Walsh

                                      Working Paper 22658
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22658


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




Antonio Diaz-Guy, Phil Wetzel, Jeremy Brown, Andrew O’Rourke provided outstanding
research assistance. Support for this research was provided by the NSF (SES-1459847).
Additional support was provided by the Central Research Development Fund and the Center on
Race and Social Problems at the University of Pittsburgh. We thank Werner Troesken, Mark
Partridge, David Huffman, Leah Brooks, Daniel McMillen, Edward Coulson, and seminar
participants at Yale, Tulane, Rochester, the Urban Economics Association, AREUEA, the
University of South Carolina, the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, and the University Center for
Social and Urban Research (UCSUR) at the University of Pittsburgh. We are grateful to Gabriel
Ahlfeldt and Daniel McMillen for providing the land price data. We also thank David Ash and
the California Center for Population Research for providing support for the microdata collection,
Carlos Villareal and the Center for Population Economics at the University of Chicago for the
Chicago street file, and Martin Brennan and Jean-Francois Richard for their support of the
project. Corresponding author’s email: walshr@pitt.edu (R. Walsh). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Allison Shertzer, Tate Twinam, and Randall P. Walsh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Zoning and the Economic Geography of Cities
Allison Shertzer, Tate Twinam, and Randall P. Walsh
NBER Working Paper No. 22658
September 2016
JEL No. H7,N42,R3

                                         ABSTRACT

Comprehensive zoning is ubiquitous in U.S. cities, yet we know surprisingly little about its long-
run impacts. We provide the first attempt to measure the causal effect of land use regulation over
the long term, using as our setting Chicago’s first (1923) comprehensive zoning ordinance. Our
results indicate that zoning has had a broader and more significant impact on the spatial
distribution of economic activity than was previously believed. In particular, zoning may be more
important than either geography or transportation networks – the workhorses of urban economic
geography models – in explaining where commercial and industrial activity are located.


Allison Shertzer                                Randall P. Walsh
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh                        University of Pittsburgh
4901 WW Posvar Hall                             4901 WW Posvar Hall
230 South Bouquet Street                        230 S. Bouquet St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260                            Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER                                        and NBER
shertzer@pitt.edu                               walshr@pitt.edu

Tate Twinam
University of Washington Bothell
18115 Campus Way NE
Bothell, WA 98011
twinam@uw.edu
    I.        Introduction


         “This zoning law does not impose a very serious limit on the use of land, for if all
         the land in Chicago were built to the limit allowed by the zoning law, the entire
         population of the United States could be housed in the city … Moreover,
         whenever there is any possibility of a higher use for any block or parcel of land
         than the one for which it is zoned, it is not very difficult to have it zoned for the
         higher use, as the five thousand amendments to the zoning law testify.”

                            -Homer Hoyt, One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago



         Among economists, conventional wisdom suggests market forces are the primary

determinant of the spatial distribution of economic activity within cities. This emphasis on

market forces can be seen both theoretically and empirically. In terms of theory, both the

monocentric city model and more recent models of agglomeration all tie market processes to the

determination of land use patterns. In terms of empirical work, the focus on markets and prices in

determining the location of economic activity can be observed in the voluminous literatures on

agglomeration economies, transportation costs, and residential sorting dynamics. 2

         The central role economists ascribe to market forces stands in stark contrast to the

conventional understanding of zoning ordinances, which are typically thought of as either

endogenous, merely reflecting the locational choices of competing economic actors, or at most,

as having short-run effects on land prices. 3 This view of zoning laws, however, is based on a

surprisingly thin evidentiary base. Given the prevalence of urban planning and zoning laws in

2
  For reviews of these literatures, see Duranton and Puga (2015), Combes and Gobillon (2015), Redding and Turner
(2015) and Kuminoff et.al. (2013).
3
  Two examples of papers that find zoning evolves to reflect the highest-value use for land include Wallace (1988)
and Munneke (2005). On the other hand, both McDonald and McMillen (1998) and Zhou et al. (2008) provide
evidence of a short-run price effects associated with different types of zoning. The notion that zoning is an
ineffectual or fleeting constraint on land use patterns is itself controversial; to quote William Fischel, this notion is
“completely at odds with the attention paid to [zoning] by otherwise rational people” (The Homevoter Hypothesis,
p. 57).


                                                            2
contemporary American society (except for Houston, every major city in the United States is

subject to a comprehensive body of zoning laws), it is surprising that no work has been done

evaluating the long-run impacts of land use regulation on the spatial organization of cities.

       Accordingly, in this paper, we present a systematic empirical assessment of the long-term

effects of zoning on the overall arrangement of economic activity in a city. Our analysis focuses

on the city of Chicago, which adopted a comprehensive zoning ordinance for the first time in

1923. The distinguishing feature of our empirical approach is that we are able to observe land

use patterns at the lot level for the entire city of Chicago before its first zoning law was

implemented. Previous scholarship on the relationship between zoning and land use has not

utilized city-wide land use patterns in the years preceding the advent of zoning laws and

therefore has had trouble cleanly identifying the impact of zoning on land use. Our findings

suggest that the existing literature understates the importance of zoning in shaping urban form in

contemporary American cities.

       Specifically, we consider an array of city block-level outcomes, investigating the long-

run influence of zoning on the location of manufacturing activity, commercial uses, residential

areas, population density and polluting facilities. At a similar spatial scale, we also evaluate

zoning’s impact on present day housing prices. This analysis indicates that Chicago’s 1923

zoning ordinance has had a sizable impact on present day land use. To understand the role of

zoning vis-à-vis other key land use drivers, we use standardized multiple-partial regression to

evaluate the relative importance of five different categories of variables: zoning, pre-existing

land uses, pre-existing transportation networks, geography, and pre-existing demographics. We

find that the impact of initial zoning classification is roughly similar in magnitude to that of pre-

existing land use in determining present day use. Furthermore, while both are clearly important,



                                                  3
our results indicate that transportation networks and geography, the stalwarts of urban land use

theory, are less important than zoning for determining land use over the long run.

         Finally, we examine the extent to which the organization of economic activity across the

city as a whole shifted following zoning. We document a high degree of mixing of residential,

commercial, and industrial activity in the city prior to zoning. Land use as imagined by the

zoning board exhibited considerably more separation of uses, and this separation did in fact

emerge by the end of the twentieth century. Following on this line of analysis, we consider the

case of Houston, arguably the only major city in the U.S. which lacks a comprehensive zoning

ordinance. We present evidence that polluting land uses (Toxics Release Inventory facilities) are

less segregated in “un-zoned” Houston than they are in comparable zoned cities in Texas

(Austin, Dallas and San Antonio). Finally, utilizing our empirical analysis of Chicago, we

construct estimates of the distribution of these polluting land uses in Chicago both under zoning

and in a counterfactual world without zoning. The resulting comparison suggests a zoning impact

that is qualitatively very similar to what we find in our analysis of cities in Texas. These city-

level results provide evidence that zoning can reshape the general spatial organization of a city

over the long term.



   II.      Background on Zoning

   Brief History of Zoning in the United States

         New York City passed the first comprehensive zoning ordinance in the United States in

1916. Over the next twenty years, facilitated by the rapid enactment of state enabling ordinances

modeled on a template developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce, over 700 additional

cities adopted comprehensive zoning ordinances (Advisory Committee on Zoning, 1926). The



                                                  4
demand for zoning was rooted in the prevailing condition of American cities, many of which saw

rapid unplanned growth following large-scale European immigration and industrialization that

began in the mid-nineteenth century.

       Extremely high residential densities, combined with poor water and waste disposal

infrastructure, led to high rates of infectious disease in major cities (Troesken, 2004). Noxious

industrial uses were frequently located in densely populated areas and routinely encroached on

higher-end retail and office districts. Many urban residents objected to the “canyon effect”

created by unbroken rows of skyscrapers, citing the potential negative effects of reduced sunlight

exposure and air flow on public health (Hall, 2002, pp. 36-47).

       Coinciding with this growth and squalor was the rise of the Progressive movement,

whose proponents sought to apply scientific and technical expertise to the problem of managing

overpopulated industrial cities. These reformers found common cause with powerful real estate

interests, whose overarching concern was the protection of property values from threats posed by

the unrestricted encroachment of undesirable land uses (Bassett, 1922).

   Land Use and Zoning in Chicago

       In many ways, Chicago was typical of major U.S. cities at this time. Overcrowding was

prevalent, especially in black and first-generation immigrant communities (Shertzer, Twinam,

and Walsh, 2016). Dense skyscraper development in the central business district caused

substantial controversy, and the unrestricted spread of commercial and industrial development

threatened property values in higher income residential neighborhoods (Schwieterman and

Caspall, 2006). Chicago’s city government had made previous attempts to control undesirable

land uses, including an 1837 municipal code that prohibited landowners from maintaining

nuisances such as dead animals, dung, putrid meat, or fish entrails on their property. However,



                                                 5
such piecemeal approaches proved insufficient to meet the public demand for controlled

development.

       In 1921, the newly created Chicago Zoning Commission began preparing a

comprehensive zoning ordinance. The Commission, composed of eight aldermen and fourteen

representatives from the Chicago community, spent eighteen months surveying existing land use

in Chicago before issuing the initial statute. While the ordinance was designed by the

Commission, the commission solicited feedback from numerous civic organizations and held

public hearings in an attempt to create what they called a “people’s ordinance” (Chicago Zoning

Commission, 1922).

       The ordinance that resulted from this process regulated land through separately defined

and overlaying districts restricting allowed uses and building volumes. Four distinct use districts

were included: residential (single-family housing), apartment, commercial, and manufacturing.

These use districts were hierarchical, with apartment districts allowing residential uses,

commercial districts allowing both apartments and single-family homes, and manufacturing

districts allowing any use. Volume districts imposed restrictions on maximum lot coverage,

aggregate volume, and height. The five volume districts in Chicago’s ordinance were also

hierarchical, with district 5 allowing the tallest buildings. Non-conforming uses existing at the

time of the ordinance’s passage were allowed to continue. However, these non-conforming uses

could not be extended and, during any ten-year period, renovation expenditures were limited to

an aggregate cost of no more than 50 percent of the value of the building.

       The question of how closely the initial zoning ordinance followed existing land use has

been explored in previous work, which found that zoning was sensitive to existing land uses,

proximity to transportation networks, and distance to waterways (McMillen and McDonald,



                                                 6
1999). In other work, we show that the distribution of minority groups also impacted the initial

zoning ordinance; in particular, southern black and first-generation immigrant neighborhoods

were more likely to be zoned for industrial uses (Shertzer, Twinam, and Walsh, 2016). In order

to disentangle a causal effect of historical zoning on contemporary land use from persistence in

land use over time, we require variation in how similar lots were zoned in 1923. We find that

although zoning was influenced by extant uses, there remains significant variation in zoning

outcomes across individual lots that were located at similar points along the commercial and/or

manufacturing activity spectrum.

   III.      Data

          There are eight components to the dataset used in our analysis. Five of these components

are contemporary: the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning’s (CMAP’s) 2005 land use

inventory; the Environmental Protection Agency’s Toxics Release Inventory (TRI); Chicago’s

2012 zoning classification map; block-level demographic data from the 2000 U.S. census; and

transaction prices for single-family homes in Chicago for the years 2000-2012 from DataQuick

Information Systems. The other three data components are historical: the Chicago Zoning

Board’s 1922 land use survey, maps of Chicago’s 1923 zoning ordinance, and enumeration

district-level demographic data aggregated from the 1920 U.S. Census. Details on the

construction of the variables used in the empirical analysis can be found in the Appendix. Table

A.1 provides summary statistics of the various historical land use, historical zoning, and

contemporary outcome variables. Except as otherwise noted, the unit of observations in our

analysis is a single city block. A brief description of each of our data sources follows.

(1) CMAP Land Use Inventory




                                                  7
           Our primary source of information on contemporary land use in Chicago is a 2005

comprehensive land use inventory compiled by the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning.

The survey measures land use at the acre to one-half acre level (a typical city block in Chicago is

five acres) and distinguishes between a wide array of land uses: single-family and multifamily

residential use are classified separately while commercial uses are separated into ten different

classes and industrial uses are divided into four different classes. 4 The inventory also accounts

separately for a variety of institutional, transportation, and open space uses.

(2) The Toxics Release Inventory

           The Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) is an annually-updated inventory of industrial

facilities in the United States. The TRI has been the basis for measuring exposure to industrial

pollution and/or locally undesirable land uses (LULUs) in numerous empirical studies. 5 We

include in our analysis all sites that reported to the TRI at any point between 1987 and 2010.

(3) 2012 Zoning

           Zoning data come from the City of Chicago and delineates the city into residential,

commercial, industrial, and other miscellaneous categories. We focus on the first three

categories, as the others (e.g., planned unit developments featuring bespoke zoning

arrangements) are not classifiable in terms of historical zoning.

(4) 2000 Census Block Data

           Our contemporary land use data is supplemented with census block-level population and

housing unit count data from the 2000 U.S. Census. GIS block maps were obtained from

NHGIS. We attach the census block-level data to individual city blocks using areal interpolation.

(5) Home sales

4
    In the analysis, we aggregate the distinct commercial and industrial land use categories.
5
    For instance, see Bui and Mayer (2003), Banzhaf and Walsh (2008), and Perlin et al. (1995).


                                                           8
        Our housing price data encompasses the universe of single-family home sales in Chicago

over the years 2000-2012. In addition to sale prices, the data includes housing characteristics

such as lot size, building square footage, number of stories, number of bedrooms and bathrooms,

and the age of the building at sale. These data come from come from DataQuick Information

Systems, under a license agreement with the vendor.

(6) The 1922 Chicago Land Use Survey

        The historical land use survey we draw upon was conducted by the Chicago Zoning

Commission in 1922 for the purposes of informing the drafting process for the 1923 zoning

ordinance. We geocoded the entire pre-zoning survey for our study. From these survey maps we

obtain the location of commercial and manufacturing land uses in the city; we also obtain the

location and number of stories for every building with four or more stories. The data contains

one commercial class and several manufacturing use classes. When delineating between areas

with commercial and manufacturing uses, we include the lightest manufacturing class

(Manufacturing A/Light Industry) with the commercial uses.

(7) Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of 1923

        We digitized the initial zoning ordinance for Chicago, recording both use zoning and

volume zoning. Use zoning delineated all areas of the city into one of four distinct districts:

residential (single-family homes), apartment, commercial, and manufacturing. These use districts

were hierarchical, with apartment districts allowing residential uses, commercial districts

allowing both apartments and single-family homes, and manufacturing districts allowing any

use. 6 The residential category was rarely used in the initial zoning ordinance; only three percent


6
 There were additional gradations within the commercial and manufacturing districts, with certain objectionable
commercial uses barred if they were within 125 feet of a residential or apartment district, while certain
manufacturing uses were barred if they were within 100 to 2000 feet of a residential, apartment, or commercial


                                                        9
of the enumeration districts in our sample have any zoning of this type. The volume districts in

the zoning ordinance are essentially rough concentric rings radiating out from the central

business district. Under volume district 1, buildings were essentially capped at 3 stories in

height. For district 2, the maximum height was on the order of 8 stories; district 3, eleven stories;

and district 4, sixteen stories. District 5, which was restricted to the central business district,

allowed a maximum building height about 22 stories. If a building satisfied requirements on

additional setbacks from the street, the allowed height was increased. There were no density

“minimums,” only restrictions on the maximum volume, height, and lot coverage. Further details

on the use and density zoning ordinances, including sample images, can be found in the

Appendix.

(8) Census Enumeration District Data for 1920

    There is evidence that neighborhood demographics impacted the initial zoning ordinance

(Shertzer, Twinam, and Walsh, 2016). Therefore, in our empirical work we include a number of

controls for 1920 demographic composition. Specifically, we obtained overall population counts,

counts of the number of southern and northern blacks, and counts of first- and second-generation

European immigrants from the 1920 census, aggregated to the enumeration district level and then

aerially interpolated to city blocks.


    IV.      Zoning and Land Use: Descriptive Evidence


          We begin with visual evidence on the relationship between pre-zoning land use patterns,

Chicago’s 1923 zoning ordinance, and contemporary land use patterns. The three panels in

Figure 1 focus on industrial land uses. The location of pre-zoning (1922) industrial uses are


district. Some commercial uses within 125 feet of residential or apartment districts also saw restrictions on the hours
during which trucking activities could occur.


                                                          10
presented in Panel A. 7 While industry was concentrated along the Chicago River, there were

isolated industrial uses scattered across all of the developed portions of the city, particularly west

of downtown. In contrast, the initial zoning ordinance (Panel B) restricted industrial uses to

locations along the Chicago River, Lake Michigan shoreline, railroads, or near existing

concentrations of heavy industry. Furthermore, large tracts for industry were set aside in the

outlying areas of the city. New industrial uses were disallowed from entire areas of the city south

and west of the central business district. Panel C shows the location of industrial uses in 2005.

Despite the grandfather clause, which permitted the continuation of pre-existing non-conforming

uses, the vast majority of isolated uses disappeared over the ensuing eighty years, with most

industrial uses now locating in areas that were zoned for industry in 1923. We note however that,

in spite of the presence of manufacturing zoning, industrial uses also disappeared from the

lakefront region of the city.

        Similarly, commercial land uses evolved over this eighty-year period to a pattern that was

reflective of the 1923 ordinance. Figure 2 replicates Figure 1 for commercial uses. Panel A

shows that commercial uses essentially carpeted the developed portion of the city in 1922. In

contrast, the new zoning ordinance restricted commercial activity to main streets and large tracts

around the CBD and bordering the lake (Panel B). Present day land use (Panel C) suggests

remarkable success in removing commercial uses from minor streets; the distribution of

commerce in 2005 is very similar to the pattern established by the 1923 zoning ordinance,

following a grid pattern along with major streets.

        To give a further sense of the raw correlations and to highlight the identifying variation in

our data, Table 1 summarizes the relationship between historical land uses, the 1923 zoning

7
 White spaces in the maps are mainly large parks and Midway airport; some of the smaller white spaces are due to
missing or damaged land use maps.


                                                       11
ordinance, and present day land uses. Panel A reports the correspondence between historical uses

and the 1923 ordinance. 8 Not surprisingly, pre-existing uses were reflected in the new zoning

rules: 77 percent of blocks with pre-existing commercial uses included some zoning for

commerce and 63 percent of blocks with industrial uses included some zoning for industry.

Conversely, 9 percent of blocks without pre-existing industry included industrial use zoning and

39 percent of blocks without pre-existing commerce included zoning for commercial uses. In

total, over 40 percent of all city blocks experienced zoning that didn’t reflect pre-existing land

uses. This divergence likely arose from the zoning board’s top-down approach and the planning

ideology of the era, which emphasized the value of the separation of “incompatible” uses.

Aspirational zoning for future commercial areas and the concentration of industry away from the

downtown no doubt played a role as well, as is clear from Figures 1 and 2. Importantly, Table 1

indicates the existence of useful variation in our data for studying how zoning affected the later

evolution of land use.

        Having established the presence of considerable variation in historical zoning outcomes

given pre-existing uses, we turn our attention to the extent of change in land use over the 1923 to

2005 period in Chicago. Previous scholarship provides almost no evidence on the micro-level

persistence of land use over this level of time scale. Thus, one contribution of our paper is

documenting the persistence of land use for a complete city over an eighty-year span. We are

interested in the extent of persistence because if the distribution of land use had already been

locked in place by 1922, there would be little scope for zoning to have shaped contemporary

uses. Panel B of Table 1 summarizes these shifts. There is much divergence. Only 52 percent of

blocks with historical commercial uses hosted any commercial activity in 2005 and only 47

8
  Because the commercial use zone allowed for the types of light industry that were classified as Manufacturing A in
the 1922 land use survey, we treat Manufacturing A as a commercial use for the comparisons in Table 1.


                                                        12
percent of blocks which historically hosted manufacturing activity still have such uses today.

Conversely, 21 percent of blocks without historical commercial uses have commerce today; the

analogous figure for manufacturing is 8 percent. Thus, while there is clearly persistence in land

use, there are also substantial changes in land use composition over time. Below, we argue that

zoning can explain a significant portion of this dynamism.



   V.      Empirical Results at the City Block Level


        We now turn to assessing the causal effect of Chicago’s first zoning ordinance in

determining present day land use at the city-block level. We begin with linear models and

attempt to control for all relevant confounding factors that may have influenced both the zoning

board’s decisions and future land use. The digitized comprehensive pre-zoning land use survey

of 1922 allows us to form an extensive suite of control variables for pre-existing commercial

uses, manufacturing sites, and tall buildings. We also use digitized 1920 enumeration district-

level census data to control for the demographic composition of each block. We account for

geographic factors such as proximity to the central business district, Lake Michigan, or a major

river (in most cases, the Chicago River) as well. Additional controls are included for proximity

to railroads and major streets. Finally, to capture the latent development potential of each block,

we include a measure of land values transcribed by Gabriel Ahlfeldt and Daniel McMillen from

the 1913 edition of Olcott’s Blue Books (see McMillen, 2012).

        Because we observe and employ the same geographic, land use, transportation and

demographic data that was available to the Zoning Commission when it drew the initial

ordinance, it may be reasonable to assume that we can control for all relevant confounds and

identify a causal relationship using this strategy. Of course, there is always a concern that there


                                                 13
may be unobserved factors that influenced both the zoning law and contemporary land use. For

instance, the members of the Zoning Commission may have been aware of features of a

neighborhood (unobserved to us) suggesting that it would transition away from industrial uses in

the future. In a second set of analyses we exploit the fact that, while zoning borders are sharp,

any unobserved confounds will likely vary continuously over space. In particular, we verify our

main results with both nonparametric and parametric regression discontinuity models that should

be robust to any confounding variables for which we fail to control.

         We consider a number of different outcome variables in our analysis. To examine the

impact of zoning on commercial and industrial activity, we regress indicators for the presence of

such activities today on the full suite of historical covariates discussed above. To examine

residential use, we regress the share of each city block devoted to single and multifamily

residences on our covariates. Our baseline specification is of the form:

                    𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑖 = 1923 𝑧𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖′ 𝛽 + 1922 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 ′𝑖 𝛾 + 𝜖𝑖 ,                     (1)

where 1922 controls include all variables describing geography, land use, transportation,

demographics, and land prices at the block level prior to the introduction of zoning as well as

densities of historical uses in 500 and 1000 foot rings around each block. The historical use

zoning variables we include are the percentage of the block zoned for commercial use,

manufacturing use, or single-family homes; the omitted category is zoning for apartment

buildings. We also include volume zoning variables measuring the percentage of the block zoned

for each of volume districts 1, 2, and 3; volume districts 4 and 5 together form the omitted

category. 9 We use robust standard errors throughout the analysis (White, 1980). 10



9
 Volume district 5 was concentrated around the central business district, and volume district 4 included provisions
very similar to that of district 5 and formed a tight boundary around district 5. We aggregate the two in the analysis.


                                                          14
         In addition to the analysis of present day land use, we examine the impact of zoning on

single-family home prices. In these regressions, we include housing characteristics, census tract

fixed effects, and year-month of sale fixed effects as well as the historical covariates discussed

above. Finally, one might expect heterogeneous effects of zoning across different levels of pre-

existing development. To capture this possibility, we replicate much of our analyses on

subsamples of the data split at the median level of population density (17 persons per acre). The

above-median density areas reflect the developed portion of the city radiating out from the

central business district. The below-median density areas are largely in the undeveloped outlying

portions of the city. 11 Where appropriate, as a further robustness check, we also split the sample

based on pre-existing levels of commercial and industrial development.

Land Use Regressions

         We begin by analyzing the impact that zoning had on the location of specific land uses

today. Tables 2 through 4 present results for industrial, commercial and residential land uses,

respectively. All variables are scaled so that the reported coefficients reflect the influence of a

one standard deviation change in their respective variables. Column 1 of Table 2 reports the

estimated impact of historical zoning variables on the likelihood that a block hosted

manufacturing activity in 2005, conditional on our controls. All else equal, blocks that received

more manufacturing and/or commercial zoning in 1923 were significantly more likely to host

manufacturing activity in 2005 than were blocks that received residential or apartment (omitted




10
   Using the method of Conley (1999) to construct standard errors robust to spatial autocorrelation consistently
resulted in smaller standard errors. To be conservative, we report robust standard errors and not the Conley standard
errors.
11
   An alternative measure of development based on a linear index of population density, density of different pre-
existing uses, and geographic factors like proximity to the CBD and Lake Michigan led to very similar results.


                                                         15
category) zoning. 12 A one standard deviation increase in the percent of manufacturing zoning is

associated with a 1.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a block having manufacturing

activity – a fairly large effect given that only 7.7 percent of city blocks experienced

manufacturing activity in 2005.

         Commercial use zoning had a comparably large positive effect on future manufacturing

activity. While, relative to apartment zoning, zoning for single-family homes had no impact on

the likelihood of manufacturing activity. Relative to the densest volume categories (classes 4 and

5 which together comprise the omitted category for density zoning), larger shares of all three

lower density zoning classes were negatively associated with the likelihood of manufacturing

activity on a block in 2005, suggesting that conditional on use zoning, manufacturing uses

developed in places where the densest construction was permitted.

         The remaining columns of Table 2 explore heterogeneity in the impact of zoning across

locations with differing initial conditions. Columns 2 and 3 split the sample between blocks that

had pre-existing industrial uses and those that did not. Fully 95 percent of our sample lies in the

latter category, so it is unsurprising that our full-sample results are essentially unchanged for this

subsample (Column 2). In those locations that had pre-existing manufacturing activity (Column

3) we are generally measuring the impact of zoning on the survival of these uses. Focusing on

volume zoning and commercial use zoning, we find results that are similar in magnitude as those

predicting the presence of industrial uses in areas which previously had none. In contrast,

manufacturing zoning itself appears not to matter for this subsample. One potential explanation

for this result is the combination of small sample size and collinearity between the use and

volume zoning overlays. To this point, when the volume district zoning variables are omitted

12
  Here we consider a block to host manufacturing if at least 5 percent of its area is devoted to one of the four
industrial land uses classified by CMAP.


                                                          16
from the analysis (Column 4), the coefficient on manufacturing zoning becomes large in

magnitude and highly significant. The Table’s final two columns subdivide the sample by pre-

existing population densities. Although one may have expected zoning to matter more in places

that were not already built up, manufacturing zoning seems to have had a larger impact on the

portion of Chicago that was developed in 1922. This result may reflect the successful efforts of

the zoning commission to concentrate the widely scattered industrial uses that existed in the

developed areas of Chicago in 1922.

       Use zoning also appears to have exerted a strong influence on the distribution of

commercial activity (Table 3). Across the entire city (Column 1), a one standard deviation

increase in the percentage of commercial zoning is associated with an 11 percentage point

increase in the likelihood of commercial use today, an increase of 28 percent with respect to the

mean. In contrast to manufacturing, inclusion in one of the lower volume districts is associated

with increased shares of commercial uses. Single-family residential zoning is associated with

less commercial activity.

       Looking across locations that differ in terms of pre-existing level of commercial activity

(Columns 2 – 4) and population density (Columns 5 and 6), we find a meaningful and

statistically significant impact of commercial zoning across all subsamples, with the largest

impacts occurring in locations that had lower population densities or no pre-existing commercial

uses. We attribute this result to the zoning commission’s successful effort to create new

commercial areas in outlying areas. The impact of volume districting is concentrated in the

developed portions of the city. These are the regions of the city where the highest volume

districts occur (omitted category). Overall, the pattern of results suggest that the volume district




                                                 17
coefficients reported in Column 1 (full sample) are generally driven by differences between

being in one of the two high volume districts as opposed to one of the three low volume districts.

       Finally, in Table 4 we investigate the impact of zoning on the location of multifamily and

single-family housing. Again we see zoning’s persistent impact. Single-family residential zoning

is associated with a larger share of single-family housing and a lower share of multi-family

housing. The single-family home effect is particularly large for the areas of Chicago that were

undeveloped in 1922. A one standard deviation increase in single-family residential zoning

(relative to apartment zoning) was associated with a 4 percentage point increase in the share of a

block used for single-family homes, an increase of 10 percent relative to the mean. We speculate

that zoning may have been crucial for establishing residential neighborhoods comprised entirely

of single-family homes in the portion of the city that was undeveloped when the ordinance was

introduced, explaining the relatively large effect in this part of the sample. Meanwhile, relative to

apartment zoning, every other type of use zoning is negatively associated with the share of the

block dedicated to single-family and/or multi-family dwellings in 2005. These results hold across

both developed and undeveloped sections of the city.

Spatial Discontinuities

       A potential concern with the above findings is that, despite our large set of control

variables, they may be driven by some unobserved path dependence in land use that is correlated

with the initial zoning outcome. In this case our estimates would not reflect the causal effect of

zoning. To address this concern, we present the results from a border identification exercise in

the spirit of Black (1999). We isolate subsamples of blocks that are within 500 feet of the border

between two different use zoning types. We then estimate local linear regressions on the




                                                 18
residuals from OLS regressions run on each border subsample. 13 Figures 3-6 display the results

from these local linear regressions, while Table A.2 reports analogous linear regression results.

         We begin with the boundary between residential zones (single family and apartment) and

non-residential zones (commercial and manufacturing). Panel A of Figure 3 shows how the

unexplained component of 2005 commercial use varies relative to this boundary. We find a

distinct discontinuity at the border, with the likelihood of commercial use being approximately

0.4 standard deviations (20 percentage points) higher on the commercial/manufacturing side of

the border. This difference declines as we move farther away from the border to the left (and

further into districts were commercial activity is permitted). This result is consistent with the

findings of our linear model. Further, it suggests that commercial uses prefer to locate near

residential areas, perhaps due to customer proximity.

         Because zoning was impacted by pre-existing uses, one might be concerned that the

number of pre-existing commercial uses varied discretely across these zoning boundaries in a

manner that is not adequately addressed by our residual modeling. As a further robustness check,

we present the same nonlinear regressions limiting the analysis to subsamples with the following

characteristics: no pre-existing commercial uses on either side of the border (Panel B); exactly

one or two commercial uses on each side of the border (Panel C); and three or more commercial

uses on each side of the border (Panel D). The clear discontinuity in the likelihood of having

commercial uses today is evident in all three subsamples.

         Next, we consider the impact of commercial-industrial borders on the location of

industrial activity. In Figure 4, the left-hand sides of the border consist of commercially zoned

13
  This approach allows us to control for confounds that vary continuously across the discrete zoning boundaries.
We estimate the border regressions on residuals from a model including all of our control variables in order to
control for any observed confounds that vary discretely at the zoning boundaries. There is very little qualitative
difference between the residual analyses presented here and border regressions that do not include these controls.


                                                         19
blocks (where manufacturing activity was prohibited) while the right-hand sides consist of

blocks with manufacturing zoning. We see a sharp discontinuity in the likelihood of modern

industrial uses on different sides of the border; manufacturing uses are much more likely to

locate in manufacturing zones. Again, this finding is consistent with the nature of the zoning law,

which restricted the location of manufacturing uses relative to commercial uses. As was the case

with our baseline regression results, the impact of industrial zoning is less clear in locations with

pre-existing manufacturing uses (Panel C). While the border analysis shows no discrete jump in

this subsample, the upward slope of the relationship is suggestive of a zoning-driven

agglomeration effect under which manufacturing activity is increasing in proximity to the center

of manufacturing zones.

       In Figure 5, we remain focused on the commercial/industrial borders. However, we now

assess their impact on commercial activity. In contrast to the industrial uses analyzed in Figure 4,

commercial activities were permitted on both sides of these borders. While overall levels of

commercial activity are generally higher on the commercial side of the border, we find no

evidence of a discrete change. Thus, summarize these three sets of results, for uses where zoning

binds we find a discrete jump at the boundary. When zoning doesn’t bind, we find no such

discrete jump.

       Finally, Figure 6 considers the difference in the percentage of a block devoted to single-

family residential use, comparing blocks which received the lowest density zoning with blocks

that received the next lowest density zoning (which accommodated mid-rise apartment

complexes). There is a sharp discontinuity, with lower density blocks hosting 0.3 standard

deviations (12 percentage points) more single-family housing than neighboring higher density




                                                 20
blocks. The effect of density zoning is evident across both high and low population density

subsamples.

           Taken as whole the non-parametric border analysis confirm the results from our simple

linear models. Parametric border regressions which correspond to these non-linear models are

included in Appendix Table A.2 and corroborate the nonparametric results.

The Effect of Zoning on LULUs, Density and Prices

           We next broaden our analysis to consider the impact of zoning on several additional

margins that drove the adoption of these ordinances: exposure to undesirable land uses,

population density, and home prices. A major motivation for the establishment of manufacturing

use zones in these early land use plans was the desire to constrain the location of locally

undesirable land uses so that they would not “destroy real estate for residential and retail

business purposes.” 14 To evaluate the long-run impact of zoning on the location of these LULUs,

we assess the impact of the 1923 zoning ordinance on the distribution of polluting (TRI)

facilities later in the twentieth century. The results presented in Table 5 demonstrate that 1923

manufacturing zoning had a quantitatively significant impact on where such polluting facilities

are located today. A one standard deviation increase in the share of a neighborhood zoned for

manufacturing is associated with a 1.4 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a city block

hosting a TRI facility; this is a quantitatively large effect given that only 1.8 percent of blocks in

our sample hosted a TRI facility during the analysis period. Commercial zoning had a similar,

but smaller in magnitude, effect. This relationship is stable across the no pre-existing

manufacturing, undeveloped, and developed subsamples. As with our above analysis of

manufacturing outcomes, the small sample of blocks that already had manufacturing in 1922


14
     New York Times, July, 26 1916.


                                                  21
responds differently. In these blocks, we see that zoning apparently had no impact on the

location of TRI facilities today.

           Population density is another concern that both explicitly and implicitly underpinned the

Zoning Commission’s work. 15 Table 6 shows that, relative to zoning for apartments, zoning for

single family homes, commercial and manufacturing uses all lead to lower population densities

in 2010. Volume zoning also impacted future density. Here, the primary distinction being

between the lowest volume districts (1 and 2) and the highest volume districts (3, 4 and 5). To

give a sense of magnitude, the model predicts that a one standard deviation increase in the

percentage of a block receiving both single-family zoning and volume district 1 zoning is

associated with a 7 person per acre decline in population density; given that the city-wide

average population density is 28 persons per acre, this is a sizable impact.

           Property values were also a key driver of Chicago’s initial zoning ordinance, particularly

for real estate interests. Prior to passage of the ordinance, Ivan O. Ackley, former president of the

Chicago Real Estate Board, predicted that comprehensive zoning would increase property values

in Chicago by one billion dollars (more than 25 percent). 16 While we are not in a position to

assess Ackley’s prediction regarding zoning’s impact on the overall price level, we can explore

how spatial differences in the 1923 zoning patterns are reflected in housing prices today. Table 7

reports the effects of the 1923 zoning ordinance on single-family home sale prices over the

period 2000-2012. Our results suggest that the patterns of land use established by the 1923

ordinance are still relevant in today’s housing market.

           To characterize historical zoning around a given home’s location, for each zoning

designation, we compute its share within a quarter mile of the home, between a quarter and half

15
     See Chicago Zoning Commission (1922) and Shertzer et.al. (2016).
16
     Chicago Tribune, January 15, 1922.


                                                        22
mile away, and between a half and a full mile away. Full sample results are presented in Column

1. Our strongest finding is that single-family residential zoning is associated with higher home

values in both the immediate vicinity of the home and further away. Moving from the proximate

region to further away, a one standard deviation increase in the share of single-family home

zoning is associated with a 1.2, 1.4, or 1.6 percent increase in home values, respectively.

Commercial zoning in the immediate vicinity is associated with lower home values, while

commercial zoning in the most distant region (between half and a full mile) increases home

values, suggesting that homebuyers value access to commercial activity, so long as it is not right

next door.

           Manufacturing uses are also associated with higher home sale values when they are

between one half and a full mile away. This effect is strongest in the developed portion of the

sample (see Column 2). 17 Focusing on the developed sample, historical manufacturing appears

to be associated with higher home values for the high-density portion of the sample whether it

was in the immediate vicinity or more distant. Supplemental analysis shows that this effect is

driven by the subset of homes located in relatively high-poverty census block-groups today,

which may reflect a preference by low-income central city residents for accessible manufacturing

jobs. 18

           Taken together, these results demonstrate that contemporary home prices have been

impacted by the 1923 ordinance’s lasting effect on Chicago’s spatial structure. They further

suggest that, to the extent that the ordinance lead to the concentration of residential uses, zoning

in Chicago has likely increased residential property values.

17
  P-value in the undeveloped sample is 0.17.
18
  Appendix Table A.3 shows analogous estimation results on the developed portion of the sample by poverty
quartiles. Large positive impacts of manufacturing zoning both within a quarter mile and a full mile on home values
are apparent for the subsample of city blocks in the top quartile of poverty rates only.


                                                        23
Zoning vs. Transportation and Geography

         Economists have typically focused on the role of transportation costs and geography in

determining urban spatial structure. Our analysis suggests zoning also can have a lasting impact

on land use patterns. Do these results warrant placing increased weight on planning relative to

transportation and geography? To assess the importance of zoning relative to other determinants

of future land use, we re-estimate the baseline models from Tables 2 and 3 and extract

standardized multiple-partial regression coefficients for five blocks of variables capturing:

zoning, geography, transportation networks, demographics, and pre-existing land use. We use the

method of sheaf coefficients to treat each block of variables as if its impact on future commercial

and industrial land use were channeled through a single latent variable (Heise, 1972; Whitt,

1986). Estimating the coefficients on these standardized latent variables gives us comparable

measures of the relative importance of each block of variables.

         Table 8 presents these results. 19 The 1923 zoning and pre-existing land uses are found to

be of comparable importance in determining present day land use, and both have a considerably

larger impact than transportation infrastructure, geography, or demographics on the

contemporary arrangement of land use. This result is somewhat surprising given the emphasis in

the urban economics literature on the importance of transportation networks and proximity to the

central business district (geography). One possibility is that the impacts of transportation and

geography were already realized through the sorting of land uses and residents prior to zoning.

To test for this possibility, and to provide for a cleaner comparison between zoning, geography

and transportation, we replicate the analysis including only three blocks of variables: zoning,

transportation, and geography. These results are presented in the final two columns of Table 8.

19
  Because there is essentially no different in the sheaf coefficient estimates for the developed and undeveloped
subsamples, for parsimony, we only report results for the full sample in Table 8.


                                                         24
Here we find that the combined impact of geography and transportation is slightly less than that

of zoning, suggesting a more prominent role for land use regulation in the shaping of cities than

many ascribe. 20



     VI.      The Citywide Organization of Land Use


           We have demonstrated that, from the perspective of an individual city block, Chicago’s

initial zoning ordinance had a marked impact on land use. In doing so, did the ordinance impact

the overall pattern of development in the city, or did the basic pattern remain the same as uses

were simply shifted from one location to another? We conclude our analysis by addressing this

broader question and considering the impact of zoning on the overall city-wide organization of

land use. Ideally this analysis would involve replicating our Chicago data set for a large panel of

cities. Such an undertaking greatly exceeds the scope of this study and, given limitations on

historical land use data, is likely infeasible even in a world without resource constraints. We can,

however, make headway relative to this larger question on several fronts.

Dispersion of Commercial and Industrial Uses

           We begin with an analysis of how the distribution of commercial and manufacturing land

uses today reflects the goals of the 1923 ordinance. Recall Figures 1 and 2, which show that

considerable mixing of uses took place before zoning. Indeed, 82 percent of blocks in the

developed portion of the city contained commercial activity prior to zoning, and 10 percent

contained heavy industry. Focusing on the developed subsample of the city so that we can

evaluate the ability of zoning to reshape existing urban areas, we begin by calculating the spatial


20
  A related issue is the persistence of the zoning itself. In Appendix Table A.4, we show that zoning in 1923 quite
predictive of zoning today.


                                                         25
distribution of parcel exposure to industrial and commercial uses. Specifically, we overlay the

developed portion of the city with a mesh of evenly-spaced points (250 feet apart). For each

point, we measure the distance to the nearest industrial (commercial) land use in 1922 and plot

the distribution of these distances. We compare this distribution to that of distances to 1923

industrial (commercial) zoning and 2005 industrial (commercial) land use. The results of this

analysis are presented in Panels A and B of Figure 7. When land uses are thoroughly mixed

throughout the city, the density of distances will be concentrated near zero. If uses are segregated

into zones, there will be more mass in the right tail of the density.

       The solid lines in these graphs plot the density of distances from points in the city to their

nearest 1922 commercial and industrial use neighbors. It is clear that the mass is concentrated

near zero; almost all locations were within a half mile of an industrial use in 1922 and within a

tenth of a mile of a commercial use. The dashed lines plot the density of distances envisioned by

the zoning ordinance. The zoning board’s preoccupation with separating uses is evident here as

the zoning densities have substantially more mass farther from zero, indicating that many

locations in the city were placed in residential zones isolated from commercial and

manufacturing activity. The intermittently dashed and dotted lines demonstrate the extent to

which the zoning board’s goals were achieved; these lines plot the density of distances to

industrial and commercial uses in 2005. A comparison across the two sets of densities shows that

the spatial distribution of land use today is much closer to that envisioned by Chicago’s planners

in 1923 than it is to the actual landscape to which these planners were reacting; thus, providing

suggestive evidence that zoning has played a role in shaping the city’s overall land use patterns

as well.

Houston, Zoning and Land Use Patterns



                                                 26
        More direct evidence on the ability of zoning to affect patterns of development at the

city-wide level could be found by comparing outcomes in zoned and un-zoned cities. However,

zoning is ubiquitous in the United States, with virtually every sizable municipality subject to a

zoning ordinance. Only one major city in the U.S. has so far resisted the implementation of

zoning: Houston, Texas. Many scholars argue that Houston provides a free-market

counterfactual to the zoned city (Siegan, 1970 and 1973). However, in lieu of zoning, Houston

actually employs a wide array of strategies to legally control land use and there is some debate

about how to view Houston vis-à-vis zoning. 21 Nonetheless, it is the case that Houston lacks an

overall planning framework designed to guide growth and create distinct zones for incompatible

uses. As a result, the city has seen multiple referenda on the issue, most recently in 1993 when

zoning was defeated by a narrow margin (Kapur, 2004). Specific objections to the lack of zoning

in Houston have focused on the poor treatment of low-income communities and a feeling that the

current system allows excessive mixing of uses, leading to “ugly chaos” (Verhovek, 1993). Thus,

there may be scope to use Houston as a counterfactual.

        To assess the extent to which land use patterns actually differ in Houston relative to a

hypothetical zoned version of the city, we analyze the diffusion of TRI facilities in Houston

relative to that in three neighboring cities that employ comprehensive zoning: Austin, Dallas, and


21
  The most prominent of these strategies is restrictive covenants or deed restrictions. These are agreements between
neighboring property owners which legally bind them to observe certain limitations on the use of their property.
Restrictive covenants are frequently employed to limit uses to single-family homes, preventing the encroachment of
commercial or industrial activity. The implementation of restrictive covenants in Houston differs markedly from its
pre-zoning implementation in U.S. cities. Due to the issue of legality and the high coordination and enforcement
costs associated with covenants, the state of Texas granted the Houston city government the power to enforce
covenants directly, without recourse to the court system (Susman, 1966; Kapur, 2004). Thus, the enforcement of
covenants in Houston is similar to the enforcement of zoning in other cities. In Houston, covenants are employed to
impose a wide range of restrictions beyond use, regulating setbacks, minimum lot sizes, structural density,
landscaping, noise levels, and architectural features. To lower coordination costs and permit covenants to more
closely mimic zoning, covenants in Houston can be created or renewed by a simple majority of lot owners in an
area. The unanimous agreement of property owners is no longer required, moving this policy far from the realm of
consensual contract.


                                                        27
San Antonio. 22 We focus on polluting facilities because separation from undesirable land uses is

central to municipal zoning and because the TRI provides a readily available source of directly

comparable data for cross-city comparisons. 23 We measure diffusion of TRI facilities using the

same approach that is discussed above for manufacturing and commercial uses in Chicago.


         Panel C of Figure 7 shows that the distribution of distances from points throughout the

city of Houston to the nearest TRI facility has a greater mass near zero than that of Dallas; a

result that is even more striking for Austin and San Antonio. A convenient summary is provided

by the percentage of points that lie within one mile of a TRI facility. In Austin, Dallas, and San

Antonio this is 30, 44, and 43 percent, respectively; in Houston, it is 65 percent. The extent to

which Houston represents an “un-zoned” counterfactual remains an open question. It is,

however, clearly distinct from the un-zoned chaos of early twentieth century Chicago. Our

cursory analysis of TRI facilities suggests that land use patterns in relatively un-regulated

Houston differ measurably from comparable cities that experienced formal zoning.

Chicago Counterfactual

         Would a lack of zoning in Chicago have given rise to a landscape more akin to

Houston’s? To answer this question, we conclude our work with a statistical counterfactual

analysis based on the TRI regression results. Using the results in Column 1 of Table 5, we

predict the location of TRI facilities under the actual 1923 zoning ordinance and under a

counterfactual in which we set the zoning everywhere at its most permissive level on both

volume and use dimensions (high-density/industrial). We then compute the distribution of


22
   To account for the different spatial extents of these cities, we take only the portions of each city within 10 miles of
its central business district. Results are similar if the entire extent of each city is used.
23
   The criteria for classifying TRI facilities is established by the EPA and will not reflect idiosyncratic differences in
the classification of land use across different cities.


                                                           28
distances as in the comparisons above. The results, presented in Panel D of Figure 7, are

consistent with our analysis of cities in Texas. They suggest that zoning shifted the distribution

of TRI distances away from the origin significantly and provide further evidence that zoning has

had a significant impact on the overall city-wide pattern of land use.


   VII.    Conclusion

       Comprehensive zoning is central to the lives of urban residents in the United States, yet

we know surprisingly little about how these policies have shaped contemporary cities. In this

paper we provide the first attempt to measure the causal effect of land use regulation over the

long term, using as our setting the first comprehensive zoning ordinance adopted by the city of

Chicago in 1923. Our analysis relies on both the digitized ordinance and a lot-level land use

survey undertaken in 1922, enabling us to control for a rich set of pre-zoning characteristics as

well as identify the boundaries between areas zoned for different uses.

       The results of this study indicate that zoning has had a broader and more significant

impact on the spatial distribution of economic activity than was previously believed. In

particular, zoning may be more important than either geography or transportation networks – the

workhorses of urban economic geography models – in explaining where commercial and

industrial activity are located. Furthermore, rather than simply “following the market,” zoning

appears to be a powerful tool for achieving separation of uses. Our results strongly suggest that

over the long-run urban planning has been effective in creating residential neighborhoods that

are distant from undesirable manufacturing uses, and that houses in these neighborhoods are

more valuable as a result.

       We close with implications of our findings. First, more work is needed to understand the

institutions that drive aggregate land use patterns. Previous research has focused on the causes of


                                                29
macro-level persistence such as agglomeration economics, locational fundamentals, durable

capital, and natural advantages (Krugman, 1991; David and Weinstein, 2002; Glaeser and

Gyourko, 2005; Redfearn, 2009; Bleakley and Lin, 2012). At the same time, block-level

persistence has received far less attention, and institutional factors such as zoning have been left

largely unexplored. Our results suggest that policymakers have great power to shape the overall

form of cities, and the spatial arrangement of economic activity in urban areas a century from

now may be largely the consequence of land use regulation choices made today.




                                                 30
Bibliography

Ancestry.com. 1920 United States Federal Census [database on-line]. Provo, UT, USA: Ancestry.com
       Operations Inc, 2010.

Banzhaf, Spencer H., and Randall P. Walsh. "Do people vote with their feet? An empirical test of
       Tiebout's mechanism." The American Economic Review 98.3 (2008): 843-863.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Jeffrey Lin. “Portage and path dependence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2),
          2012, pp. 587-644.

Bui, Linda TM, and Christopher J. Mayer. "Regulation and capitalization of environmental amenities:
          evidence from the toxic release inventory in Massachusetts." Review of Economics and
          statistics 85.3 (2003): 693-708.

Murray, Cameron K., and Paul Frijters. "Clean money, dirty system: Connected landowners capture
         beneficial land rezoning." Journal of Urban Economics, 93, 2016, pp. 99-114.

Cheshire, P., & Sheppard, S. (2002). The welfare economics of land use planning. Journal of Urban
          economics, 52(2), 242-269.

Chicago Zoning Commission 1922, “Zoning Chicago” (pamphlet).

Conley, Timothy G. “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal of Econometrics,
        92(1), 1999, pp. 1-45.

Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor. “Is the Melting Pot Still Hot? Explaining the
        Resurgence of Immigrant Segregation.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 2008, pp.
        478-497.

Davis, Donald R. and David Weinstein. “Bones, bombs and break points: The geography of economic
        activity.” American Economic Review, 92(5), 2002, pp.1269-1289.

Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga. “Chapter 8 - Urban Land Use.” Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson
          and William C. Strange, Eds, Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 2015, Volume 5,
          pp. 467-560.

Ellickson, R. C. (1973). Alternatives to zoning: covenants, nuisance rules, and fines as land use controls.
        The University of Chicago Law Review, 40(4), 681-781.

Fischel, William A. Do growth controls matter?: A review of empirical evidence on the effectiveness and
        efficiency of local government land use regulation. Lincoln Inst of Land Policy, 1989.

Fischel, William A. The Homevoter Hypothesis: How Home Values Influence Local Government
        Taxation, School Finance, and Land use Policies. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Joseph Gyourko. “Urban decline and durable housing.” Journal of Political
        Economy, 113(2), 2005, pp. 345-375.

Glaeser, E. L., & Ward, B. A. (2009). The causes and consequences of land use regulation: Evidence
        from Greater Boston. Journal of Urban Economics, 65(3), 265-278.

                                                    31
Hall, Peter. An Intellectual History of Urban Planning and Design in the Twentieth Century. Third
        edition, Wiley-Blackwell Publishing, 2002.

Heise, David R. “Employing nominal variables, induced variables, and block variables in path analyses.”
        Sociological Methods & Research, 1(2), 1972, pp. 147-173.

Ihlanfeldt, Keith R. "Exclusionary Land use Regulations within Suburban Communities: A Review of the
        Evidence and Policy Prescriptions." Urban Studies 41(2), 2004, pp. 261-283.

Ihlanfeldt, Keith R. The effect of land use regulation on housing and land prices. Journal of Urban
        Economics, 2007, 61(3), pp. 420-435.

Kennedy, Louise Venable. The Negro Peasant Turns Cityward: The Effects of Recent Migrations to
      Northern Centers. New York: AMS Press, 1968.

Krugman, Paul. “Increasing returns and economic geography.” Journal of Political Economy, 99(3),
      1991, pp.483-499.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V., V. Kerry Smith, and Christopher Timmins. "The new economics of equilibrium
      sorting and policy evaluation using housing markets." Journal of Economic Literature 51(4),
      2013, pp. 1007-1062.

McDonald, John F. and Daniel P. McMillen. “A simultaneous equations model of zoning and land
     values.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 21(1), 1991, pp. 55-72.

McDonald, John F. and Daniel P. McMillen. “Land values, land use, and the first Chicago zoning
     ordinance.” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 16(2), 1998, pp.135-150.

McMillen, Daniel. “Conditionally Parametric Quantile Regressions for Spatial Data: An Analysis of
      Land Values in Early Nineteenth Century Chicago.” Working paper. 2012.

McMillen, Daniel P. and John F. McDonald. “A Markov chain model of zoning.” Journal of Urban
      Economics, 30(2), 1991, pp. 257-270.

McMillen, Daniel P. and John F. McDonald. “Land Use before Zoning: The Case of 1920s Chicago.”
      Regional Science and Urban Economics, 29, 1999, pp. 473-489.

McMillen, Daniel P. and John F. McDonald. “Land Values in a Newly Zoned City.” Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 84(1), 2002, pp. 62-72.

Munneke, Henry J. “Dynamics of the urban zoning structure: An empirical investigation of zoning
      change.” Journal of Urban Economics, 58(3), 2005, pp. 455-473.

Papke, Leslie E. and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. Econometric Methods for Fractional Response Variables
        with an Application to 401(k) Plan Participation Rates.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11(6),
        1996, pp. 619-632.

Pearl, Judea. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Second edition, Cambridge University Press,
         2009.


                                                   32
Perlin, S. A., Setzer, R. W., Creason, J., & Sexton, K. (1995). Distribution of industrial air emissions by
         income and race in the United States: an approach using the toxic release inventory.
         Environmental Science & Technology, 29(1), 69-80.

Pogodzinski, J. Michael, and Tim R. Sass. "Measuring the effects of municipal zoning regulations: a
       survey." Urban Studies 28.4 (1991): 597-621.

Redding, Stephen J. and Matthew A. Turner. “Chapter 20 - Transportation Costs and the Spatial
          Organization of Economic Activity.” Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson and William C.
          Strange, eds. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 2015, Volume 5, pp. 1339-1398.

Quigley, J. M., & Raphael, S. Regulation and the high cost of housing in California. The American
       Economic Review, 2005, 95(2), pp. 323-328.

Redfearn, Christian L. “Persistence in urban form: The long-run durability of employment centers in
       metropolitan areas.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 39(2), 2009, pp. 224-232.

Rosenbaum, Paul R. and Donald B. Rubin. “The Central role of the Propensity Score in Observational
       Studies for Causal Effects.” Biometrika, 70(1), 1983, pp. 41-55.

Schwieterman, Joseph P. and Dana M. Caspall. The Politics of Place: A History of Zoning in Chicago.
       Lake Claremont Press, 2006.

Shertzer, Allison, Tate Twinam, and Randall P. Walsh. “Race, Ethnicity, and Discriminatory Zoning.”
        2016. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.

Siegan, B. H. “Non-zoning in Houston.” The Journal of Law & Economics, 1970, 13(1), pp. 71-147.

Siegan, B. H. Land use without zoning. 1973. Free Press.

Susman, Thomas M. “Municipal Enforcement of Private Restrictive Covenants: An Innovation in Land
      use Control.” Texas Law Review, 44, 1966, pp. 741-768.

Turner, Matthew A., Andrew Haughwout, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. “Land use regulation and
        welfare.” Econometrica, 82(4), 2014, pp. 1341-1403.

Wallace, Nancy E. “The market effects of zoning undeveloped land: Does zoning follow the market?”
       Journal of Urban Economics, 23(3), 1988, pp. 307-326.

Whitt, Hugh P. “The sheaf coefficient: A simplified and expanded approach.” Social Science Research,
        15(2), 1986, 174-189.

Zhou, Jian, Daniel P. McMillen, and John F. McDonald. "Land values and the 1957 comprehensive
        amendment to the Chicago zoning ordinance." Urban Studies 45.8 (2008): 1647-1661.




                                                     33
Figure 1. Distribution of Industrial Land Use in 1922 and 2005 and Zoning for Industry in 1923




                A. 1922 Land Use                                     B. 1923 Zoning                                     C. 2005 Land Use



Notes: This image contrasts 1922 land use with 1923 zoning and 2005 land use. Blue areas in panel A contained industrial uses prior to zoning. Blue areas in
panel B were zoned for industry. Blue areas in panel C contained industry in 2005.




                                                                              34
Figure 2. Distribution of Commercial Land Use in 1922 and 2005 and Zoning for Commerce in 1923




        A. 1922 Land Use                                   B. 1923 Zoning                                            C. 2005 Land Use



Notes: This image contrasts 1922 land use with 1923 zoning and 2005 land use. Red areas in panel A contained commercial uses prior to zoning. Red areas in
panel B were zoned for commercial use. Red areas in panel C contained commercial uses in 2005.




                                                                             35
Figure 3. Local Linear Regression Residual Plots: Probability of Commercial Use in 2005 across Commercial/Apartment Border




Panel A. Entire Sample                                                         Panel B. No Pre-Existing Commercial Uses




Panel C. One or Two Pre-Existing Commercial Uses                               Panel D. Three or More Pre-Existing Commercial Uses


Notes: Subsample includes blocks with commercial/manufacturing zoning that are within 500 feet of a block containing only apartment/residential zoning as
well as apartment/residential only blocks within 500 feet of a block containing commercial/manufacturing zoning. Left hand side of border includes
commercial/manufacturing blocks. Right hand side includes apartment/residential blocks. Outcome variable is the residual from a linear regression of an
indicator for 2005 commercial use on all pre-1923 zoning covariates.

                                                                             36
Figure 4. Local Linear Regression Residual Plots: Probability of Industrial Use in 2005 across Commercial/Industrial Border




Panel A. Entire Sample                                                            Panel B. No Pre-Existing Industrial Uses




Panel C. One or More Pre-Existing Industrial Uses

Notes: Subsample includes blocks with commercial zoning (and no manufacturing zoning) that are within 500 feet of a block containing manufacturing zoning
(and no commercial/residential zoning) as well as blocks containing manufacturing zoning (and no commercial/residential zoning) that are within 500 feet of a
block containing commercial zoning (and no manufacturing zoning). Left hand side of border includes commercially zoned blocks. Right hand side includes
manufacturing zoned blocks. Outcome variable is the residual from a linear regression of an indicator for 2005 industrial use on all pre-1923 zoning covariates.

                                                                               37
Figure 5. Local Linear Regression Residual Plots: Probability of Commercial Use in 2005 across Commercial/Industrial
Border




Panel A. Entire Sample                                                           Panel B. No Pre-Existing Commercial Uses




Panel C. One or Two Pre-Existing Commercial Uses                                 Panel D. Three or More Pre-Existing Commercial Uses

Notes: Subsample includes blocks with commercial zoning (and no manufacturing zoning) that are within 500 feet of a block containing manufacturing zoning
(and no commercial/residential zoning) as well as blocks containing manufacturing zoning (and no commercial/residential zoning) that are within 500 feet of a
block containing commercial zoning (and no manufacturing zoning). Left hand side of border includes commercially zoned blocks. Right hand side includes
manufacturing zoned blocks. Outcome variable is the residual from a linear regression of an indicator for 2005 commercial use on all pre-1923 zoning covariates.


                                                                              38
Figure 6. Local Linear Regression Residual Plots: Percent of Block Devoted to Single-Family Residential Use across Volume Borders




Panel A. Entire Sample                                                           Panel B. Low Population Density




Panel C. High Population Density
Notes: Left hand side of border includes blocks with the lowest level of density zoning. Right hand side includes blocks with the next lowest level of density
zoning (accommodating mid-rise apartment complexes). Panel B restricts the sample to blocks with below median population density in 1920; Panel C restricts
to blocks with above median population density in 1920. Outcome variable is the residual from a linear regression of the share of the block devoted to single-
family residential use in 2005 on all pre-1923 zoning covariates.




                                                                              39
Figure 7. Distribution of Distances to Nearest Industrial or Commercial Use

Panel A. Chicago: Industry




Panel B. Chicago: Commerce




                                           40
Panel C. Texas Cities: TRI Facilities




Panel D. Chicago: TRI Facilities Counterfactual




Notes: Panel A shows the distribution of distances from each point of a mesh of equidistant (250 foot spaced) points
to the nearest 1922 industrial use (blue line), nearest 1923 industrial zoning (green line), and nearest 2005 industrial
use (red line). Analysis is restricted to the portion of the city with above median population density in 1920. Panel B
repeats the analysis for commercial uses and zoning. Panel C reports a distribution of distances to TRI facilities over
1987-2010 in four Texas cities, restricting to the area within 10 miles of the central business district. Panel D
reports a similar analysis for the distribution of distances to predicted TRI facilities in Chicago under zoning (red
line) and under a counterfactual of unrestricted zoning (blue line).


                                                          41
Table 1. Historical Land Use, 1923 Zoning Ordinance, and Modern Day Land Use.


  Panel A. Historical Land Use and the 1923 Zoning Ordinance

                                               Any historical commercial zoning?
                                                    No                 Yes
 No historical commercial/mfg A uses               61%                 39%
 Historical commercial/mfg A uses                  23%                 77%

                                                Any historical industrial zoning?
                                                   No                     Yes
 No historical mfg. B, C or S                     91%                     9%
 Some historical mfg B, C or S                    38%                    62%

 Panel B. Historical Land Use and Modern Day Land Use

                                                 Any modern commercial uses?
                                                    No               Yes
 No historical commercial/mfg A uses               79%              21%
 Historical commercial/mfg A uses                  48%              52%

                                                  Any modern industrial uses?
                                                    No                 Yes
 No historical mfg. B, C or S                      92%                  8%
 Some historical mfg B, C or S                     53%                 47%
Notes: The unit of observation is a city block. Because the commercial use zone allowed for the types of light
industry that was classified as Manufacturing A in the 1922 land use survey, we treat Manufacturing A as a
commercial use for these comparisons. Panel A describe the correspondence between land uses in 1922 and zoning
in 1923. Panel B describes the correspondence between land uses in 1922 and those in 2005.




                                                      42
Table 2. Impact of 1923 Zoning on the Contemporary Land Use: Manufacturing

                                                                   dependent variable = 1 if manufacturing activity in block in 2005
                                                      (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)                    (6)

 Percent Manufacturing Zoning                      0.017***           0.018***            -0.009          0.069***           0.016***          0.027***
                                                    (0.003)            (0.003)           (0.025)           (0.025)           (0.0039)           (0.004)
 Percent Commercial Zoning                         0.061***           0.056***            0.052*            0.006            0.047***          0.097***
                                                    (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.027)           (0.024)           (0.0049)           (0.008)
 Percent Single Family Res. Zoning                  -0.002             -0.002*            -0.146           -0.143           -0.006***         -0.011***
                                                    (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.163)           (0.158)           (0.0017)           (0.003)
 Percent Volume District 1 Zoning                 -0.050***          -0.039***           -0.151*                            -0.118***         -0.039***
                                                    (0.012)            (0.013)           (0.085)                             (0.0455)           (0.013)
 Percent Volume District 2 Zoning                 -0.051***          -0.042***          -0.114**                            -0.112***          -0.029**
                                                    (0.012)            (0.013)           (0.049)                             (0.0432)           (0.013)
 Percent Volume District 3 Zoning                 -0.027***          -0.023***            -0.032                              -0.033*         -0.024***
                                                    (0.008)            (0.008)           (0.025)                             (0.0193)           (0.008)

 Mean of Dependent Variable                          0.077              0.056            0.473              0.473            0.074              0.081
 Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable                     0.267              0.230            0.500              0.500            0.261              0.273
 Sample Restriction                                  None            # Mfg = 0         # Mfg > 0          # Mfg > 0       Undeveloped         Developed
 R-Squared                                           0.344              0.242            0.460              0.455            0.446              0.309
 Observations                                       14,582             13,830             752                752             7,221              7,361

Notes: Models include full set of spatial, demographic, and land use controls described in Section IV. Estimation uses OLS. Zoning variables are standardized on
the full sample (columns (1)-(4)), undeveloped sample (column (5)), or developed sample (column (6)). Columns (5) and (6) restrict to the section of the city
below and above median 1920 population density, respectively.




                                                                              43
Table 3. Impact of 1923 Zoning on the Contemporary Land Use: Commercial Uses

                                                 dependent variable = 1 if commercial activity in block in 2005
                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)                    (5)               (6)

 Percent Commercial Zoning                          0.108***          0.191***           0.105***            0.034***           0.133***          0.078***
                                                     (0.005)           (0.008)            (0.012)             (0.009)           (0.0068)          (0.0078)
 Percent Manufacturing Zoning                       0.015***            0.007               0.01               0.016             -0.001           0.032***
                                                     (0.005)           (0.006)            (0.014)             (0.014)           (0.0067)          (0.0075)
 Percent Single Family Res. Zoning                 -0.020***         -0.011***            -0.013              -0.011           -0.016***            0.000
                                                     (0.003)           (0.003)            (0.014)             (0.036)           (0.0042)          (0.0036)
 Percent Volume District 1 Zoning                   0.056***            -0.02             -0.006               0.042             -0.002           0.046***
                                                     (0.019)           (0.037)            (0.051)             (0.028)           (0.0611)          (0.0150)
 Percent Volume District 2 Zoning                   0.088***           -0.005              0.042             0.068***             0.031           0.094***
                                                     (0.018)           (0.037)            (0.051)             (0.024)           (0.0576)          (0.0201)
 Percent Volume District 3 Zoning                    0.025**           -0.024              0.028               0.016              0.007            0.034**
                                                     (0.011)           (0.022)            (0.031)             (0.013)           (0.0254)          (0.0140)

 Mean of Dependent Variable                           0.373            0.219               0.427              0.614             0.321              0.424
 Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable                      0.484            0.414               0.495              0.487             0.467              0.494
 Sample Restriction                                   None           # Com = 0         0 < # Com ≤ 2        # Com > 2        Undeveloped         Developed
 R-Squared                                            0.337            0.304               0.322              0.250             0.376              0.327
 Observations                                        14,582            7,483               2,963              4,136             7,221              7,361

Notes: Models include full set of spatial, demographic, and land use controls described in Section IV. Estimation uses OLS. Zoning variables are standardized on
the full sample (columns (1)-(4)), undeveloped sample (column (5)), or developed sample (column (6)). Columns (5) and (6) restrict to the section of the city
below and above median 1920 population density, respectively.




                                                                              44
Table 4. Impact of 1923 Zoning on the Contemporary Land Use: Residential Areas

                                                       Percent Single-Family Residential                     Percent Multifamily Residential
                                                       (1)            (2)           (3)                    (4)            (5)             (6)

 Percent Single Family Residential Zoning           0.040***         0.052***          0.037***        -0.029***        -0.032***         -0.030***
                                                     (0.003)         (0.0039)          (0.0038)          (0.003)         (0.0023)          (0.0029)
 Percent Commercial Zoning                         -0.034***        -0.051***         -0.027***        -0.047***        -0.033***         -0.065***
                                                     (0.003)         (0.0046)          (0.0039)          (0.003)         (0.0035)          (0.0053)
 Percent Manufacturing Zoning                      -0.013***          -0.010          -0.035***        -0.057***        -0.040***         -0.068***
                                                     (0.003)         (0.0059)          (0.0040)          (0.003)         (0.0035)          (0.0050)
 Percent Volume District 1 Zoning                   0.118***           0.043           0.076***        -0.048***          0.023           -0.040***
                                                     (0.011)         (0.0366)          (0.0070)          (0.011)         (0.0326)          (0.0107)
 Percent Volume District 2 Zoning                   0.034***          -0.027            0.014*            0.007           0.059*             0.001
                                                     (0.011)         (0.0340)          (0.0077)          (0.010)         (0.0303)          (0.0140)
 Percent Volume District 3 Zoning                    0.013**          -0.020           0.016***          -0.009           0.004             -0.008
                                                     (0.006)         (0.0142)          (0.0046)          (0.006)         (0.0122)          (0.0095)

 Mean of Dependent Variable                           0.388          0.593             0.187              0.291          0.143             0.436
 Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable                      0.396          0.383             0.291              0.339          0.247             0.354
 Sample Restriction                                   None        Undeveloped        Developed            None        Undeveloped        Developed
 R-Squared                                            0.546          0.456             0.354              0.433          0.318             0.334
 Observations                                        14,582          7,221             7,361             14,582          7,221             7,361
Notes: Models include full set of spatial, demographic, and land use controls described in Section IV. Estimation uses OLS. Zoning variables are standardized on
the full sample (columns (1) and (4)), undeveloped sample (columns (2) and (5)), or developed sample (columns (3) and (6)). Columns (2) and (5) restrict to the
section of the city below median 1920 population density. Columns (3) and (6) restrict to the section of the city above median 1920 population density.




                                                                              45
Table 5. Impact of 1923 Zoning on LULUs (TRI Facilities)

                                                   dependent variable=1 if TRI Facility in Block
                                                         (1)                (2)               (3)                      (4)                 (5)

 Percent Manufacturing Zoning                         0.014***             0.013***             -0.001             0.015***             0.011***
                                                       (0.002)              (0.002)             (0.018)            (0.0035)             (0.0037)
 Percent Commercial Zoning                            0.005***             0.004***             -0.006             0.007***              0.006**
                                                       (0.002)              (0.002)             (0.016)            (0.0022)             (0.0022)
 Percent Single Family Residential Zoning               0.000                0.000              -0.070              -0.000               -0.001*
                                                       (0.001)              (0.001)             (0.095)            (0.0010)             (0.0005)
 Percent Volume District 1 Zoning                      -0.001                0.003              -0.007              -0.006                -0.003
                                                       (0.006)              (0.005)             (0.059)            (0.0227)             (0.0047)
 Percent Volume District 2 Zoning                      -0.001                0.003               -0.01              -0.008                -0.001
                                                       (0.006)              (0.005)             (0.040)            (0.0216)             (0.0066)
 Percent Volume District 3 Zoning                      -0.001                0.001              -0.005               0.001                -0.002
                                                       (0.004)              (0.003)             (0.020)            (0.0092)             (0.0049)

 Mean of Dependent Variable                              0.018               0.011               0.145              0.019                0.016
 Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable                         0.132               0.104               0.352              0.137                0.127
 Sample Restriction                                      None             # Mfg = 0            # Mfg > 0         Undeveloped           Developed
 R-Squared                                               0.180               0.094               0.310              0.256                0.132
 Observations                                           14,582              13,830                752               7,221                7,361
Notes: Models include full set of spatial, demographic, and land use controls described in Section IV. Estimation uses OLS. Zoning variables are standardized on
the full sample (columns (1)-(3)), undeveloped sample (column (4)), or developed sample (column (5)). Columns (4) and (5) restrict to the section of the city
below and above median 1920 population density, respectively.




                                                                              46
Table 6. Impact of 1923 Zoning on Present Day Population Density

                                                   (1)              (2)             (3)

Percent Commercial Zoning                      -2.487***        -2.956***       -2.601***
                                                 (0.281)          (0.297)         (0.447)
Percent Manufacturing Zoning                   -1.655***        -1.371***       -1.179***
                                                 (0.120)          (0.162)         (0.203)
Percent Single Family Res. Zoning              -3.556***        -2.753***       -4.383***
                                                 (0.222)          (0.254)         (0.378)
Percent Volume District 1 Zoning               -3.694***           4.717        -3.651***
                                                 (1.271)          (4.114)         (1.008)
Percent Volume District 2 Zoning                -2.233*            5.410         -3.251**
                                                 (1.279)          (3.893)         (1.399)
Percent Volume District 3 Zoning                 -0.103            1.521          -0.689
                                                 (0.768)          (1.744)         (1.000)

Mean of Dependent Variable                        27.74           23.84      31.56
Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable                   23.73           19.27      26.86
Sample Restriction                                None         Undeveloped Developed
R-Squared                                         0.333           0.397      0.349
Observations                                     14,582           7,221      7,361
Notes: Models include full set of spatial, demographic, and land use controls described in Section IV. Estimation
uses OLS. Zoning variables are standardized on the full sample (column (1)), undeveloped sample (column (2)), or
developed sample (column (3)). Columns (2) and (3) restrict to the section of the city below and above median 1920
population density, respectively.




                                                         47
Table 7. Impact of 1923 Zoning on Contemporary Single Family House Prices


                                                                     (1)                (2)                 (3)

 Percent Commercial Zoning within ¼ Mile                        -0.00862**            -0.0116          -0.00637*
                                                                 (0.00379)          (0.00843)          (0.00357)
 Percent Mfg. Zoning within ¼ Mile                                -0.00389          0.0224***           -0.00770
                                                                 (0.00391)          (0.00808)          (0.00497)
 Percent Residential Zoning within ¼ Mile                        0.0118***            0.00379          0.0157***
                                                                 (0.00368)          (0.00678)          (0.00471)
 Percent Commercial Zoning between ¼ and ½ Mile                   -0.00424           -0.00766            0.00173
                                                                 (0.00527)           (0.0110)          (0.00464)
 Percent Mfg. Zoning between ¼ and ½ Mile                          0.00848           0.0224**            0.00118
                                                                 (0.00523)           (0.0114)          (0.00648)
 Percent Residential Zoning between ¼ and ½ Mile                 0.0144***          -0.000661          0.0200***
                                                                 (0.00394)          (0.00727)          (0.00512)
 Percent Commercial Zoning between ½ and 1 Mile                    0.0165*             0.0200             0.0129
                                                                 (0.00911)           (0.0176)          (0.00784)
 Percent Mfg. Zoning between ½ and 1 Mile                        0.0443***           0.0588**             0.0134
                                                                 (0.00815)           (0.0245)          (0.00967)
 Percent Residential Zoning between ½ and 1 Mile                 0.0162***           -0.00306          0.0223***
                                                                 (0.00492)           (0.0135)          (0.00620)
 Constant                                                         12.74***           11.59***           12.65***
                                                                   (0.217)            (0.325)            (0.419)

 Sample Restriction                                                 None            Developed         Undeveloped
 R-Squared                                                          0.794             0.822              0.704
 Observations                                                      50,556            18,378             32,178
Notes: Observations are individual home sales between 2000 and 2012. Models include full set of spatial,
demographic, and land use controls described in Section IV as well as housing characteristics, census tract fixed
effects, and year-month sale fixed effects. Estimation uses OLS. Zoning variables are standardized on the full
sample (column (1)), undeveloped sample (column (2)), or developed sample (column (3)). Columns (2) and (3)
restrict to the section of the city above and below median 1920 population density, respectively. The dependent
variable is the log of the sales price.




                                                         48
Table 8. Sheaf Statistics: Developed Chicago (1923)



                      Commercial          Industrial      Commercial          Industrial

 Zoning                 0.152***          0.075***            0.191***        0.111***
                          0.004             0.004               0.004           0.004
 Geography              0.072***          0.058***            0.071***        0.060***
                          0.007             0.004               0.006           0.003
 Transportation         0.100***          0.019***            0.115***        0.026***
                          0.004             0.003               0.004           0.003
 Demographics           0.031***          0.007***
                          0.007             0.003
 Land Use               0.152***          0.092***
                          0.008             0.004
Notes: Table presents the sheaf coefficients and standard errors for the estimated latent variables capturing the
impact of zoning, pre-existing land use, transportation, demographics, and geography; the estimated latent variables
are standardized to have standard deviation of one for comparability of coefficients (Heise 1972; Whitt 1986).
Outcome variables are indicators for commercial and industrial land use in 2005.




                                                         49
Appendix

          A.I. Data Appendix

    This section describes the eight components of the dataset compiled for this paper in more

detail.

(1) CMAP Land Use Inventory

    Our primary source of information on contemporary land use in Chicago is drawn from a

2005 comprehensive land use inventory compiled by the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for

Planning, the official regional planning organization for Cook County and the six neighboring

counties. The CMAP land use inventory was created to inform the development of a

comprehensive regional plan. The survey is based on 2005 aerial photography as well as data

from other government and private organizations. The survey measures land use at the acre to

one-half acre level (a typical city block in Chicago is five acres) and distinguishes between a

wide array of land uses: single-family and multifamily residential use are classified separately

while commercial uses are separated into ten different classes and industrial uses are divided into

four different classes. The inventory also accounts separately for a variety of institutional,

transportation, and open space uses.

(2) The Toxics Release Inventory

    The Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) is an annually-updated inventory of industrial facilities

in the United States. It was created in 1986 following several high-profile toxic waste

management disasters with the aim of informing the public about potential environmental

hazards in their communities. Facilities which manage or release into the environment certain

hazardous chemicals in quantities greater than certain thresholds must report these quantities to

the EPA, and these are compiled into the TRI. The TRI has been the basis for measuring



                                                 50
exposure to industrial hazards and/or locally undesirable land uses (LULUs) in numerous

empirical studies. 24 We include in our analysis any sites that reported to the TRI at any point

between 1987 and 2010.

(3) 2012 Zoning

           Zoning data come from the City of Chicago and delineates the city into residential,

commercial, industrial, and other miscellaneous categories. We focus on the first three

categories, as the others (e.g., planned unit developments featuring bespoke zoning

arrangements) are not classifiable in terms historical zoning.

(4) 2000 Census Block Data

           Our contemporary land use data is supplemented with counts of housing units, African

Americans, and Hispanics at the census block level for the year 2000. Census data and GIS block

maps were obtained from NHGIS. We attached the census block data to our Chicago city block

data using areal interpolation.

(5) Home Sales

           Our housing price data encompasses the universe of single-family home sales in Chicago

over the years 2000-2012. In addition to sale prices, the data includes housing characteristics

such as lot size, building square footage, number of stories, number of bedrooms and bathrooms,

and the age of the building at sale. These data come from come from DataQuick Information

Systems, under a license agreement with the vendor.

(6) 1922 Chicago Land Use Survey

           The historical comprehensive land use survey we draw upon was conducted by the

Chicago Zoning Commission in 1922 to inform the drafting process for the zoning ordinance.


24
     See for instance, Banzhaf and Walsh (2008)


                                                   51
Four teams, each equipped with an automobile, recorded the use of every building and lot in the

city (Zoning Chicago 1922 Pamphlet). From these survey maps we obtain the location of every

commercial and manufacturing use in the city; we also obtain the location and number of stories

of every building with four or more stories. We geocoded the entire pre-zoning survey for our

study.

         Figure A.1.A provides a map image of several blocks from the survey. The Tilden Public

School in the center of the image is surrounded by noxious facilities, indicated by “++N” on the

map. The building heights of all structures over four stories can also be seen (surveyors

occasionally indicated three-story buildings although not consistently). The letters on buildings

correspond to specific uses, which we classified as residential, commercial, or manufacturing

using the same system as the Chicago Zoning Commission in 1922. Of particular use for our

identification strategy are the manufacturing classes: classes A and B include general

manufacturing that does not cause a nuisance but may require yard storage, class S includes

large-scale industrial facilities such as rail yards and granaries, class D covers storage of

explosives and high pressure gases (only one instance in our sample), and class C includes

manufacturing facilities that emit noise, smoke, odors, or pose a fire risk. Commercial use is

indicated using only one category and covers retail establishments, offices, and entertainment

venues such as theaters. Class A manufacturing included such uses as printers and laundries, so

we group these with commercial uses when splitting samples along these lines.

(7) Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of 1923

         We digitized the initial zoning ordinance for Chicago, recording both use zoning and

volume zoning. Use zoning delineated the city into four distinct districts: residential (single

family homes), apartment, commercial, and manufacturing. These use districts were



                                                  52
hierarchical, with apartment districts allowing residential uses, commercial districts allowing

both apartments and single-family homes, and manufacturing districts allowing any use. 25 The

residential category was rarely used in the initial zoning ordinance; only three percent of the

enumeration districts in our sample have any zoning of this type. Figure A.1.B shows a section

of a use zoning map from an area west of the downtown along the Chicago River. Zones for

apartments, commercial activity, and manufacturing can all be seen.

         The volume districts in the zoning ordinance are essentially rough concentric rings

radiating out from the central business district. Figure A.1.C shows the digitization of these

districts with each enumeration district assigned to the volume district most common within its

borders. The volume district 1 maximum building height was 33 feet, corresponding to roughly

three stories. For district 2, the maximum height was about six stories; district 3, eleven stories;

and district 4, sixteen stories. District 5, which was restricted to the central business district,

allowed a maximum building height about 22 stories. If a building satisfied requirements on

additional setbacks from the street, the allowed height was greater. There were no density

“minimums,” only restrictions only the maximum volume, height, and lot coverage.

(8) Census Enumeration District Data for 1920

         In the empirical work we control for four categories of racial and ethnic minorities in

1920 since there is evidence that the spatial distribution of these groups impacted the initial

zoning ordinance (Shertzer, Twinam, and Walsh, 2016). We obtained counts of the number of

blacks and white ethnic groups from the 1920 census at the enumeration district level using the


25
  There were additional gradations within the commercial and manufacturing districts, with certain objectionable
commercial uses barred if they were within 125 feet of a residential or apartment district, while certain
manufacturing uses were barred if they were within 100 to 2000 feet of a residential, apartment, or commercial
district. Some commercial uses within 125 feet of residential or apartment districts also saw restrictions on the hours
during which trucking activities could occur.


                                                          53
genealogy website Ancestry.com. Enumeration districts were small administrative units used

internally by the Census Bureau to divide cities up into small areas that could be surveyed by one

person. 26 In order to place individuals in 1920 urban space, we digitized the 1920 enumeration

district map of Chicago. We first used written descriptions of the enumeration districts available

on microfilm from the National Archives. The information from these microfilms has been

digitized and made available on the web due to the work of Stephen P. Morse. 27 Second, we took

digital photographs of the physical map of the 1920 census enumeration districts of Chicago

from the National Archives. Working primarily with a geocoded (GIS) historic base street map

developed by the Center for Population Economics at the University of Chicago, we generated a

GIS representation of the Chicago enumeration district map that is consistent with the historic

street grid.

         We define southern blacks to be individuals who report their race as black or mulatto and

their place of birth as in the South. 28 We define “second-generation” blacks, that is, individuals

born in the North but with southern-born fathers, in the southern black category. Northern blacks

are defined as black or mulatto individuals who were both born outside the South with fathers

born outside the South. First-generation immigrants include all foreign-born individuals plus

second-generation individuals under the age of 18, the latter of whom are presumably children

residing in the same household as their foreign-born parents. Second-generation immigrants are




26
   The Census Bureau did not switch to a mail-based survey system until 1960.
27
   Website: http://stevemorse.org/ed/ed.php.
28
   We use an eleven state definition of the South, defining the region to include Alabama, Arkansas, Florida,
Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia.


                                                         54
defined as individuals who were born in the U.S. and who are at least 18 years old with foreign-

born fathers. 29




29
  Using these definitions, we avoid the standard problem in the segregation literature of immigrant populations
being diluted by the presence of their native-born children (see Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor, 2008).


                                                        55
Figure A.1. Land Use Survey and Use Zoning Map Samples

Panel A: 1922 Land Use Survey Sample                                                 Panel B: 1923 Use Zoning Map Sample




Notes: A portion of the 1922 land use survey map created by the Chicago
Zoning Commission. These blocks are located just across the Chicago River to
the west of the downtown. Numbers indicate building heights in stories. Black
squares within parcels indicate commercial uses; letters sometime accompany          Notes: This image shows the area of Chicago west of the downtown along the
these to indicate a specific commercial activity. V indicates a vacant               Chicago River. Unhatched areas are zoned for apartments, hatched areas are
lot/building. Letters followed or preceded by a single + indicate light industrial   zoned for commercial uses, and cross-hatched areas are zoned for
uses. Letters preceded by ++ indicate heavier industrial uses; in particular, ++N    manufacturing.
indicates uses which “by reason of excessive noise, odor, fumes, gases, etc.,
affect the adjacent territory.”




                                                                                 56
Figure A.1, con’t

Panel C: Volume Zoning Map




Notes: This map shows volume districts in the Chicago zoning ordinance with enumeration districts assigned to the
volume district in which the majority of its area fell. District 5 (darkest hue) permitted the tallest buildings, up to 22
stories. District 1 (lightest hue) was the most restrictive, allowing only buildings with three or fewer stories.




                                                           57
Table A.1. Summary Statistics

                                                                          Undeveloped
                                      Full Sample     Developed Sample      Sample
                                     Mean      SD      Mean       SD     Mean      SD

Population density                   28.70    31.95   52.41     29.85    4.89     4.37
Fraction southern black               0.02     0.08    0.03      0.10    0.01     0.05
Fraction northern black               0.01     0.04    0.01      0.05    0.00     0.02
Fraction first-gen. immigrant         0.47     0.19    0.45      0.20    0.49     0.17
Fraction second-gen. immigrant        0.21     0.07    0.22      0.08    0.19     0.06
Indicator for commercial use          0.49     0.50    0.75      0.43    0.23     0.42
Indicator for mfg. A use              0.18     0.38    0.28      0.45    0.08     0.27
Indicator for mfg. B use              0.04     0.18    0.04      0.20    0.03     0.16
Indicator for mfg. C use              0.02     0.14    0.02      0.16    0.01     0.12
Indicator for mfg. S use              0.01     0.08    0.00      0.07    0.01     0.09
Indicator for warehouse use           0.05     0.22    0.07      0.26    0.02     0.16
Density of commercial uses            0.43     0.72    0.74      0.86    0.11     0.33
Density of mfg. A uses                0.07     0.23    0.11      0.27    0.03     0.17
Density of mfg. B uses                0.01     0.05    0.01      0.05    0.01     0.05
Density of mfg. C uses                0.00     0.04    0.01      0.04    0.00     0.04
Density of mfg. S uses                0.00     0.01    0.00      0.01    0.00     0.02
Density of warehouses                 0.01     0.09    0.02      0.10    0.01     0.07
Density of 4 story buildings          0.05     0.18    0.08      0.23    0.01     0.09
Density of 5 story buildings          0.01     0.07    0.01      0.08    0.00     0.06
Density of 6-25 story buildings       0.02     0.12    0.02      0.14    0.01     0.10
Average 1913 land value               0.61     3.58    0.75      2.79    0.47     4.22
Railroad indicator                    0.00     0.02    0.00      0.02    0.00     0.02
Major street indicator                0.63     0.48    0.62      0.49    0.64     0.48
River indicator                       0.00     0.07    0.00      0.06    0.01     0.08
Coast indicator                       0.01     0.09    0.01      0.10    0.01     0.08
CBD indicator                         0.03     0.17    0.04      0.19    0.02     0.14
Commercial zoning indicator           0.59     0.49    0.68      0.47    0.50     0.50
Manufacturing zoning indicator        0.13     0.34    0.10      0.30    0.16     0.37
Residential zoning indicator          0.07     0.25    0.02      0.14    0.12     0.32
Percent commercial zoning             0.17     0.20    0.21      0.21    0.12     0.16
Percent manufacturing zoning          0.08     0.21    0.05      0.17    0.10     0.24
Percent residential zoning            0.04     0.14    0.01      0.06    0.06     0.19
Percent volume 1 zoning               0.35     0.44    0.14      0.31    0.57     0.45
Percent volume 2 zoning               0.49     0.46    0.62      0.45    0.35     0.43
Percent volume 3 zoning               0.11     0.30    0.17      0.35    0.05     0.21
Percent residential land use, 2005    0.68     0.35    0.62      0.36    0.73     0.34
Percent commercial land use, 2005     0.13     0.21    0.15      0.23    0.11     0.20

                                             58
 Table A.1., con’t.


 Percent industrial land use, 2005           0.04        0.17        0.04        0.16        0.04        0.18
 Indicator for commercial land use,
 2005                                        0.37        0.48        0.42        0.49        0.32        0.47
 Indicator for industrial land use,
 2005                                        0.08        0.27        0.08        0.27        0.08        0.27
 Indictor for TRI facility                   0.02        0.13        0.02        0.13        0.02        0.14
 Population density, 2010                   27.68       23.71       31.56       26.86       23.78       19.28
 Housing unit density, 2010                 12.16       15.23       15.05       17.91        9.25       11.24
 Percent manufacturing zoning, 2012          0.04        0.16        0.05        0.17        0.04        0.15
 Percent residential zoning, 2012            0.70        0.35        0.63        0.37        0.76        0.33
 Percent commercial zoning, 2012             0.14        0.21        0.16        0.23        0.11        0.19
 N                                          14690       14690       7361        7361        7329        7329
Notes: Densities are with respect to acres. The developed sample includes blocks with above median population
density (17 persons per acre) in 1920; the undeveloped sample captures those blocks with below median population
density in 1920.




                                                       59
Table A.2. Zoning Border Regressions




  A. Blocks within 500 feet of both a Residential or Apartment Block and some Commercial or Industrial Zoning:
                                          Probability of Commercial Use
                                                             (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)


Commercial Side of Border                               0.719***       0.688***         0.751***      0.731***
                                                           (0.0305)    (0.0488)          (0.0675)      (0.0989)
Distance to Nearest Comm. or Mfg. Zoning                -0.211***      -0.195***         -0.347**       -0.024
                                                           (0.0510)    (0.0587)          (0.1355)      (0.2971)
Distance to Nearest Res. or Apt. Zoned Block               -0.028        0.052            -0.072        -0.131
                                                           (0.0923)    (0.2027)          (0.2016)      (0.1329)


Sample Restriction                                          None      # Com = 0       0 < # Com ≤ 2   # Com > 2
Observations                                               10,805        5,662            2,297         2,846
R-squared                                                   0.398        0.358            0.399         0.296



  B. Blocks within 500 feet of both Commercial and Industrial Zoning: Probability of Industrial Use
                                                             (1)          (2)               (3)


Manufacturing Side of Border                            0.326***       0.292***           0.148
                                                           (0.0642)    (0.0772)          (0.1782)
Distance to Nearest Comm. Zoning                            0.178        0.159            0.463
                                                           (0.2550)    (0.3214)          (0.5618)
Distance to Nearest Mfg. Zoning                         -0.310***      -0.365***         -1.077*
                                                           (0.1059)    (0.1188)          (0.6278)


Sample Restriction                                          None       # Mfg = 0        # Mfg > 0
Observations                                                3,118        2,758             360
R-squared                                                   0.338        0.250            0.547




                                                      60
        C. Blocks within 500 feet of both Commercial and Industrial Zoning: Probability of Commercial Use
                                                                (1)           (2)              (3)              (4)


 Commercial Side of Border                                 0.177***        0.197**            0.044           0.189
                                                              (0.0593)     (0.0946)         (0.1383)         (0.1249)
 Distance to Nearest Comm. Zoning                             -0.086        -0.103            -0.878          -0.143
                                                              (0.2043)     (0.2741)         (0.5683)         (0.6571)
 Distance to Nearest Mfg. Zoning                              0.350**       0.560*           0.596*           -0.118
                                                              (0.1476)     (0.3039)         (0.3303)         (0.2351)


 Sample Restriction                                            None       # Com = 0      0 < # Com ≤ 2      # Com > 2
 Observations                                                  2,945        1,136              699            1,110
 R-squared                                                     0.245        0.245             0.304           0.292


 D. Blocks within 500 feet of Residential (Single Family) Zoning: Percent of Block Dedicated to Single
                                           Family Residential
                                                                (1)           (2)              (3)


 Low Density (Volume 1) Side of Border                     0.523***       0.562***          0.450***
                                                              (0.0605)     (0.0797)         (0.1380)
 Distance to Nearest Volume 1 Zoning                          -0.102        -0.102            -0.244
                                                              (0.1795)     (0.2972)         (0.2544)
 Distance to Nearest Volume 2 Zoning                           0.047        -0.042            0.108
                                                              (0.1197)     (0.1430)         (0.3439)


 Sample Restriction                                            None      Undeveloped       Developed
 Observations                                                  2,518        1,634              884
 R-squared                                                     0.502          0.480           0.459
Notes: Panel A replicates the analysis from figure 3 using OLS. Similarly, Panels B, C and D replicate Figures 4, 5,
and 6, respectively. Sample restrictions are with respect to 1922 land use. The developed sample includes blocks
with above median population density (17 persons per acre) in 1920; the undeveloped sample captures those blocks
with below median population density in 1920. All models include the full set of historical covariates.




                                                         61
Table A.3. Impact of 1923 Zoning on Single Family House Prices by Poverty Rate

                                                             dependent variable is single-family home sale values
                                                                   (1)                 (2)              (3)

Percent Commercial Zoning within a Quarter Mile                   -0.00441             0.00774              -0.0105
                                                                  (0.0178)            (0.0141)             (0.0279)
Percent Manufacturing Zoning within a Quarter Mile               0.0424***             0.00995             -0.00557
                                                                  (0.0160)            (0.0132)             (0.0314)
Percent Residential Zoning within a Quarter Mile                    0.0193            -0.00127               0.0144
                                                                  (0.0147)            (0.0115)             (0.0235)
Percent Commercial Zoning within a Half Mile                      -0.0413*             -0.0101               0.0360
                                                                  (0.0222)            (0.0173)             (0.0416)
Percent Manufacturing Zoning within a Half Mile                    0.00908              0.0167              -0.0506
                                                                  (0.0214)            (0.0219)             (0.0497)
Percent Residential Zoning within a Half Mile                      0.00933             -0.0183              0.00337
                                                                  (0.0168)            (0.0120)             (0.0225)
Percent Commercial Zoning within a Mile                            -0.0353              0.0444              0.00709
                                                                  (0.0398)            (0.0309)             (0.0586)
Percent Manufacturing Zoning within a Mile                        0.130***              0.0852             -0.283**
                                                                  (0.0447)            (0.0523)              (0.119)
Percent Residential Zoning within a Mile                            0.0429             -0.0175               0.0372
                                                                  (0.0376)            (0.0200)             (0.0465)
Constant                                                          11.88***            12.22***             13.78***
                                                                   (0.808)             (0.791)              (2.267)

Sample Restriction                                            Developed, top         Developed,          Developed,
                                                                quartile of          middle two        bottom quartile
                                                               poverty rates         quartiles of      of poverty rates
                                                              (high poverty)        poverty rates       (low poverty)
Observations                                                      5,813                8,323                4,242
R-squared                                                         0.735                0.807                0.772
Notes: Observations are individual home sales between 2000 and 2012. Models include full set of spatial,
demographic, and land use controls described in Section IV as well as housing characteristics, census tract fixed
effects, and year-month sale fixed effects. Estimation uses OLS. Zoning variables are standardized the developed
sample. Poverty rate is drawn from 2010 Census block-group data. The dependent variable is the log of the sales
price.




                                                        62
Table A.4. Determinants of Contemporary Zoning
                                                                       Percent                             Percent                              Percent
                                                  Percent Mfg.         Comm.           Percent Mfg.        Comm.            Percent Mfg.        Comm.
                                                  Zoning 2012        Zoning 2012       Zoning 2012       Zoning 2012        Zoning 2012       Zoning 2012
                                                       (1)               (2)                (3)              (4)                 (5)              (6)

Percent Manufacturing Zoning                        0.053***           0.007***          0.084***          0.017***           0.035***             0.001
                                                    (0.0032)           (0.0020)          (0.0056)          (0.0036)           (0.0037)           (0.0026)
Percent Commercial Zoning                           0.015***           0.079***          0.029***          0.078***           0.012***           0.082***
                                                    (0.0022)           (0.0029)          (0.0036)          (0.0043)           (0.0026)           (0.0036)
Percent Single Family Residential Zoning              0.000           -0.007***          -0.002**            0.001            -0.003**          -0.006***
                                                    (0.0008)           (0.0011)          (0.0007)          (0.0013)           (0.0011)           (0.0016)
Percent Volume District 1 Zoning                     -0.007            0.047***           0.020*           0.032***            -0.170             -0.014
                                                    (0.0152)           (0.0165)          (0.0105)          (0.0124)           (0.1561)           (0.1091)
Percent Volume District 2 Zoning                     -0.011            0.064***           0.028**          0.049***            -0.167              0.004
                                                    (0.0151)           (0.0164)          (0.0130)          (0.0152)           (0.1528)           (0.1065)
Percent Volume District 3 Zoning                     -0.004            0.031***            0.011           0.031***            -0.058              0.001
                                                    (0.0083)           (0.0087)          (0.0098)          (0.0110)           (0.0495)           (0.0348)

Sample Restriction                                     Full               Full         Undeveloped       Undeveloped         Developed         Developed
R-Squared                                             0.377              0.504            0.464             0.522              0.438             0.507
Observations                                         12,035             12,035            5,695             5,695              6,340             6,340
Notes: Outcome variables are shares of blocks devoted to each zoning type in 2012; the omitted zoning type is residential (single and multifamily). Columns (3)-
(4) are restricted to developed blocks in 1920, while (5)-(6) are restricted to undeveloped blocks. Only blocks covered by residential, commercial, and/or
industrial zoning are included; many blocks are covered by bespoke zoning arrangements through Planned Unit Developments, and we are unable to classify the
zoning in these blocks. All models include the full set of historical covariates.




                                                                              63
