                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       PENSIONS AND FIRM PERFORMANCE




                              Steven G. Allen

                              Robert L. Clark




                          Working Paper No. 2266




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 May 1987




Final draft of chapter for the 1987 Research Volume of the Industrial Relations
Research Association titled Human Resources and Firm Performance, edited by
Morris Kleiner, Richard Block, Myron Roomkin, and Sidney Salsburg. Stan
Leibowitz gave us useful advice on the measurement of profit rates. We have
received helpful comments from Richard Ippolito and the University of North
Carolina Human Resource Economics Workshop and excellent research assistance
from Linda Shumaker and Myra Ragland. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2266
                                               May 1987




                         Pensions and Firm Performance

                                   ABSTRACT


   This paper examines how pension plans affect employee behavior and firm

performance. Theoretically, the impact of pensions on firm performance cannot

be predicted. Firms with pensions should have lower turnover rates and more

efficient retirement decisions; their employees will be less likely to shirk.

On the other hand, pension compensation is not very closely linked to worker

performance and there is some risk that turnover may fall too much. The

evidence indicates that although wages do not seem to fall with pension

compensation, profit rates are not affected by pension coverage. This suggests

that pension coverage is associated with higher productivity, a proposition

that is supported by indirect evidence on pensions, turnover, and productivity

but not by direct tests of how pension coverage and productivity are

correlated.




Steven IL Allen                                Robert L. Clark
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
  and Business                                   and Business
Box 8110                                       Box 8110
North Carolina State University                North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110                         Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
                                                                                 1


                                 I. Introduction



     Pension benefits represent a form of deferred compensation that a worker

receives after he retires from a firm, provided he has met certain age and

service requirements. The magnitude of these benefits depends on the nature of

the employment contract and whether the worker and the firm have fulfilled the

obligations of that contract. This chapter examines the role of pensions as a

form of compensation and how pensions are used as a component of personnel

policy. Such a review requires a clear understanding of how future pension

benefits are evaluated by workers and financed by firms. Having determined

these concepts, we can assess the influence of pensions on firm performance.

Pensions are strictly regulated by the federal government and so our

examination will include a brief review of current regulations and how they

temper the impact of pensions on firm performance.

    Our examination of pensions begins with a brief overview of the growth and

development of the employer pension system in the United States. This includes

a discussion of the distribution of pensions by worker and firm

characteristics. In section II, specific plan characteristics are described

and their importance is discussed. Next, we present several alternative

rationales for why workers and unions want pensions as part of their

compensation. Section IV presents competing models of the pension contract and

develops predictions for the effect of pensions on compensation and

performance. The impact of pensions on employee behavior is considered from a

theoretical perspective in section V; section VI assesses the evidence

concerning the impact of pensions on firm performance. The final section
                                                                                 2

reports our conclusions and discusses some areas where further research would

be useful.

Growth and Development of Employer Pensions

     While public pensions in the United States are as old as the republic

(dating to benefits for Revolutionary War veterans), private pensions first

appeared in the late nineteenth century. Greenough and King (1976) credit the

American Express Company with establishing the first formal employer pension

in 1875. Early pensions were generally found in railroads, banking, and public

utilities. Prior to World War II, growth in pension coverage was slow;

however, in the immediate post-war period there was a rapid increase in

the number of employers offering pensions and the number of workers covered by

a pension. The proportion of wage and salary workers in the private sector

covered by an employer pension grew from 25 percent in 1950 to over 50 percent

in 1984. Most of this growth occurred prior to 1975. In the last decade,

coverage rates have changed only modestly. The proportion of covered workers

actually fell from 56 to 52 percent between 1979 and 1983 (Andrews, 1985).

Growth in coverage and increases in benefits raised the percentage of payroll

going to pensions from 1 percent in 1950 to 6 percent in 1980 (Fields and

Mitchell, 1984).

     Ippolito (1986a) estimates that in 1984 there were 788,000 pension plans, of

which 744,000 covered fewer than 100 participants. Allowing for duplicate

coverage, these plans contained 57.5 million active participants and 8 million

annuitants. Public employees have always been more likely to be covered by an

employer pension than private sector workers. Currently, over 90 percent of

state and local workers and all federal workers are covered by an employer

pension (Munnell, 1979).
                                                                                  3

     How can the observed pattern of development of pensions be explained?

Several factors may have stimulated the surge in pension coverage after World

War II. A comprehensive assessment of the economic rationale for the existence

of pensions is provided in subsequent sections of this chapter. However, it is

useful to point to several changes that occurred during the 1940s which may

have provided the impetus to increased pension coverage. First, the 1942

amendments to the Internal Revenue Code clarified and expanded tax treatment of

pensions and precluded the establishment of pension funds limited to corporate

officers (Creenough and King, 1976). Second, wartime stabilization policy made

it easier to increase fringe benefits than cash wages. Third, in 1949 the

National Labor Relations Board ruled in the Inland Steel decision that pensions

were a proper subject for collective bargaining. This action removed a

constraint that limited unions' ability to achieve pension coverage for their

members and may have altered union attitudes toward seeking pension benefits

(Allen, Melone, and Rosenbloom, 1984).

     Are there similar specific events that might explain the slowdown in the

growth of the coverage rate in the last decade? In 1974, the Employee

Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) was enacted. This legislation imposed a

sweeping new set of regulations on the use and funding of pensions. In the

last decade, a number of additional modifications to the pension laws have been

instituted. These regulations have raised the administrative costs of pensions

and reduced the range of permitted pension contracts. Some have speculated

that restrictions on the use of pensions may partially explain the slowing in

the growth of pensions. However, Ippolito (1986b) concludes that ERISA had

only a small effect on plan terminations.
                                                                                 4

     In   addition to the new regulations, the growth in pension coverage may have

slowed simply because workers who were most likely to desire pensions were

already covered. Relatively high current coverage rates among high wage

workers, unionized workers, and employees in large firms imply that further

extension of pension coverage may proceed more slowly in the future.



Patterns of Pension Coverage

     The odds that any individual will be covered by a pension plan on his job

vary tremendously with both personal and job characteristics. The most up-to-

date information is reported in the pension supplement to the May 1983 Current

Population Survey (CPS). We restrict the sample to full-time private wage and

salary workers. Those who have jobs which are covered by collective bargaining

agreements are much more likely to be included in a pension plan than nonunion

workers. The coverage rate for private sector workers is 82 percent for union

versus only 44 percent for nonunion workers, as shown in Table 1. Union

contract coverage is correlated with a number of other personal and job

characteristics which in turn are also highly correlated with pension coverage

(e.g., wages, industry). In order to estimate the net effect of union contract

coverage, we estimated a probit equation for pension coverage which included

all of the variables in Table 1. The probit results showed that, other things

equal, those covered by union contracts have a 26.3 percentage point higher

probability of being covered by a pension than nonunion workers.

     The size of the workplace (establishment) and the size of the company,

especially the latter, are also important correlates of pension coverage. In

establishments with fewer than 25 workers, only 28 percent of the work force is

covered by a pension plan. Coverage rates jump to 51 percent in establishments
                                                                                 5

with 25 to 99 workers and reach 86 percent in establishments with 1,000 or more

workers. The share of workers covered by a pension in companies with fewer

than 25 workers is a paltry 17 percent. This percentage also rises with size,

reaching 80 percent in firms with 1,000 or more employees.

     These two size measures are obviously correlated, so it is reasonable to ask

which matters the most. According to the probit analysis, the resounding

answer is company size. Other things equal (including company size), there is

only a 10 percentage point difference between pension coverage probability in

the smallest and largest establishment size categories. In contrast, there is

a 15 percentage point difference between companies with fewer than 25 employees

and those with 25 to 99 employees. This widens to a 45 percentage point

difference between companies with fewer than 25 employees and those with 1,000

or more.

     The pattern of pension coverage across different age groups suggests that

workers gradually sort themselves into jobs with pensions over time. Only

about a quarter of workers between 16 and 24 are covered by pensions. Pension

coverage rises to 50 percent for those between 25 and 34; it is slightly above

60 percent for all older workers. Other things equal, the odds of being

covered are 13 percentage points higher for 25 to 34 year olds and 20 to 24

percentage points higher for 35 to 64 year olds than for 16 to 24 year olds.

Although patterns within a cohort over time may be quite different from the

across cohort patterns, they suggest the possibility that if a worker is not

covered by a pension by the time he reaches the 35 to 44 age group, given the

low turnover rates among older workers, there is a good chance he never will be

covered.
                                                                                 6

     Because of the favorable tax treatment of pensions, it should come as no

surprise that pension coverage is also strongly correlated with average hourly

earnings. The coverage rate for workers earning less than $4 an hour is a mere

13 percent in contrast to coverage rates above 70 percent for those earning $10

an hour or more. Most of this difference cannot be explained by other factors,

as indicated by the probit results.

     Workers with jobs in mining, manufacturing, and transportation and utilities

have higher pension coverage rates than those in other industries. However,

much of the difference in coverage rates across industries can be explained in

terms of other factors such as firm size, earnings, and collective bargaining

coverage. For instance, the probit results show that workers in wholesale

trade have a 12 percentage point greater probability of being covered by a

pension than service industry workers, holding all other factors constant. The

difference between workers in durable manufacturing and services turns out to

be even smaller (9 percentage points), despite the fact that the raw,

unadjusted coverage rate for durable manufacturing (72 percent) is much higher

than that for wholesale trade (52 percent).

     Table 1 also indicates that pension coverage rates are lower for persons

in service occupations (compared to blue or white collar occupations), lower

for those living in the West, higher for men, higher for married workers, and

higher for high school and college graduates. The magnitude of these

differences is relatively small in relation to the differences in pension

coverage associated with union contract coverage, company size, age, average

hourly earnings, and industry.
                                                                                 7

Significance of Pension Benefits and Funds

     The growth of pensions over the past four decades has increased their

importance in a number of areas. First, pensions have grown as a source of

income to older Americans. Ippolito (1986a) estimates that the mean initial

pension annuity for 1984 beneficiaries was $6,360 representing 23 percent of

their final earnings. A U.S. Department of Labor Study (1985) reports that the

replacement rate rises with the level of final earnings. Replacement rates for

1978 retirees rose from 14 percent for those with earnings less than $6,000 to

20 percent for those with earnings between $10,000 and $11,999 to 25 percent

for retirees with $14,000 to $19,999 in final earnings. A total of $70 billion

was paid to retirees in pension benefits in 1984. Over the past quarter

century, pension benefits have come to represent an increasing proportion of

retiree income.

     Second, pension funds represent a growing proportion of invested funds in

the United States. Ippolito (1986a) estimates that 1984 pension assets totaled

one trillion dollars. These funds represented 22.8 percent of all corporate

equity and 49.9 percent of all corporate bonds. The dramatic rise in pension

funds is shown by comparing these values to their 1950 rates. In 1950,

pensions held less than 1 percent of corporate equity and only 13.1 percent of

all corporate bonds. Another measure of the size of pension assets is that in

1981 pension assets per worker were equal to $10,907 which represented 75

percent of annual earnings.



                         II. Pension Plan Characteristics

     Pension plans are of two basic types: defined contribution and defined

benefit. Within a particular plan type, pensions differ in their plan
                                                                                 8

formulas, vesting requirements, maximum benefit provisions, social security

integration, age of normal and early retirement, reductions for early

retirement, and benefit increases associated with delayed retirement. This

section examines these diverse characteristics among pensions and indicates how

these differences affect behavior at the workplace.

Types of Pension Plans

     Defined contribution and defined benefit plans are the two basic types of

pension plans. Defined contribution plans are by far the most common type of

plan representing 71 percent of all plans in 1984. However, these plans tend

to be provided by relatively small employers. As a result, less than 20

percent of all pension participants are covered by defined contribution plans.

Table 2 shows the greater incidence of coverage by defined contribution plans

among small employers. Sixty-three percent of pension participants in nonunion

plans covering less than 100 participants are in defined contribution plans.

This compares to a defined contribution coverage rate of only 12.9 percent for

small union plans and 0.7 percent for large union plans. The greater use of

defined contribution plans among small employers is attributable to lower

administrative costs, plus the tremendous costs of compliance with government

regulations of defined benefit plans for small firms (Smeeding 1983; Mitchell

and Andrews 1981).

     In a defined contribution plan, the firm promises to contribute each period

a fixed amount of money to an individual's pension account. In some plans

workers will also be allowed or even required to make contributions. The funds

are invested by the plan and accumulate throughout the worker's life. The

benefit at retirement is determined by the size of the individual's pension

fund at that time. The worker bears all of the risk concerning the rate of
                                                                                 9

return on the invested funds. However, the worker does not risk losing pension

benefits if he leaves the firm prior to retirement or if the company goes out

of business, terminates the pension, or fires the worker. Property rights are

clearly defined; the funds in defined contribution plans belong to the worker.

These plans have no impact on turnover, except for the simple fact that

workers covered by such plans have more total compensation than other workers

if all other variables (including cash earnings) are held constant. They also

have no effect on retirement decisions, except to the extent that workers

face liquidity constraints and are unable to use their benefits as collateral

(in which case they may have to postpone retirement). The key factor to

recognize is that there are no bonuses or penalties associated with the choice

of retirement age in defined contribution plans.

     Defined benefit plans are much more common among large employers and as a

result, almost 80 percent of pension participants are covered by defined

benefit plans. These plans are more complex than defined contribution plans

and federal regulations tend to be more restrictive. In a defined benefit

plan, the worker is promised a benefit upon retirement based on plan

generosity, years of service, and in some cases earnings. The firm must set

aside sufficient dollars to provide for these future benefits. The rate of

firm contributions is regulated by the government. As we will explain in

detail below, a worker who leaves prior to the retirement age will lose

benefits relative to the worker who remains with the firm. Thus in these

plans, the worker bears risks associated with plan termination, his own desire

to quit, and potential firing by the firm. However, the firm bears all risks

concerning the rate of return on the pension fund. The use of these plans to

influence turnover and retirement is explored in sections IV and V.
                                                                                 10

Plan Characteristics

     Several plan characteristics play a critical role in determining benefit

levels, along with any loss of benefits associated with leaving the job. Much

of this discussion is relevant only to defined benefit plans. The primary plan

characteristics are reviewed below along with a discussion of economic effects

and the frequency of their use.

     Benefit Formula. Defined benefit plans typically use one of three formula

types. The most frequently used formula type is the terminal earnings formula

which determines benefits by multiplying years of service by an average of the

final three or five years earnings and a generosity parameter. In the 1983

Employee Benefit Survey of Medium and Large Firms (EBS), plans using these

formulas cover 54 percent of all participants. The career earnings formula is

similar, except that the salary average is based on all earnings with the firm

instead of just the final three or five final years. These plan formulas cover

14 percent of participants. Dollar amount formulas provide a fixed dollar

amount to all retirees or multiply years of service times a fixed dollar

amount. These formula types cover 28 percent of participants.

     Earnings based formulas are used more frequently by plans covering

professional workers and in noncollectively bargained plans. Obviously, these

plans allow for a variance in pension benefits that reflects earnings. Dollar

amount formulas are used more frequently in plans covering production workers

and unionized workers. These formulas tend to reduce the variance of the

benefit distribution relative to the earnings distribution and to flatten the

age-compensation profile of union workers relative to nonunion workers (Allen

and Clark, 1986).
                                                                                11

     Vesting. Vesting pertains to the portion of a worker's specified benefit

to which he is legally entitled upon leaving the firm. Prior to 1987,

regulations allowed firms to select one of three vesting rules. These were 100

percent vesting of accrued benefits after 10 years of service, 25 percent

vesting of accrued benefits after 5 years of service with additional vesting

accruing each year until the worker is 100 percent vested after 15 years, and

50 percent vesting of accrued benefits when age and service add up to 45 with

100 percent vesting 5 years later. Almost all companies adopted the 10 year,

100 percent vesting rule (Schulz, 1985). Tax legislation in 1986 altered

vesting standards to be either 100 percent vested after 5 years or graded

vesting with a worker being 50 percent vested after 3 years and accruing

additional vesting each year until he is 100 percent vested after 7 years.

     If a worker leaves prior to being vested, he will receive no retirement

benefits. Even if the worker achieves 100 percent vesting, there is still a

penalty for leaving the firm, which we will describe in detail below.

     Post-retirement Increases. If pension benefits are not increased after

retirement, their real value will decline in the presence of inflation. Until

recently, it was widely believed that pension benefits were fixed in nominal

terms. Surveys of large firms indicate that less than 5 percent of private

plans automatically increase benefits in response to inflation. The lack of

automatic adjustments does not necessarily imply that no post-retirement

increases are granted. Approximately two-thirds of large plans provided one or

more ad hoc increases during the last half of the 1970s (King, 1982). Allen,

Clark, and Sumner (1986) report that between 1973 and 1979 average benefits for

persons already receiving benefits in 1973 increased by 24 percent during a

period when the Consumer Price Index rose by 63 percent.
                                                                                12

      Table 3 shows that benefit increases were larger and more prevalent in

collectively bargained plans. The method of benefit increase also varied by

collective bargaining status (Allen and Clark, 1986) with bargained plans being

more likely to use methods that provide the largest percentage increases to

those with the lowest benefits.

     Maximum Benefit Provisions. Some pensions incorporate specific plan rules

in order to set a maximum pension benefit. Some type of maximum benefit

provision is incorporated into pension plans covering 42 percent of

participants represented in the 1983 EBS. The most prevalent form of

limitation to benefits is to limit credited service to a specific number of

years. This type of limitation is used in plans covering 31 percent of

participants. This limit is usually 30 years or more. Terminal earnings plans

are much more likely to include such limits than plans with other types of

benefit formulas. Eleven percent of participants are in plans that limit

benefits to either a maximum percent of terminal or career earnings or to a

maximum flat dollar amount.

     Social Security Integration. Firms are permitted to reduce pension benefits

by including the worker's Social Security benefit as part of total pension

benefits or costs. Just over half of all participants in the EBS were in plans

that integrated pension benefits with Social Security benefits. Smaller plans

are more likely to be integrated (President's Commission on Pension Policy,

1980). Until 1987, the Internal Revenue Service regulations allowed two

types of integration: the excess method and the offset method. The excess

method allows firms to provide greater benefits based on earnings above the

Social Security taxable earnings limit than on earnings below this limit. In

an excess plan which does not consider years of service, the pension benefit
                                                                                13

based on earnings above the specified limit could not exceed 37.5 percent of

the plan benefits based on earnings below that level. Plans could set this

compensation limit no higher than the current year's Social Security taxable

earnings limit. Most plans set the limit well below the allowable amount

and tended not to have adjusted this earnings amount as the Social Security

earning limit rose (Urban Institute, 1982).

     The offset method allows a certain portion of the retiree's primary

insurance amount (PIA) to be subtracted from the pension benefit. Prior to

1987, the offset could not exceed 83.33 percent of the worker's PIA. Most

surveys indicate that integrated plans did not use the maximum possible

offsets. In offset plans, the most frequently used percentage is 50 percent of

the PIA. It remains to be seen how plans will adjust to the 1986 tax changes

governing Social Security integration.

     Retirement Age and Gains From Continued Employment. Pension plans specify

an age of normal retirement, which is the time that a worker can retire and

receive full pension benefits as provided by the pension formula. In recent

years the age of normal retirement has been lowered in many plans. In the EBS

sample, only 36 percent of the participants were covered by plans using 65 as

the normal retirement age. Another 33 percent were in plans that specified

ages between 60 and 64 and 11 percent were in plans with ages between 55 and

59. Approximately 18 percent of plans had no age requirement at all;

eligibility in these plans depends solely on length of service.

    Virtually all defined benefit plans allow for retirement prior to the normal

retirement age at reduced benefits. In most plans, the reduction in benefits

is less than the actuarial equivalent of the normal retirement benefit.

    Since the 1978 amendments to the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, firms
                                                                                 14

have not been able to mandatorily retire workers prior to the age of 70. Thus,

workers may continue to work past the normal retirement age. Firms can erect

strong pension incentives for older workers to retire at the normal retirement

age. First, relatively few firms provide any actuarial increase in benefits

for work past the normal retirement age and as a result pension wealth may fall

after this point. Second, in 1985 approximately half of all participants were

covered by plans that did not continue to credit years of service and earnings

after the date of normal retirement. Thus, the pension is fixed in nominal

terms at the normal retirement age. The worker can continue on the job but

will lose that year's pension benefits.

     Legislation enacted in 1986 has altered both the mandatory retirement and

the pension accrual regulations. For most firms, mandatory retirement is now

entirely forbidden as a firm personnel policy regardless of the age of the

worker. In addition, firms providing a pension cannot discontinue wage and

service   accruals   at a specified age. These changes reduce the ability of firms

to provide incentives to older workers to retire.



                      III. Why Do Workers and Unions Want Pensions?



     Pension coverage has expanded through the labor force and the magnitude of

pension benefits has increased in response to the actions of various labor

market agents striving to maximize their objective functions. To understand

the development of the pension system, we must determine who the players are,

what their objectives are, and how pensions can help them achieve their

objectives. These negotiations are conducted in a changing regulatory

environment which alters the incentives associated with the use of a pension.
                                                                                 15

     The primary agents in bargaining concerning pensions are workers, firms and

unions. Workers seek to maximize total compensation for a given amount

of labor supply or effort. Firms seek to maximize profits. The objectives of

unions tend to be more complex and may include reducing income inequality,

providing economic security for workers and retirees, and raising wages and

benefits. The remainder of this section examines how pensions help workers and

unions achieve their primary objectives. Sections IV and V analyze how

pensions affect firm performance.

Worker Utility and the Desire for Pensions

     Economic theory assumes that individual workers attempt to maximize utility

subject to their personal budget constraint. A simplified version of this

maximization process has the worker's utility as a function of total

compensation and the amount of labor supplied. For a given amount of labor

supplied, the worker seeks to maximize total compensation. Compensation may

come in many forms other than current cash such as job safety, comfort on the

job, and all types of employee benefits including pensions.

     For the purposes of this part of the discussion, assume that the firm is a

neutral agent and is willing to sell the worker any type of benefit at a price

that is equal to the firm's cost of acquiring this benefit. The worker pays

for each benefit by receiving less in cash compensation. Theoretically this

compensating differential would allow the worker to buy the desired amount of

any benefit offered by the firm. The worker would purchase benefits until the

marginal utility of this benefit was equal to marginal value of a dollar of

cash spent on other goods and services (Rosen 1974). With no taxes or other

governmental interference, benefits would be bought only if the firm can buy
                                                                                16

these goods at a lower cost than the worker could purchase them in the market

or if the benefit is tied to the job and can only be bought from the firm.

     Neither of these explanations for the existence of fringe benefits seem to

apply in the case of pensions. Today, there are financial intermediaries which

give individuals access to a wide spectrum of investment opportunities; workers

are not required to save through a pension to gain access to financial

markets. The diversity of investment opportunities available to individuals

also makes it unlikely that the expected rate of return to pension funds is

greater than the expected rate of return that an individual investor could

receive.

     During the early development of the pension system these conditions may not

have prevailed. Prior to the development of large mutual funds, small

investors may have been unable to obtain widespread diversification.

Therefore, capital market regulations and institutions may have played a role

in the initial growth of pensions. Even today there may remain differences in

transactions costs associated with individual investments versus investment

through a pension fund. Despite this potential offset, it seems highly

unlikely that the widespread pension coverage in today's economy can be

explained in terms of lower transactions costs.

     A much more convincing rationale is the tax status of pensions in comparison

to current earnings. Firms with qualified plans make tax deductible

contributions to a pension fund that is used to provide future benefits to

current workers. The value of these contributions is not viewed as current

compensation to the worker and therefore is not subject to the individual

income tax in the current period. The return to assets in these funds is also

not taxable. Instead, benefits are taxed when they are received and the
                                                                                    17

expectation is that the worker will be in a lower tax bracket at that time.

Prior to the advent of Individual Retirement Accounts, workers had no other

form of savings that received such preferential tax treatment.

     Pension contributions by firms are also exempt from Social Security and

Unemployment Insurance payroll taxes. For the worker the value of pension

contributions permanently escapes the employee's share of the Social Security

tax, although the resulting lower earnings means that future Social Security

benefits will also be lower. Given today's benefit structure, the expected

loss in benefits will be less than the savings from reduced taxes and the

worker's lifetime income will rise.

     As a result of the differential tax treatment, workers could increase total

compensation by agreeing with the firm   to   establish a pension plan. The value

of a pension plan is dependent on the prevailing tax rate. Thus, as tax rates

rise, more workers would be expected to request their firms to institute a

pension. The tax effect is also an important determinant of the distribution

of plans across workers in any given year. High wage workers are much more

likely to be covered by a plan than low wage workers, as shown in Table 1.



Union Objectives and the Use of Pensions

     Unions have played an important independent role in the expansion of pension

coverage and the development of certain pension characteristics. Historically,

unions have consistently exerted pressure on both employers and governments to

provide economic security for older workers through both private pensions and

Social Security. Private pension plans became much more widespread after the

Inland Steel decision made pensions a permissible topic for collective

bargaining. Even today workers who are covered by collective bargaining
                                                                                 18

agreements are much more likely than other workers to receive a pension when

 they retire.

     Despite the difficulties associated with defining union objectives in

precise terms, it is quite clear that pensions can help achieve many possible

union objectives. First, the preferences of older, more senior workers receive

much more weight in determining the terms of the employment contract under

unionism. These workers prefer a compensation package with lower wages and

higher retirement income, holding the cost of the package constant. As a

result of the greater weight given to their preferences, the package becomes

more likely to contain a pension along with other provisions which increase the

income and economic security of older workers. Second, pensions can be used to

compress the distribution of total compensation among union members. Allen and

Clark (1986) show how the choice of benefit parameters can reduce pension

inequality among workers.

     Third, pensions can serve the interests of union officers. Albert Rees

(1962) argued that by obtaining a new benefit for their members, union leaders

can gain much more credit for innovation than they would if they had obtained a

wage increase of equal value. In cases where the union has some control over

the pension plan, the scope of authority of the leadership is significantly

greater as well. Fourth, unions have an organizational advantage in certain

aspects of pension administration. For instance unions often administer plans

in industries with small employers or short job durations. Without unions

there probably would not be very many workers covered by private pensions in

the construction industry. Unions also monitor plan behavior so that employers

do not renege on explicit or implicit contracts.   Finally, higher wages place
                                                                                 19

union members in higher marginal tax brackets, thereby increasing the demand

for all forms of tax-free or tax-deferred compensation, including pensions.



                         IV. What Is The Pension Contract?

    The influence of pension plans on firm performance depends on the nature of

the pension contract and how this contract is evaluated by the worker and the

firm. Two models of pension contracts have been developed in the economics

literature. The first is primarily based on the work of Bulow (1982) who

derived the value of pensions under a strict legal or explicit contract. This

model assumes that a worker considers only the value of benefits that a firm is

legally required to pay if the worker were to leave the firm at the end of the

current period. This model clearly applies to defined contribution plans and

many contend that it applies to defined benefit plans as well. The second

model, developed in recent work by Ippolito (l985a, l986a) and others, allows

for the existence of implicit long term employment contracts and focuses on the

role of defined benefit plans in such contracts.   This model assumes that a.

worker views the employment contract as an implicit promise by the firm to

retain the worker (subject to performance requirements) until retirement and to

pay a benefit based on final pay.

 These models yield different predictions concerning incentives for the worker

to quit and incentives for the worker to provide a high level of job

performance to minimize risks of being fired. In addition, these theories of

the pension contract predict alternative patterns of life cycle compensation.

In this section, each of these models is examined in detail and the

corresponding relationship with firm performance is assessed. The final
                                                                                 20

 objective of this section is to analyze the role of collective bargaining in

models of the pension contract.



The Extlicit Contract View of Pensions

     The basic premise of the explicit contract model is that workers act as if

the employment contract is for only one period. Of course, if both parties are

agreeable employment may be continued on a period by period basis. Since the

worker knows that he may be terminated at the end of the current period, he is

unwilling to accept any compensation that is contingent on his remaining with

the firm for an extended period of time. This type of contract implies that

the worker will value future retirement benefits on the basis of work to date

and will consider only benefits that the firm is legally required to pay.

     Under explicit employment contracts, workers face no loss in future benefits

if they quit their current job. As a result, pensions cannot be used to reduce

turnover or encourage a higher level of job performance.   Despite the lack of a

capital loss associated with leaving a job, pensions still represent an

important component of compensation and will affect the growth rate of earnings

of a worker covered by a pension. In addition, coverage by a pension alters

the cash wage offer necessary to entice a worker to leave his present job. To

understand these effects, a brief discussion of the evaluation of pension

wealth is necessary along with the related concept of annual pension

compensation.

     The expected present value of future pension benefits, pension wealth, is

determined by finding the discounted value of a life annuity beginning at

retirement. The magnitude of the annual flow is governed by the pension

formula and the individual's own work history. The most frequent form of
                                                                                 21

benefit formula is one where the benefit is determined by multiplying the

number of years of service by a fixed percentage of the worker's average

earnings during the final years of employment. Pension wealth is calculated by

using the worker's current years of service and salary average along with the

prevailing benefit formula. These values, along with assumptions concerning

survival probabilities and the market interest rate, are sufficient to

calculate pension wealth for any worker.

     Pension compensation is the change in pension wealth resulting from

continued employment. From the above discussion, one can see that pension

wealth rises due to an additional year of service and to any increase in

earnings. Mathematical derivations of pension compensation are found in Bulow

(1982), Clark and McDermed (1986a) and Kotlikoff and Wise (1985). These papers

illustrate that if earnings are rising with tenure, pension compensation grows

more rapidly than earnings.

     The explicit contract literature assumes that in each year a worker is paid

total compensation equal to the value of his output. With perfect capital

markets, the cost to the firm of funding pension benefits is the same as the

value that the worker places on these benefits. If there are no other forms of

compensation, the wage plus pension compensation will equal the worker's

output. With pension compensation growing more rapidly than earnings, pension

compensation will increase as a proportion of total compensation as the worker

continues on the job. This lifetime pattern of compensation is shown in Table

4.


     Under the explicit contract model, pension wealth and pension compensation

are zero until the worker is vested in the pension plan. After vesting but

still during the early working years, pension compensation is small both in
                                                                                 22

absolute terms and as a percentage of total compensation. If the worker

remains on the job, pension compensation grows rapidly and may reach 30 to 50

percent of total compensation during the final working years prior to

retirement. This increase in pension compensation produces a corresponding

growth in pension wealth to which the worker is legally entitled.

     Although there is no loss in pension wealth if the worker leaves his job,

pensions still affect the wage offer from a competing firm that is necessary to

entice the worker to leave his current job. A competing firm that has no

pension must offer a cash wage equal to the worker's current earnings plus

pension compensation. Even if the competing firm has a pension that is

identical to the one on the worker's current job, the wage offer must exceed

current earnings. This follows because pension compensation will be lower on

the new job, either because the worker will not be vested or because he will

have fewer years of service on the new job.

     This discussion would seem to indicate that under the explicit contract

model pensions would tend to reduce turnover by raising the reservation wage at

other firms. This is an incorrect inference. Since the model assumes a spot

market with all firms willing to pay total compensation equal to the worker's

marginal product, competing firms are willing to pay the higher cash wage

solely because they are not providing as much pension compensation.

     Several important predictions can be derived from this model.    First, there

is no pension loss from leaving the job so pensions should not reduce quit

rates. For the same reason, pensions cannot be used as a personnel policy to

encourage reduced worker malfeasance. Second, workers covered by pensions

should have a flatter age-earnings profile than workers who receive their

entire compensation in cash. In addition, Bulow (1982) has shown that earnings
                                                                                 23

should exhibit discrete jumps at several times associated with large changes in

pension compensation. For instance at vesting, pension compensation goes from

zero to hundreds of dollars. Assuming no similar increase in the value of the

worker's output takes place, wages must adjust in the opposite direction.

There should be no ad hoc post-retirement increases in benefits for workers

covered by an explicit contract. For the most part, these predictions are

contradicted by the available evidence.



The Inrnlicit Contract View of Pensions

     An alternative to the single period contract described above is a long term

employment contract which requires future payment for current labor services.

Terms of such contracts may be either explicit as in formal contracts or

implicit. Recently, a series of papers by Lazear (1979, 1981, 1983, 1986) and

Malcolmson (1984) have pointed out how Implicit labor contracts can be used to

modify worker behavior and improve firm performance. Pensions can be an

important component of these contracts. The key factor in the use of pensions

in an implicit contract is the difference in the implied value of pension

wealth if the worker remains with the firm until retirement and the actual

value of the pension if the worker leaves prior to fulfilling the terms of the

contract.

     Firms and workers may enter into an implicit contract in order to reduce

labor turnover and increase the level of worker productivity. These objectives

are accomplished by imposing a wealth loss on workers who quit the firm prior

to the end of the contract or who are fired due to shirking on the job. The

wealth loss is produced by assuming that the worker is paid each period total
                                                                                 24

compensation equal to his output; however, the value of the compensation

is conditional on the worker continuing to meet the terms of the contract.

     Pension compensation comprises the conditional component of total

compensation.     In this model, pension wealth is based on the worker's

expectation that he will remain with the firm until he retires. As such, the

expected pension benefit is based on his projected final earnings. The

difference between the calculation of pension wealth using the implicit

contract method and the explicit contract model is the use of projected final

earnings instead of current earnings to determine the value of current pension

wealth. The use of projected earnings will produce a higher estimate of

pension wealth.

     In an implicit contract, the worker receives pension compeiisation based on

the change in pension wealth as calculated using projected earnings. In this

case, pension wealth increases only because of additional years of service.

Pension compensation will be greater than under the explicit contract early in

life, but will not rise as rapidly with years of service. Ippolito (l985a)

has shown that under certain conditions pension compensation will represent a

constant proportion of total compensation throughout work life.

     The worker is assumed to pay for a pension conditional on remaining with the

firm until retirement. If he leaves the firm, his actual pension will be

considerably smaller than the pension he was paying for in the form of reduced

earnings. Thus, termination of the employment contract imposes a capital loss

on the worker. This capital loss equals the difference between pension wealth

based on projected earnings and pension wealth under the legal method.

Formulas for calculating the capital loss are reported in Ippolito (1985a) and

Allen, Clark, and McDermed (1986).
                                                                                 25

     The existence of this potential loss will make the worker less likely to

quit and more likely to perform at a level that will not tempt the firm to fire

him. The value of this capital loss rises during the early work years and then

begins to decline as the worker approaches the age of retirement. An example

of this effect is shown in Table 5. For many workers, the loss in pension

wealth associated with quitting may represent half of annual earnings or with

high rates of inflation perhaps as much as a full year's earnings (Ippolito,

(l985b, 1987), Allen, Clark and McDermed, (1986)).

     The implicit contract model generates several predictions concerning

earnings and worker performance. First, workers covered by a pension should be

less likely to quit and should be more willing to provide a high level of

effort to reduce the probability of being fired. Second, the rate of growth

of earnings for workers covered by a pension should be approximately the same

as the growth of earnings of similar workers not covered by a pension.

Available evidence seems to support the latter prediction (Clark and McDermed,

l986b; Mitchell and Pozzebon 1986: Ippolito, l985a): evidence on turnover is

examined in detail in Section VI.



The Pension Contract under Collective Bargaining

    The impact of unionism on any pension contract, whether explicit or

implicit, hinges on the decision making process within the union and how

various groups exert their influence on the determination of the bargaining

agreement. In the simple "monopoly union" framework, there is only one

prediction about union impact: pension plans should be more generous in all

respects. This means higher initial benefits, larger increases in benefits
                                                                                 26

after retirement, earlier eligibility for benefits, and fewer restrictions on

participation and vesting.

     Public choice models recognize the conflicts within the union concerning

the division of monopoly rents. Despite the well known difficulties involved

with specifying the political mechanisms at work, two of the most tractable

public choice approaches yield the prediction that the pension contract will

be tilted in favor of older workers. Freeman (1985) has shown formally that in

a median voter approach, the pension contract will be written to match the

preferences of inframarginal workers, whereas in a nonunion setting, it will

be written to match the preferences of the marginal worker.

     The inframarginal worker is likely to be older and more attached to the firm

than the marginal worker. As a result, the union firm is more likely to have a

pension plan and that plan is likely to have provisions which older, less

mobile workers will find attractive. In particular, Freeman argues that unions

are more likely to adopt a defined benefit rather than a defined contribution

plan and that union plans will have stricter provisions for eligibility and

portability. Under both of these provisions, persons who leave the firm

subsidize those who stay. The political dominance of older workers in union

politics need not result from median voter characteristics; autocracy rather

than democracy may very well be a better rationale. This approach still yields

the same answer to pension issues as the median voter approach --   more pensions
under unionism and the adoption of pension contract provisions favorable to

older workers.

     Unions can also change the terms of the pension contract so as to

redistribute income within and across cohorts of workers. This objective

serves union interests by promoting worker solidarity and eliminating compen-
                                                                                 27

sation cost differences as a basis for competition among employers. Standard

wage rate policies help reduce income differences between older and younger

workers and between skilled and unskilled workers. Their counterparts in the

pension contract is the use of benefit formulas which give all workers either

the same flat benefit or the same dollar amount of benefits for each year of

service. Pension benefits are very rarely based on earnings in a plan covered

by collective bargaining. Allen and Clark (1986) show that the impact of both

earnings and years of service on pension benefits within a cohort of retirees

is much smaller for union than nonunion beneficiaries. In addition, unions

equalize pension wealth across cohorts by giving proportionally larger

post-retirement increases to those who have been retired the longest.

    Regardless of whether the pension contract is implicit or explicit, these

considerations lead us to expect that collectively bargained plans will differ

from nonbargained plans. A difficulty which arises in many types of implicit

contracts is that in certain situations one party stands to gain from violating

the contract. For instance post-retirement adjustments seem to be part of an

implicit contract under which firms reduce uncertainty about the plan's rate of

return and the impact of inflation in return for lower wages or lower

benefits. Firms have an incentive to renege on such a contract because the

worker pays for the insurance but has no legal title to claim post-retirement

increases promised by the firm. In general, one would expect that firms would

weigh the short-term gains from breaking the agreement against the reputational

costs. Even if a firm currently faces large reputational costs for breaking

implicit contracts, there still is a chance that the reputational costs will

become smaller at some point in the future.
                                                                                    28

     These difficulties decrease the probability that certain types of implicit

contracts will be written without some form of outside enforcement. Unions can

play an important role in this regard. As long as it is in the interests of the

union, it can raise the cost of violating such implicit agreements well above

the cost of a diminished reputation. Since both sides recognize this, it

becomes easier to write such contracts in a collective bargaining situation.

     Ippolito (1985c) has argued that the pension contract plays a completely

different role under collective bargaining - -   that   of a bond which the union

posts to guarantee the survival of the firm. With fixed investments in physical

and human capital, the firm faces the risk of a "holdup" by the union (in the

form of higher wage demands or lower productivity) when it starts to receive

the returns from those investments. Without some insurance against this

possibility, the firm will be unable to attract capital and provide jobs for

union members. Ippolito claims that underfunded pension plans provide this

insurance. Under this setup, should the union ever decide to stage a holdup,

its members lose the portion of their pensions which has not been funded and

which is not insured by the PBGC. All parties gain from such an arrangement

because holdups become unlikely, allowing the firm to make profits and the

union members to collect rents.

     Ippolito's model predicts that union members are more likely to be covered

by pension plans than nonunion workers and that such plans are more likely to

be underfunded than nonunion plans. This also means that defined contribution

plans will not be adopted under unionism because such plans are by definition

always fully funded. The role of past service credits for older workers in

this framework is to make them more concerned about the financial wellbeing of
                                                                                29

the firm. The prediction about underfunding is the distinctive feature of this

model.

     In a subsequent paper, Ippolito (1986b) argues that virtually all systematic

underfunding in private pension plans in the United States is attributable to

underfunded plans covering unionized participants. He argues that the union

tendency to "holdup" firms and the response of firms to underfund plans was one

of the principal reasons for organized labor's support for passage of ERISA,

including the insuring of pension benefits through the PBGC. He concludes that

the resulting system provided large transfers to unionized workers. This

follows from the tendency toward underfunding and the fact that the overall

probability of plan sponsor failure during 1978 through 1983 was 1.4 percent

while the probability for firms that were 100 percent unionized was almost 200

percent higher. PBGC data shows that almost 95 percent of the monies

transferred through the pension insurance system have been claimed by union

participants. Participants covered by the United Automobile Workers and the

Steelworkers of America received 63 percent of these transfers.



                         V. Pensions and Employee Behavior



     The characteristics of the pension contract outlined above have predict-

able consequences for certain types of employee behavior. It has long been

recognized that pensions should and do reduce employee turnover. In the

explicit contract framework, the observed correlation between pension coverage

and low turnover occurs because workers who are vested in their pension receive

more compensation than other workers, other things equal. In the implicit

contract approach, pensions reduce turnover by imposing a tax on workers who
                                                                                30

leave the firm. This tax can be imposed through vesting rules which prevent

workers who leave the firm before a given number of years from receiving a

pension. It can also be imposed through benefit formulas based on final

earnings. For instance, consider a case where a worker earns $20,000 after 20

years and $40,000 after 40 years in the labor market and is covered by a

pension plan which will annually pay him 1.5 percent of final earnings for each

year of service when he retires. If he stays at the same job throughout this

period, his annual benefit will be $24,000 (.015 x 40 x 40,000). However if he

switches jobs after his 20th year, his benefit will be only $18,000 (.015 x 20

x 20,000 + .015 x 20 x 40,000). Recognizing this, the worker becomes less

likely to leave the firm because the benefit formula rewards those who

stay. The incentive to stay is even greater in periods of rapid inflation

because benefits are based on historical earnings unadjusted for inflation.

     In addition to the direct incentives which vesting and earnings-based

benefit formulas provide for any employee to stay with the firm, these pension

characteristics will also influence the type of employee which the firm is

able to attract. Consider the following simple example. Suppose there are two

types of workers with quit probabilities p and q respectively, with p > q.

These differences could arise from expected differences in the value of

nonmarket time over the life cycle or differences in mobility costs. A firm

which must invest a great deal in worker-specific training will want to

attract the worker with the lower quit probability. This can be done by

setting up a compensation schedule which includes a pension with delayed

vesting and an earnings based formula. This will simultaneously discourage the

p-applicants and encourage the q-applicants. The result is a set of employees

with lower initial odds of leaving the firm.    post whenever these employees
                                                                                 31

consider leaving the firm, the financial incentives created by vesting and the

benefit formula will discourage many of them from doing so. This argument is

presented formally and with several interesting extensions in Viscusi (1980,

1985).

     As a form of deferred compensation, pensions can also be used as part of

a scheme to discourage workers from shirking. Lazear (1979, 1981) has showed

how deferred compensation results in workers being paid less than their

marginal product during their initial years with the firm and more than their

marginal product in their final years. The underpayment in the initial years

is equivalent to the posting of a bond for good performance. Workers who

shirk must forfeit the bond as well as the ability to collect the returns to

the bond in the future. This compensation scheme benefits workers because they

end up with higher productivity over their lifetime and thus with more

income. Lazear shows how the combination of a pension payable upon retirement

and an age-earnings profile which is steeper than the age-productivity profile

produces this result.

     One problem which arises when firms adopt payment systems where workers

receive more than their marginal product in their later years is that they

have an incentive to stay with the firm too long. "Too long" in this context

means that if the worker was actually paid his marginal product rather than a

premium above his marginal product, he would choose to retire or work else-

where. Lazear (1979) shows that mandatory retirement results in more efficient

separation decisions by removing this adverse incentive. Pensions can also be

used to encourage workers to make efficient separation decisions by acting as

a form of severance pay, as shown in Lazear (1983). If the provisions for early

retirement benefits are sufficiently generous, pension compensation (the
                                                                                 32

change in pension wealth attributable to staying an extra year with the firm)

becomes negative, making total compensation (earnings plus pension compensa-

tion) equal marginal product and thereby eliminating the incentive to stay

"too long."

     This   can explain the frequent use of "sweetened" early retirement benefits

in companies which must reduce employment, especially if the cost of the

sweeter benefits is less than the cost of layoffs (e.g., difficulties in

attracting workers in the future, higher payroll taxes). Typically, firms will

offer a retirement "window", i.e. a short time period during which workers

can retire under special terms. These programs often add years to a person's

age and job tenure for the purpose of calculating pension benefits.

     Pensions also encourage certain types of behavior which are detrimental

to the firm. It is not inconceivable that pensions may reduce turnover too

much. The pension loss associated with leaving a firm will keep some workers

in jobs that they do not like and for which they are not well suited. This is

especially likely in companies where opportunities for individual advancement

turn out to be less than what employees expected.

     There is also usually very little connection between pension benefits and

worker performance. Pension wealth depends either on length of service or

length of service and earnings. In the former case, performance affects

pension wealth only to the extent that the pension discouraged the worker from

engaging in behavior for which he would have been dismissed. In the latter

case, the pension-performance connection depends entirely upon the linkages

between earnings and performance. Unless those linkages are quite strong, the

rational worker will regard pension compensation as a fixed element in the

compensation package, just like health insurance and paid holidays.
                                                                                33

     By reducing the pay differentials across different jobs within an

organization, pensions limit the ability of managers to use those differen-

tials to obtain skills needed for advancement or to use the pay system to award

certain types of behavior. For instance, Allen (1981) uses a simple labor

supply model to show how an increased share of employee benefits in the

compensation package creates an incentive for excessive absenteeism.

     Thus, the overall impact of pensions on employee behavior has both desirable

and undesirable consequences for the firm. Firms with pensions should have

lower turnover rates, which will save them the costs of finding and training

replacements. Early retirement benefits can also be used to encourage people to

leave the firm when their marginal product has fallen below their

earnings. There is some risk, however, that turnover may fall too much and that

many workers in the middle of their careers may stay in jobs which they do not

like for fear of losing future pension benefits. Workers covered by pensions

will be less likely to shirk, for fear of getting fired and losing some of the

pension wealth they would have received if they had not lost their job. This is

offset by the fact that the risk of getting fired is about the only linkage

between pension compensation and worker performance.



Regulatory Environment

     The overall impact of pensions on firm performance will be influenced by

regulation. Most pension regulations deal with purely financial matters which

can be ignored in the present context. Nonetheless certain pension regulations

constrain the choices made by workers and firms and thus influence outcomes. At

the most obvious level, pensions would be a much less popular form of compensa-

tion if they were not tax-exempt. Beyond that, the Employee Retirement Income
                                                                                34

Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) contains certain provisions which are likely to

be relevant. First, ERISA sets minimum vesting standards. Under past

regulations, most firms choose to provide complete vesting after 10 years of

service. It is doubtful that this has much effect on turnover in light of the

very low rates of turnover among workers with 10 or more years of service who

are not covered by pensions (Allen, Clark, and McDermed (1986)). Second, ERISA

makes it difficult for firms to restrict pension coverage to particular

individuals. This probably has some impact on firms which are just on the

margin of having a pension plan. Third, ERISA imposes limits on underfunding of

pension plans and requires firms to pay for plan termination insurance. This

would limit the ability of firms to use pensions to stop union holdups.



                  VI. Evidence on Pensions and Firm Performance



     Pensions are most likely to influence employee behavior by raising

productivity and by influencing labor mobility. The impact of pensions on the

overall financial well-being of the firm depends on the monetary value of these

effects. It also depends upon how pensions affect the overall size of the

compensation package. If there is not a dollar for dollar tradeoff (after

taxes) between pensions and other forms of compensation; then firms with

pensions will have higher labor costs than firms without pensions and firms

with pensions will be at a competitive disadvantage, unless there is some

offsetting productivity or cost differential in their favor. This section

begins by summarizing previous evidence and reporting some new evidence on

compensating wage differentials for pensions. The first evidence regarding the

impact of pensions on productivity levels, productivity growth rates, and
                                                                                35

profitability is then reported. This direct evidence is inconclusive. To gain

further insights, the final part of this section summarizes evidence on

indirect mechanisms through which pensions can affect productivity such as

turnover, retirement, and absenteeism.

Compensating Wage Differentials for Pensions

     Testing for wage-pension tradeoffs has always been a very tricky busi-

ness. The data sets which are usually employed by economists report wages or

earnings, but they do not report pension compensation. This latter variable

can be reported only by employers and even here it is not clear theoretically

which concept (legal or projected earnings) of pension compensation should be

used. There is a further problem with reverse causality. Workers with high

earnings are also in high tax brackets and thus should want a larger share of

their income in the form of pension compensation. Anyone who puts wages on

the left hand side and estimated pension compensation on the right hand side

of an OLS equation should not expect glowing referee reports. This problem is

further exacerbated by the fact that in defined benefit plans with

earnings-based formulas, pension compensation is a direct function of

earnings. Lastly, it is very difficult to hold all other relevant factors

constant. The critical omitted variables include other forms of compensation

as well as a set of variables which will in effect hold either employee

utility or firm profitability constant so that a true wage-pension tradeoff

can be estimated.

     A few studies have developed procedures which overcome some of these

problems; their estimates are summarized in Table 6. Out of the six studies,

only two contain any evidence that wages drop by the amount of pension

compensation: Schiller and Weiss (1980) got this result for the 45-54 age
                                                                                36

group in a 1969 sample which matched a Labor Department file of pension

plan characteristics (including benefit formulas) with a Social Security

earnings history file for males in those companies whose benefits were vested

and Smith (1981) estimated a compensating differential for non-uniformed

government workers in a sample of 58 cities and counties in Pennsylvania in

1976. The results in Schiller and Weiss for other age groups provide little in

the way of additional confirmation. They find a weak negative tradeoff between

wages and pensions for the 26-34 and 35-39 age groups, a weak positive tradeoff

for the 40-44 age group, and no tradeoff for the 55-64 age group; all of these

estimates are very imprecise. The only other study to directly test for

compensating wage differentials by putting pension compensation on the

right-hand side of the equation is Smith and Ehrenberg (1983), which found no

evidence of a wage-pension tradeoff. The other three studies tested for such a

tradeoff by using proxies for pension compensation; they also found no evidence

that pensions reduce wages.

     One limitation which all of these studies face is that they use indivi-

dual characteristics as proxies for worker productivity. With industry data,

one can include productivity directly as a right-hand side variable. This is

done in Table 7, where the log of average hourly earnings for workers in

3-digit manufacturing industries in the May 1983 CPS are regressed on a set of

standard control variables (hours, age, schooling, union, establishment size,

tenure, marital status, race, and sex) and then a productivity measure (value

added per hour) is added to the equation. In the first model, average hourly

earnings are 38 percent higher in industries where all workers are covered by

pensions than in industries where no workers are covered by pensions. This

earnings difference drops to 35 percent when the productivity variable is
                                                                                37

added to the model. Thus, adding productivity to the set of right-hand side

variables does not shed any new insights. Equations estimated over full time

private wage and salary workers in the May 1983 CPS produce sharply lower

estimates of the wage premium which workers with pensions receive (16 to 19

percent) This suggests that aggregation may be contaminating the estimates

obtained from industry data, but it is clearly not creating enough bias to

reverse the direction of the estimate.

     In summary, the empirical evidence on wage-pension tradeoffs is quite

clear. Most estimates of compensating wage differentials for pension coverage

show that wages do not drop dollar-for-dollar with increases in pension

compensation. Firms with pensions pay higher compensation to their current

workers. Thus, the empirical studies suggest that firms must have higher

productivity or receive some cost savings elsewhere in order to survive in

markets with firms which do not have pensions. Of course, another plausible

explanation is that these studies have been unable to accurately estimate the

true pension compensating wage differential. A final conclusion on the

magnitude of any compensating differential awaits better theory or better data.



Pensions. Productivity and Profits

     As pointed out in Section V, pensions can potentially increase productiv-

ity by reducing turnover and shirking and by producing efficient retirement

decisions. These positive effects may be offset by excessively low turnover

rates, higher absenteeism, and the weaker linkage between performance and pay

that is generated by many pension plans. To determine whether pensions do

have any impact on productivity, we merged data for 3-digit manufacturing

industries from the 1983 Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM) with pension
                                                                                 38

coverage data for those industries from the May 1983 CPS. The production

function is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas with constant returns to scale. The

productivity measure is the log of value added per hour. It is regressed on

the log of the capital-labor ratio and the fraction of workers in each industry

who participate in an employer or union sponsored pension plan, along with a

set of 20 binary variables indicating 2-digit industry. We also included a set

of six additional control variables: ratio covered by union contracts, ratio

in establishments with fewer than 25 employees, ratio with less than one year

of service with their employer (new hires), average years of schooling, and

average age. After experimenting with a variety of specifications, we found

that the impact of pension coverage on productivity varied with union contract

coverage, average age, and the share of employees who are new hires. Thus, we

added interaction terms between each of these variables and pension coverage.

To estimate the impact of the size of pension benefits on productivity, we also

included an interaction term between pension coverage and the log of average

hourly earnings. The results are reported in Table 8 with and without the

interaction terms.

     In the specification without interaction terms (column 1 in Table 8),

productivity is 25.3 percent lower in industries with high pension coverage

rates, but the impact of pension coverage is not statistically different from

zero. In fact, productivity is uncorrelated with most variables in the model,

except for the capital-labor ratio and average weekly hours.

     The results for the specification containing the interaction terms show a

much more complex relationship between productivity, pension coverage, and the

other right hand side variables. The impact of pension coverage on

productivity clearly varies with average hourly earnings, union contract
                                                                                 39

coverage, average age of workers, and the share of workers who are new hires.

Pensions are more likely to have a positive impact on productivity in

industries with high earnings, a small share of workers covered by union

contracts, a small ratio of new hires to employment, or a large share of young

workers. At the across-industry means of these variables, productivity is

35.3 percent lower in industries where all workers are covered by pensions than

in industries where no workers are covered. Pension coverage is correlated

with greater productivity in industries where union contract coverage is below

12.6 percent, where fewer than 6.8 percent of all employees are new hires and

where coverage age is below 35.4 percent. (The across-industry means of these

variables are 30.5 percent, 14.1 percent, and 38.5 percent). On balance, these

results show that in the average industry pensions have no effect on

productivity, but pensions are associated with hither productivity in nonunion

industries with low new hire rates, high wages, and younger workers.

     A related measure of firm performance is productivity growth. In most

studies of productivity growth done by economists, the focus is usually on the

impact of such variables as research intensity, concentration ratios, and

collective bargaining. The impact of human resources policies on innovative

activity has not been carefully explored. To the extent that pensions help

mold long terni economic security among the workforce, they may also encourage

innovation.

     The Labor Department calculates productivity growth indexes for a set of

4-digit industries where output can be measured in physical units. The ratio

of the 1983 to the 1972 values of the productivity index was regressed on

pension coverage to estimate the impact of pension coverage on productivity

growth and the results are shown in Table 9. Pension coverage data from the
                                                                                40

beginning of the period are unavailable. To establish the robustness of the

findings, we constructed pension coverage rates by 3-digit industry from the

1979 as well as the 1983 May CPS. Also included as control variables were

percentage union members in 1973-75, the change in unionization between 1973-75

and 1984, the 1972 four firm concentration ratio, the difference between the

1982 and the 1972 concentration ratio, and the ratio of R&D used by the

industry to value added. The sample consists of 73 industries.

    When pension coverage in 1983 appears on the right-hand side of the

equation, 1972-1983 productivity growth is 32 percentage points greater in

industries where workers are covered by pensions than in industries where

workers are not covered. However, this estimate is barely larger than its

standard error. Further, when 1979 coverage rates are used instead, there is

no correlation between pension coverage and productivity growth. Productivity

growth is faster in industries which are concentrated, in industries where

concentration ratios are rising, and in industries with high ratios of R&D to

output. Pension coverage does not seem to affect productivity growth.

     The final indicator of the impact of pensions on firm performance which

we examined was profitability. This variable can be measured in the 1983

ASM data in two different ways. Profits equal value added less depreciation,

total payroll (including benefits and Social Insurance), and rental capital.

The estimated rate of return on assets equals profits divided by the gross

book value of capital at the end of the year. The price cost margin equals

profits divided by value added. Both variables were regressed on the same

sets of control variables which were used in the productivity level equations

in Table 8 and the results are reported in Table 10.
                                                                                41

     Industries with high pension coverage rates seem to have the same profit

rates as industries with low coverage rates. In the specifications without

pension interactions (columns 1 and 3), each profit measure is 12 to 13

percentage points higher when all workers are covered by pensions than when

none are, but neither estimate is significantly different from zero. When the

interaction terms with pension coverage are added in columns 2 and 4, the

average rate of return on assets is 4 percentage points lower in the average

industry if it has full pension coverage than if it has no pension coverage,

whereas the price-cost margin is 8 percentage points higher if it has full

pension coverage. Neither estimate is statistically significant. Except for

the age interaction in the rate of return equation, the signs of the

interaction terms in both profit equations are the same as in the productivity

equations. Thus, the profit equations also indicate that pensions are more

likely to enhance firm performance in nonunion industries with relatively few

new hires and a younger workforce.

     Profit rates should be lower in industries with high coverage rates if

pensions raise labor costs but do not raise productivity. Why are these

results contradictory? The first suspect is always the data, in this case the

ASM data used to estimate the productivity and profit equations. In the data's

defense, we note that there was a very strong positive correlation between

productivity and the capital-labor ratio and that the coefficient of the

capital-labor ratio was always near capital's share of output in manufacturing

(all coefficients were between .42 and .44). Perhaps the pension coverage

rates from the CPS contained too much measurement error, but restrictions on

the sample to industries were more than 30 observations for each 3-digit
                                                                                42

industry cell did not affect the results. This leads us to believe that the

data are not the problem.

        Another possibility is the empirical model. We used pension coverage but

could not take into account variation in the size of pension compensation

across different industries. Based on our studies of pension benefit formulas

across different industries, we find it hard to believe that this is contami-

nating our results. Benefit parameters do not vary all that much among

manufacturing firms with common formula types. Differences in other pension

characteristics, such as age of eligibility for early or normal benefits, may

be important in this regard, but study of any of these questions awaits better

data.

        One final way to resolve this contradiction is to examine variables which

are believed to affect productivity, although the exact magnitude of their

impact is unknown. We do this in the final part of this section, focusing on

the evidence on pensions and turnover.



Indirect Evidence on Pensions and Productivity

        All of the available evidence shows that pensions reduce turnover. Mitchell

(1982) tested the effect of pension coverage on quits and job changes using the

longitudinal sample from the 1973 and 1977 Quality of Employment Survey. She

found that men were 10 percent less likely to quit if they were covered by a

pension plan. Pension coverage had a smaller and statistically insignificant

effect on quits among females. Job changes were much less likely to occur

among both males and females covered by a pension. Taking into account the

simultaneity between wage offers and quits, Mitchell (1983) obtains similar

results: pension coverage lowers the quit rate for males but has no significant
                                                                                43

effect on the quit rate for females. The impact of pensions on mobility has

also been studied over a sample of United Kingdom data by McCormick and Hughes

(1984). They also find that pensions reduce mobility.

     This still leaves open the question of why pensions reduce mobility. One

factor which has always been thought to be important is vesting. A worker who

is considering leaving a company may remain with the firm longer than he would

otherwise in order to receive a pension. The impact of vesting on turnover

depends on how much pension wealth is obtained at vesting. The available

evidence indicates that for most workers this gain is fairly small. Looking

across 1183 plans in the BLS 1979 Level of Benefits survey, Kotlikoff and

Wise (1985) show that the gain in pension wealth when vesting occurs at age 40

ranges between 5 and 37 percent of salary. At their intermediate wage and

interest rate assumptions, the gain is 14 percent. For most workers this

amounts to a few thousand dollars. This will be of critical importance to a

worker with 9 years of service who can move from zero to full vesting by

staying an additional year. It is not likely to have much effect on workers

with less than five years of service, the group where turnover is most likely

to take place. The only empirical evidence on this issue comes from a study

of persons covered by 133 pension plans done by Schiller and Weiss (1979).

They found that stricter vesting requirements were associated with hither exit

rates. Thus, both theory and evidence indicate that vesting is not likely to

explain why pensions reduce turnover.

     There are three other possibilities. First, lower mobility rates for

workers covered by pensions may merely reflect a higher overall level of

compensation. Most studies include either actual or imputed wages as control

variables, so it should be no real surprise that they find a positive correla-
                                                                                44

tion between pension coverage and mobility. Workers covered by pensions have

higher total compensation than other workers ceteris paribus. A second

possible explanation is that pension benefit formulas are structured so that

there is a capital loss for those leaving the firm. As noted above, this can

only happen if the pension is part of an implicit labor contract. Under the

legal or explicit contract interpretation of the value of pension wealth,

there is no penalty for turnover. The final possibility is that the lower

mobility observed among workers covered by pensions reflects the use of

pensions as a sorting device. Workers who expect to stay with a firm are

attracted to firms which provide pensions; those who do not intend to stay

prefer a different compensation structure.

     One can distinguish between these three explanations by focusing on the

coefficients of pension coverage, pension compensation, and the capital loss

associated with mobility. Under the first explanation, once pension compensa-

tion is added to the model, pension coverage should no longer be correlated

with mobility. If it is only greater compensation which ties workers around

to jobs with pensions, then the pension compensation variable will be a much

more accurate measure of the extra value of those jobs than the coverage

dummy. The validity of the second explanation depends on the correlation

between the capital loss and turnover. If the third explanation is correct,

then the coverage dummy will still be a good predictor of turnover but pension

compensation and the capital loss will be uncorrelated with turnover.

     Allen, Clark, and McDermed (1986) examined the validity of each of these

by estimating length of service and mobility equations over three different

data sets; the results are summarized in Table 11. In every data set pension

coverage is a very strong predictor of length of service and turnover, even
                                                                               45

when the pension compensation and the capital loss variables are included in

the model. Also, except for the years of service equations estimated over the

May 1983 CPS (all spells in progress), pension compensation has no effect on

mobility or length of service. Both of these findings clearly contradict the

first explanation.

     The results for the capital loss variable vary across each sample. In

both the CPS and the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID) the capital loss

was strongly related to years of service. It was also correlated with lower

job change probabilities for workers between the ages of 45 and 54 in the

PSID. However, the capital loss had no effect on mobility for workers under

the age of 45 in the PSID, nor did it have any effect on mobility in the

National Longitudinal Survey (NLS) sample of older men.

     A likely explanation for the negative findings on mobility for younger

workers is that the mean of capital loss of pension wealth per year of

remaining worklife is rather small. It is $36 for workers covered by pensions

who are less than 25 years old; $143 for between 25 and 34; and $335 for

those between 35 and 44. In contrast the average loss for workers between 45

and 54 is $590. Thus the loss may not have very much effect on workers under

45 because the loss is not very big.

     This rationale does not apply to the workers in the NLS sample, where the

mean loss per year of remaining worklife is $1270. The key factor here is

probably the very low mobility rate in the sample. The average age of workers

in the sample in 1971 is 56 and only 17 percent of them change jobs over a ten

year period. Among those covered by pensions the mobility rate is an even

smaller 9 percent. Thus the capital loss may have little effect on mobility
                                                                                  46

because a negligible proportion of older workers covered by pensions change

jobs.

        The results also support the self selection argument. Self selection is

clearly not the only factor, as the capital loss results indicate. Yet

neither the capital loss variable nor the pension compensation variable can

account for the lower turnover observed among younger workers covered by

pensions. Self selection is the only remaining explanation for this group.

        An estimate of the impact of this decline in turnover on productivity can

be obtained by using the result in Brown and Medoff (1978) that a decline of

the log of the annual quit rate equal to one results in an 11 percent increase

in productivity. Based on the PSID sample means, it seems reasonable to us

that pensions reduce turnover from about 4 percent per year to 2 percent.

This translates into a log change of - .69 which is associated with a produc-

tivity increase of about 7.6 percent.

        In addition to turnover, indirect evidence on the effect of pensions on

productivity can be obtained from studies of work attendance and retirement.

Allen (1981) found in a sample of 41 paper and box manufacturing plants that a

10 percent increase in monthly pension benefits per year of service is

associated with an increase in the absence rate of 0.2 percentage points (the

mean absence rate was 2.5 percent). This evidence is consistent with the

theory that workers consider income from benefits as exogenous in making labor

supply decisions and that increases in exogenous income reduce the number of

hours which employees desire to work.

     The survey article by Mitchell and Fields (1982) indicates that most

studies find higher pensions tend to encourage earlier retirement. Further
                                                                                 47

evidence in support of this conclusion appears in more recent studies by

Fields and Mitchell (1984) and Allen and Clark (1986).

     The implications of these findings for productivity are not clear. Some

studies have indicated that the effect of age on productivity is insignificant

prior to age 60 or older. When productivity begins to decline (whether due to

changes in technology, depreciation of human capital, or changes in mental or

physical abilities), this need not translate into a drop in job performance.

Older workers may be able to adjust by having lower absence rates, lower

turnover rates, or increased quality of work. Reviews of studies concerning

the age-productivity relationship are provided by Clark and Spengler (1980),

Kreps (1977) and Riley and Foner (1968). In examining productivity by age, it

is also important to recognize that only workers who remain employed are

included in the measured population. The least productive workers may have

already quit or been fired, in which case earlier retirement of the remaining

workers may not be in the firm's best interests. Much needs to be learned

about these issues.



                        VII. Observations and Conclusions



     The role of pensions as a form of compensation and as a method of achieving

personnel objectives has received substantial attention by economists over the

last decade. The rapid growth and now widespread use of employer-provided

pensions suggests that offering a pension as a form of compensation does not

adversely affect the economic performance or the profitability of firms.

Coverage rates vary significantly across industrial and occupational groups;

however, no sector has 100 percent coverage or zero coverage of workers by
                                                                                48

pensions. Thus, firms with and without pensions coexist side by side in many

different types of markets.

     We have presented the first empirical evidence that the rate of profits

among firms is not affected by the existence of a pension. Obviously, pensions

cost the firm money but if they do not reduce profits then there must be some

compensating offsets either through a reduction of other labor costs or through

an increase in productivity. A brief review of existing studies of

compensating wage differentials attributable to pensions yields inconclusive

results. At best, we can conclude that there is no empirical basis for arguing

that wages or other forms of compensation decline in the presence of a

pension. This does not necessarily imply that there are no compensating wage

differentials for pension benefits; it merely means that there is presently

little empirical evidence of such differentials. We provide the first

estimates of the direct effect of pensions on labor productivity and are unable

to find any significant effect of pension coverage on productivity within

industries while holding constant average worker and firm characteristics.

     If all of these findings are correct, how do firms offering pensions compete

with firms that do not provide this form of compensation? There are two

possibilities. First, the evidence seems to indicate that the answer is

indirect productivity effects. Instead of being neutral sellers of pensions to

workers, firms use pensions to achieve personnel objectives. These objectives

are to reduce turnover during most of the employee's worklife and to increase

retirement rates among older workers. Lower turnover means fewer resources are

devoted to hiring and training new workers. It increases the proportion of

workers with a greater amount of job tenure and on the average this raises

labor productivity. Earlier retirement among older workers may reduce average
                                                                                49

salaries and also may affect average productivity of workers. The second

possibility is that the empirical results are misleading, particularly those on

compensating wage differentials.

     These changes in the age-tenure composition of the labor force and their

effect on productivity are not captured in the productivity regressions

discussed above. It seems likely that they provide the solution to our

puzzle. Furthermore, these effects may provide an explanation for the pattern

of pension coverage across firms. Firms with greater costs of turnover should

be more likely to offer pensions. Firms in which workers suffer greater

productivity declines with advancing age should be more likely to offer

pensions. Since these are different objectives, some firms may wish to

discourage turnover but not encourage earlier retirement. These firms should

have different plan characteristics than firms which seek to encourage early

retirement.

     Many of the conclusions concerning pensions and firm performance are quite

tentative and must await further confirmation. Past studies have been hindered

by a lack of data that relates plan features and the characteristics of

sponsoring firm to worker characteristics. The 1983 Survey of Consumer Finance

may be helpful in this regard but it does not allow the researcher to determine

the productivity and profitability of the firm. We anticipate continued

progress in the estimation of the effect of pensions on mobility and retirement

decisions. A greater knowledge of these effects and a better understanding of

the link between age, tenure and productivity would significantly increase our

understanding of the relationship between pensions and firm performance. It

would be useful to have a theory of the optimal age structure of a firm and how

pensions can be used to achieve this objective.
                                                                                50

     One element of the relationship between pensions and firm performance which

this study has not addressed is the impact of the financial status of the

pension plan. Studies of market valuation done by Feldstein and Seligman

(1981), Feldstein and Morck (1983), and Bulow, Morck, and Summers (1985) all

indicate that the stock market treats net assets in a pension plan as if they

were part of the corporate balance sheet. In other words, underfunded pension

plans translate into a lower market value of the firm's stock, with the decline

in market value equal to the funding liability.

     The recent decline in interest rates and the accompanying bull market have

put most pension plans on excellent financial footing. A growing number of

plans are being terminated with the excess assets reverting to the firm. In

most cases, a new pension plan is created after a termination which preserves

the legal pension wealth of both participants and annuitants. It remains to be

seen whether their wealth under the implicit contract interpretation of the

firm's pension promises will also be preserved and, if not, what impact this

will have on employee behavior.
                                                                                 51

Table 1. Determinants of Pension Coverage, 1983 CPSa

                                                       Marginal impact on
                                  Percentage           pension coverage
                                  covered by           probability from
                                  pension              probit equation (x 100)

Union contract coverage
  Nonunion                            44.1
  Union                               82.2                     26.3
Establishment size
  Less than 25                        27.8                     -   --
  25-99                               51.1                         2.4*
  100-499                             68.9                         4.7
  500-999                             77.6                         9.6
  1000 or more                        85.9                     10.2
Company size
  Less than 25                        17.1
  25-99                               36.7                     15.1
  100-499                             54.6                     26.5
  500-999                             62.7                     31.1
  1000 or more                        79.7                     45.2
Industry
  Agriculture, forestry, fisheries    11.3                         4.0*
  Mining                              74.0                     14.4
  Construction                        35.9                    -11.0
  Durable manufacturing               72.2                      9.2
  Nondurable manufacturing            64.7                      6.2
  Transportation and utilities        70.8                      2.2*
  Wholesale trade                     52.1                     11.6
  Retail trade                        31.7                     35*
  Finance, insurance, real estate     58.8                     10.7
  Services                            39.6
Occupation
  Executive, administrative,          60.2
   managerial
  Professional specialty              61.6                      0.1*
  Technicians & related support       60.0                     -3.0*
  Sales                               42.6                     -6.0
  Administrative support,             55.8                      3.4*
   including clerical
  Private household service            0.0                     -   --
  Protective service                  37.7                    -17.7
  Other service                       27.6                     -8.9
  Precision production,               57.4                     -1.3*
   craft & repair
  Machine operators, assemblers       59.5                     47*
   & inspectors
  Transporation & material            53.7                     -3.6*
   moving
                                                                                   52

Table 1. Determinants of Pension Coverage, 1983 CpSa (cont'd)

                                                         Marginal impact on
                                   Percentage            pension
                                   covered by            probability from
                                   pension               probit equation (x 100)
  Handlers, equipment                 47.2
    cleaners, etc.
  Farming, forestry & fishing         11.1                      -17.2
Region
  Northeast                           57.5                        7.8
  North Central                       58.0                       10.9
  South                               47.5                        5.0
  West                                47.4
Sex
  Female                              45.6
  Male                                56.8                        3.4
Marital Status
  Married, spouse present             57.6                        2.9
  Other                               42.2
Age
  16-24                               26.0
  25-34                               50.5                      13.4
  35-44                               61.2                      20.4
  45-54                               62.2                      24.3
  55-64                               62.8                      24.0
Years of schooling
  Less than 9                         43.6
  9-11                                44.4                       1.8*
  12                                  52.0                       7.8
  13-15                               52.0                       7.0
  16                                  57.2                       4.8*
  More than 16                        66.6                      10.1
Average hourly earnings
  Less than $4                        13.2
  $4 -     $5.99                      31.8                      17.6
  $6 -     $7.99                      51.8                      28.6
  $8 -     $9.99                      63.2                      32.9
 $10 -    $14.99                      73.3                      37.4
$15 or more                           79.4                      41.2

         aSp1e is limited to private wage and salary workers between the ages of
          16 and 64 who usually work more than 35 hours per week. The estimates
          in the second column are probit estimates of the derivative of the
          probability function evaluated at the means of the independent
          variables. All of the above variables were included in the probit
          equation. Estimates with a significance level below the 95 percent
          level are indicated with an asterisk.
                                                                         53

Table 2. Percent Defined Contribution Coverage Among Pension-Covered
          Workers, 1982


    Pension Plan Size               Union               Nonunion
     (Participants)




          1    - 99                  12.9                 63.1
                          .
        100    - 999                  4.3                 31.2

      1,000    - 10,000               3.6                 11.2

   Greater than 10,000                 .7                  4.9


              Total                   2.0                 22.4




Source: Richard Ippolito, "A Study of the Regulatory Impact of ERISA,"
         unpublished paper, July 1986, Table 4.
                                                                                      54

Table 3.   Post Retirement I ncreases in Pension Benefits

                               Union                                Nonunion
                                 Benefits as                              Benefits as
             Percent Awarded     Percent of            Percent Awarded    Percent of
             Increase            1973 Benefit          Increase           1973 Benefit


1973              45.0             100.0                    25.6              100.0
1974              59.6             105.6                    31.6             101.3
1975              62.2             110.3                    35.6             105.1
1976              52.6             114.7                    19.1             108.9
1977              60.4             119.4                    42.9             110.3
1978              65.6             123.2                    11.4             117.2
1979                               128.6                                     118.5

Change 19 73-79                        28.6                                   18.5



Source: Robert Clark, Steven Allen, and Daniel Sumner, "Inflation and Pension
         Benefits," in Richard Ippolito and Walter Kolodrubetz (Eds.) The Handbook of
         Pension Statistics 1985, Chicago: Commerce Clearing House, 1986, p. 196.
                                                                                    55

Table 4. Earnings and Pension Compensation by Age and Tenurea

                                                             Total Compensation

                                  Pension           Percent       Percent Pension
Age     Tenure      Earnings      Compensation      Earnings      Compensation


30       10         $ 7,743        $ 321              96.0               4.0

35       15           8,891           456             95.1               4.9

40        20          10,174          663             93.9               6.1

45        25          11,606          957             92.4               7.6

50        30          13,189        1,374             90.6               9.4

55        35          14,914        1,969             88.3              11.7

60       40           16,753        2,820             85.6              14.4

64       44           18,262        3,767             82.9              17.1

65       45           22,796          -106           100.5              -0.5

70        50          30,118        -3,814           114.5             -14.5



aThe analysis is based on a defined benefit plan with an earnings based formula.
 Salary average is computed over the last 5 years of earnings and the generosity
 parameter is 1.0 percent per year of service.

Source: Robert Clark and Ann McDermed, "Earnings and Pension Compensation: The
         Effect of Eligibility," Quarterly Journal of Economics XCXI (1986): 341-61.
                                                                                      56

Table 5. Lifetime Compensation (Projected Earnings Method):
                                                              Manufacturing,
          Professional and Administrative Workers, 1,000 or More Employeesa

                                                                       Pension
                             Pension         Total           Pension   Loss From
Age    Tenure    Earnings    Compensation    Compensation    Wealth    Leaving

25        0       8,839         1,161          10,000              0           0

35       10      11,866         1,573          13,439         15,728     8,921
40       15      13,744         1,835          15,580         27,529    13,727
45       20      15,912         2,150          18,061        42,990     18,029
50       25      18,398         2,540          20,938         63,492   20,833
55       30      21,231         3,042         24,273         91,259    20,416
60       35      24,428         3,711         28,139        129,870    13,661
64       39      31,448           222         31,670        173,174            0
65       40      32,809          -188         32,620        181,514            0

70       45      43,873        -6,057         37,816        227,394            0



aThe analysis is based on the average plan in manufacturing for professional workers.
 The plan is a defined benefit plan with an earnings based formula. Average salary is
 computed over the last 5 years of earnings and the generosity parameter is 1.53
 percent per year of service.

Source: Steven Allen, Robert Clark, and Ann McDermed, "Job Mobility, Older Workers,
         and the Role of Pensions," Final Report for U.S. Department of Labor
         Contract No. J-9-M-5-0049, October 1986.
                                                                                                    57

Table 6. Previais Evidence czi Wage-Pensicn Tradeoffs

                                                                               Key
          Study                          Sample                              Results
Direct tests
Schiller and Weiss (1980)     1969 Labor Dept. private perisicn     Coefficient of legal mstbod
                              file ntch with SSi earnings           pensicti ccmpensaticn in log
                              histories; neles in defined           earnings equaticti is -1 for
                              benefit plans                         45-54 age grxip 1*it m ge-
                                                                    pensicn tradeoff for other
                                                                    fair age grxips
&nith (1981)                  1976 Pennsylvania txnuniforn.d       Coefficient of legal ntbod
                              goverrmnt rkers in defined            pensicii ccnipensatiou in log
                              benefit plans                         earnings equaticn is -1
Soith and threrIberg (1983)   200 finns providing pensiou           Earnings difference across
                              and earnings data to Hay              Hay Point levels within
                              Associates                            firms uncorrelated with
                                                                    either difference in
                                                                    pensicri 'vale or difference
                                                                    in pensic*i costs
Indirect tests
Elirenberg (1980)             1973 data ci police and               Entrance pay and amxinun
                              fireflgjiters                         earnings Inversely related to
                                                                    ratio of benefits to earnings
                                                                    to earnings for police; ne
                                                                    correlatici for fireflgbters
                              1974-75 data ci police,               Average annual earnings
                              firefighters, and sanitaticti         uncorrelated with ratio of
                              rkers                                 benefits to earnings
Clark and Derned (1986a)      1971-75 Retirnt History               Earnings significantly higher
                              Survey; full-tine msles               for tbose or1dng past age of
                                                                    pensici eligibility to offset
                                                                    drop in pensicn txxnpensaticn
Mitchell and Pozzebcn (1986) 1983 Survey of Ccz'stmr                Icg lx*irly ge significantly
                              Finance; private nxagricu1trua1       higher for tbose covered by
                              ge and salary employees               either defined benefit or
                                                                    defined caitrihitici plans

Source: Olivia Mitchell, and Sil'vana Pozzebcn, "Wages, Pens loris and the
         Wage-Pensici Tradeoff," unpiblished paper, 1986.
                                                                                  58

Table 7.    Log Average Hourly Earnings Equation Estimates

Sample and pension                  Additional               Pension coverage
variable                            controls                 coefficient (S.E.)

3-digit manufacturing
industries, 1983 Annual
Survey of Manufacturers

  Percentage participating            List 1                        .319
  in pension plan                                                  (.079)

  Percentage participating            List 1, log of                .301
  in pension plan                     value added per hour         (.077)

Full-time private wage
and salary workers, May
1983 CPS:

  Participates in                     List 2                        .174
  pension plan                                                     (.009)

 Employer provides                    List 2                        .146
 pension plan                                                      (.009)



List 1: Average weekly hours, average age, average years of schooling
         completed, percentage covered by union contracts, percentage in
         small establishments, percentage with less than one year of service,
         percentage married, percentage white, percentage male

List 2: Age, years of schooling completed, union contract coverage, sex,
         marital status, establishment size, firm size, region, industry,
         occupation
                                                                        59

Table 8. Productivity Equation Estimates, 1983 ASM 3-digit Industries


                                         (1)                   (2)

in (K/L)                             .427                      424
                                    (.037)                 (.037)

Ratio covered
by union contracts                  -   .078              1.742
                                    (.207)                 (.905)

Ratio in establishments
with fewer than 25 people           -. 360                -   .462
                                    (.217)                 (.219)

Ratio with less than
one year of service                 -   .173              4.448
                                    (.446)                (2.127)

Average age                         -   .001                .102
                                    (.010)                 (.042)

Average years of
schooling completed                 -   .027              -   .056
                                    (.034)                 (.042)

Average weekly hours                 .034                   .031
                                    (.016)                 (.016)

Ratio covered by pension            -   .292              5.865
                                    (.242)                (2.757)

Pension * average ln(w)                                    .358
                                                          (.344)

Pension *   union                                        -2.463
                                                         (1.190)

Pension * new hires                                      -5.974
                                                         (2.884)

Pension * age                                             -. 142
                                                          (.059)

R2                                      .789                  .807
                                                                         60

Table 9. Productivity Growth Equation Estimates, 4-digit Industries 19721983a

                                                 (1)          (2)

    Constant                                 .763         .884
                                            (.181)       (.223)

    Pension coverage 1983                    .317
                                            (.316)

    Pension coverage 1979                                -   .026
                                                         (.424)

    Percentage union                        -   .039      .164
    1973-75                                 (.298)       (.344)

    Change in percentage union              -. 764       -   . 649
    1973-75 to 1984                         (.530)       (.553)


    Concentration ratio 1972                    .344      .417
                                            (.157)       (.157)

    Change in                               1.288        1.226
    concentration ratio                     (.499)       (.500)
    1972 to 1982

    R & D intensity                         1.160       1.187
                                            (.576)       (.583)

                                                .234         .222




   aStandard errors appear in parentheses
                                                                               61

Table 10. Rate of Return and Price-Cost Margin Equation Estimates, 1983 ASM
           3-digit Industriesa

                                 Rate of return             Price-cost
                                 on assets                  margin

                                 (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)

ln(K/L)                      -   .407     -   .426      -.004       -.009
                             (.085)       (.086)        (.016)      (.015)

Ratio covered by
union contracts              -   .368      .855         -   .117     .446
                             (.477)      (2.134)        (.089)      (.377)

Ratio in establishments
with fewer than 25 people    -. 355       -   .438       .052        .010
                             (.499)       (.516)        (.093)      (.091)

Ratio with less than
one year of service              .742     7.273          .212       2.827
                            (1.027)      (5.017)        (.191)      (.887)

Average age                      .007      .136         -   .004     .048
                             (.024)       (.100)        (.004)      (.018)

Average years of
schooling completed          -   .045     -   .106      -.004       -.011
                             (.078)       (.100)        (.014)      (.018)

Average weekly hours             .066      .062          .007        .006
                             (.037)       (.037)        (.007)      (.006)

Ratio covered by pension      .129        6.978          .119       3.198
                             (.557)      (6.504)        (.104)     (1.150)

Pension * average ln(w)                    .827                      .202
                                          (.813)                    (.144)

Pension *   union                        -1.818                     -   .803
                                         (2.809)                    (.497)

Pension * new hires                      -8.725                    -3.482
                                         (6.805)                   (1. 203)

Pension * age                              .181                     -   .073
                                          (.140)                    (.025)

R2                               .635         .650          .642        .690
                                                                                                            62

Table 11. Evidence cti the Impact of Pensiai Coverage, Pensicn Ccitipensatfrn, and Pensfrn Capital thss cxi Years of
             Service, Job thange Probability, and Quit Probability
                                                                            Results
Sample and
dependent                      Pensicii                    Pensiai                          Pensicn
variable                       coverage                    canpensaticxi                    loss
May GPS 1979-1983;           Survival rates are
survival rates across        35-47 percentage
100 pensictage/             points higher
iistrf/occupaticxi
cells


May 1983 CPS; years         Years of service             Years of service              }bsitively correlated
of service                   Increases by 34 to 49%      Increases by 5% with          with years of service
                                                         each duller

1975-82 PSID 1x*iselxld     Reduces job change           I'b effect in any grc*ip      Reduces job change
heads under 55; job         probabilities for all                                      probabilities for 45-54 year
change probability          fcxr age grips                                             olds; r effect cxi other age
                                                                                       grps
1975-82 PSID lx*aseheld     Reduces quit                    effect In any grip         t'b effect in any grcxip
heads under 55; quit        probabilities for
probability                 25-34, 35-44, 45-54
                            age graips


1975-82 PSID 1xisebold      Mditiaial years              b effect                      Mditienal years of service
heads under 55; hazard      of service 28% higher                                      22% higher for $10,000 loss
for additictial years of
service cxi 1975 job


1971-81 NLS older ni;       Reduces job change           lb effect                     lb effect
job change probability      probability by 11
                            to 16 percentage points

1971-81 NLS older nn;       Reduces quit probability     lb effect                     lb effect
quit probability            by 8 percentage points
Scce: Steven Allen, Robert Clark, arK! Ann }kDernied, "Job Wbility, Older Workers and the Role of Pens ictis,"
         Final Report for U.S. Departxint of Labor Ccntract lb. J-9-M-5-0049, October 1986.
                                                                                 63

                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY


Allen, Everett, Joseph Melone, and Jerry Rosenbloom, Pension Planning,
   Homewood, Ill.: Richard Irwin, 1984.

Allen, Steven, "Compensation, Safety, and Absenteeism: Evidence from the Paper
   Industry, "Industrial and Labor Relations Review 34 (January 1981):
   207-218.

Allen, Steven and Robert Clark, "Unions, Pension Wealth, and Age Compensation
   Profiles," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 39 (July 1986): 502-17.

Allen, Steven, Robert Clark, and Ann McDermed, "Job Mobility, Older Workers and
   the Role of Pensions," Final Report for U.S. Department of Labor Contract
   No. J-9-M-5-0049, October 1986.

Allen, Steven, Robert Clark, and Daniel Sumner, "Postretirement Adjustments of
   Pension Benefits," Journal of Human Resrouces, XXI (Winter 1986): 118-27.

Andrews, Emily, The Changing Profile of Pensions in America, Washington, D.C.:
   Employee Benefit Research Institute, 1985.

Brown, Charles and James Medoff, "Trade Unions in the Production Process,"
   Journal of Political Economy, 86 (June 1978): 355-78.

Bulow, Jeremy, "What Are Corporate Pension Liabilities?" Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, XCVII (1982): 435-52.

Bulow, Jeremy, Randall Morck, and Lawrence Summers, "How Does The Market Value
   Unfunded Pension Liabilitips?" NBER Working Paper No. 1602, April 1985.

Clark, Robert, and Joseph Spengler, The Economics of Individual and Population
   Aging, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1980.

Clark, Robert, Steven Allen, and Daniel Sumner, "Inflation and Pension
   Benefits," in Richard Ippolito and Walter Kolodrubetz (Eds.) The Handbook
   of Pension Statistics 1985, Chicago: Commerce Clearing House, 1986.

Clark, Robert and Ann McDermed, "Earnings and Pension Compensation: The Effect
   of Eligibility," Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCXI (May l986a): 341-61.

Clark, Robert and Ann McDermed, "Labor Contracts, Pension Plans, and Lifetime
   Earnings," North Carolina State University, unpublished paper (1986b).

Ehrenberg, Ronald, "Retirement System Characteristics and Compensating Wage
   Differentials in the Public Sector," Industrial and Labor Relations Review
   33 (July 1980): 470-483.
                                                                                   64

 Feldstein, Martin and Randall Morck, "Pension Funding Decisions, Interest Rate
    Assumptions, and Share Prices," in Avi Bodie and John Shoven (Eds.),
    Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System,
                                                           Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press (1983): 177-210.

Feldstein, Martin and S. Seligman, "Pension Funding, Share Prices and National
   Saving," Journal of Finance, 36 (1981): 801-24.

Fields, Gary, and Olivia Mitchell, Retirement. Pensions, and Social Security,
   Cambridge: MIT Press, 1984.

Freeman, Richard, "Union, Pensions, and Union Pension Funds," in David Wise
   (ed.), Pensions. Labor, and Individual Choice, Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press (1985): 89-122.

Greenough, William and Francis King, Pension Plans and Public Policy, New
   York: Columbia University Press, 1976.

Ippolito, Richard, "The Labor Contract and True Economic Pension Liabilities,"
   American Economic Review, LXXV (December 1985a): 1031-43.

Ippolito, Richard, "The Economics of Pensions and Mobility,"
                                                               unpublished paper
   (l985b).

Ippolito, Richard, "The Economic Function of Underfunded Pension Plans,"
   Journal of Law and Economics, 28 (l985c): 611-51.

Ippolito, Richard, Pensions. Economics and Public Policy, Honiewood, Ill.:   Dow
   Jones-Irwin, 1986. (a)

Ippolito, Richard, "A Study of the Regulatory Impact of ERISA,"   unpublished
   paper l986.(b)

Ippolito, Richard, "Why Federal Workers Don't Quit," Journal of Human
   Resources, 1987 forthcoming.

King, Francis, "Indexing Retirement Benefits,It The Gerontologist, 22 (December
   1982): 488-92.

Kotlikoff, Laurence and David Wise, "Labor Compensation and the Structure of
   Private Pension Plans," in David Wise (Ed.) Pensions. Labor, and Individual
   Choice, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, (1985): 55-85.

Kreps, Juanita, "Age, Work and Income," Southern Economic Journal, 44 (1977):
   1423-37.

Lazear, Edward, "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
   Economy, 87 (December 1979): 1261-1284.

Lazear, Edward, "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity and Hours
   Restrictions," American Economic Review, 71 (September 1981): 606-20.
                                                                                 65

Lazear, Edward, "Pensions As Severance Pay," in Zvi Bodie and James Shoven
   (Eds.), Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System, Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press, (1983): 57-90.

Lazear, Edward, "Incentive Effects of Pensions," in David Wise (ed.), Pensions,
   Labor, and Individual Choice, Chicago: University of Chicago Press (1985):
   253-282.

Malcomson, James, "Work Incentives, Hierarchy, and Internal Labor Markets,"
   Journal of Political Economy 92(1984): 486-507.

McCormick, Barry and Gordon Hughes, "The Influence of Pensions on Job
   Mobility," Journal of Public Economics, 23 (1979): 939-56.

Mitchell, Olivia, "Fringe Benefits and Labor Mobility," Journal of Human
   Resources, XVII (1982): 286-98.

Mitchell, Olivia, "Fringe Benefits and the Cost of Changing Jobs," Industrial
   and Labor Relations Review, 36 (October 1983): 70-78.

Mitchell, Olivia, and Emily Andrews, "Scale Economies in Private Multieniployer
   Pension Systems," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 34 (1981):
   522-530.

Mitchell, Olivia, and Gary Fields, "The Effect of Pensions and Earnings on
   Retirement: A Review Essay," in Ronald Ehrenberg (ed.), Research in Labor
   Economics, Vol. 5, Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press (1982): 115-155.

Mitchell, Olivia, and Silvana Pozzebon, "Wages, Pensions and the Wage-Pension
   Tradeoff," unpublished paper, 1986.

Munnell Alicia, Pensions for Public Employees, Washington, D.C.: National
   Planning Association, 1979.

President's Commission on Pension Policy, An Interim Report, Washington, D.C.:
   Novembar 1980.

Rees, Albert, The Economics of Trade Unions, Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press, 1962.

Riley, Matilda, and Ann Foner, Aging and Society, Vol. I, New York: Russell
   Sage Foundation, 1968.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets," Journal of Political
   Economy, 82(1984): 34-55.

Schiller, Bradley, and Randall Weiss, "The Impact of Private Pensions on Firm
   Attachment," Review of Economics and Statistics 61 (August 1979): 369-380.

_________   "Pensions and Wages: A Test for Equalizing Differences," Review
   of Economics and Statistics 62 (November 1980): 529-538.
                                                                                 66

Schulz, James, The Economics of Aging, Belmont, Cal.: Wadsworth
                                                                Publishing
   Company, 1985.

Smeeding, Timothy, "The Size Distribution of Wage and Nonwage Compensation:
   Employer Cost versus Employee Value," in Jack Triplett (Ed.),
   Measurement of Labor Costs, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Smith, Robert, "Compensating Differentials for Pensions and Underfunding in The
   Public Sector, "Review of Economics and Statistics 63 (August 1981):
   463-468.

Smith, Robert, and Ronald Ehrenberg, "Estimating Wage-Fringe Trade-Offs: Some
   Data Problems," in Jack E. Triplett (ed.), The Measurement of Labor Cost,
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press (1983): 347-369.

Urban Institute, "Financial Retirement Incentives in Private Pension Plans,"
   Report submitted to the U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, D.C.: 1982.

U.S. Department of Labor, Findings From the Survey of Private Pension Benefits
   Amounts, Washington: U.S_G.P.O., 1985.

Viscusi, W. Kip, "Self-Selection, Learning-Induced Quits, and the Optimal Wage
   Structure," International Economic Review 21 (1980): 529-546.

_________  "Nontransferable Pensions as a Mobility-Reduction Device," in
  David Wise (ed.), Pensions. Labor, and Individual Choice, Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press (1985): 223-248.
</ref_section>
