                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               HOPE AS ASPIRATIONS, AGENCY, AND PATHWAYS:
          POVERTY DYNAMICS AND MICROFINANCE IN OAXACA, MEXICO

                                        Travis J. Lybbert
                                         Bruce Wydick

                                       Working Paper 22661
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22661


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




We thank Chris Barrett, Paolo Carozza, Alessandra Cassar, Paul Glewwe, Phillip Ross, and Laine
Rutledge, seminar participants at the University of California at Davis, San Jose State University,
University of Gothenberg, University of Notre Dame, Hope College, the University of California
at Berkeley, and seminar participants at the 2016 Pacific Conference for Development Economics
at Stanford University for helpful conversations and comments related to this research. Funding
from the University of Notre Dame, The University of San Francisco, and The University of
California at Davis is gratefully acknowledged. This RCT was registered in the American
Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials under Trial number
AEARCTR-0000721. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Travis J. Lybbert and Bruce Wydick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Hope as Aspirations, Agency, and Pathways: Poverty Dynamics and Microfinance in Oaxaca,
Mexico
Travis J. Lybbert and Bruce Wydick
NBER Working Paper No. 22661
September 2016
JEL No. O12

                                           ABSTRACT

Work in positive psychology decomposes hope into aspirations, agency, and pathways. Operating
in the context of an economic model developed with this framework, we review the literature on
hope from philosophy, theology, psychology, and its relationship to emerging work on aspirations
in development economics. We then present one-month follow-up results from an experimental
study based on a hope intervention in Oaxaca, Mexico among 601 indigenous women with access
to microfinance loans. Our early experimental results suggest that the intervention raised
aspirations approximately a quarter of a standard deviation, significantly raised a hope index
among the treated subjects, and had positive but statistically insignificant results on enterprise
revenues and profits.


Travis J. Lybbert
Agricultural and Resources Economics
University of California, Davis
1 Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
tlybbert@ucdavis.edu

Bruce Wydick
Department of Economics
University of San Francisco
San Francisco, CA 94117
wydick@usfca.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/721
1. Introduction
Much research in development economics has been devoted recently to the study of poverty
dynamics. The possibility of multiple equilibria in economic outcomes and, thereby, poverty traps
has been particularly compelling as both a research focus and a motivation for development policy
and program design. The majority of the research on poverty traps has concentrated on dynamics
arising from external constraints such as missing credit, labor, and land markets or structural
features such as locally increasing returns to scale in production. Recent work in behavioral
economics, however, has illuminated the potential for development traps based on internal
psychological phenomena. These phenomena may take the form of internal constraints (Sen,
1999), such as a belief that one is not capable of engaging successfully in certain types of economic
activities or domains of economic life. They may also take the form of a recursive trap in which
low income produces feelings of helplessness that then result in feelings of low self-efficacy, and
a resulting low application of effort into one or more economic activities further resulting in low
income and a continued sense of helplessness.

       In this research we address the subject of hope, which may form a key component to
breaking cycles of poverty. While hope (usually articulated contextually as confidence or
expectations) has played a central role in understanding multiple equilibria and low-equilibrium
traps in macroeconomics (e.g. Diamond, 1982; Murphy et al., 1988), it is less often invoked in
microeconomics. And although development practitioners routinely reference the importance of
hope in work among the poor, microeconomists have only recently engaged hope as a subject
worthy of serious research.

       Understanding the role hope plays in shaping poverty dynamics is a daunting pursuit
because the two subjects are nuanced and complex when viewed in isolation. Yet, even a fleeting
reflection suggests that the interactions and interdependency between hope and poverty
dynamics are potentially potent and therefore deserving of attention from development
economists. This complex relationship will only be understood though the accumulation of
careful theoretical and empirical study. The work described in this paper constitutes an initial
offering in this direction.

       One must begin with clear working definitions of the concept of hope – definitions that
can be operational in the context of poverty interventions. As we will argue subsequently, hope
has a number of components that may operate both individually and jointly in breaking cycles of

                                                 1
poverty. Furthermore, it is important to understand whether hope as a phenomenon is
substitutionary or complementary to more tangible interventions in areas such as health,
schooling, and finance. We favor the latter. That is, there must be a tangible basis for hope that
stems from reality, but at the same time, reality may not create its own hope. Patterns of
hopelessness may persist even when an intervention that relieves tangible economic constraints
offer the potential for economic advancement, and if they are not accompanied by important
psychological changes, their impacts are unlikely to be fully realized. Throughout this paper, we
explore the complementarity between hope and more standard economic interventions.

       Our inquiry into the economics of hope is structured in four parts: In section 2, we provide
an introduction to the psychological literature on hope and importantly related concepts. In
section 3 we review the theoretical and empirical literature in development economics related to
hope, which in this literature has largely been reduced to material aspirations. Here we also
review a simple economic model of hope we develop in Lybbert and Wydick (forthcoming) that
uses a reference-dependent utility framework to incorporate three essential elements of hope
from the positive psychology literature: aspirations, agency and pathways. We use this simple
model to differentiate aspirations from the broader concept of hope and to show how hope
shapes economic development outcomes and the impact of different types of interventions. We
then illustrate how recent empirical results in development economics can be more clearly
understood in this hope framework. In section 4, we present one month follow-up results from
a randomized controlled trial among microfinance borrowers. In the Oaxaca Hope Project,
we experimentally test the effects of an intervention that includes all three components
of hope. Results show the intervention significantly raised aspirations and had a positive but
yet statistically insignificant impact on short-term small business outcomes. In section 5, we
conclude with reflections on the complex interplay of hope and poverty dynamics.

2. The Psychology of Hope
       Psychology began to explore the concept of hope systematically in the 1950s with the
emergence of positive psychology as a new field of study within the discipline. In response to
complaints that the field had focused too much on pathologies and had overlooked positive
psychological phenomena (K. Menninger 1959), a branch of psychology took up this challenge
to understand hope and other “healthy” psychological attributes as part of what would ultimately
become defined as the subfield of positive psychology (M.E. Seligman and M. Csikszentmihalyi

                                                2
2000). This new branch of psychology proved to be the fertile ground that ultimately gave rise
to new thinking about the psychology of hope.

         As described in Froh (2004), positive psychology initially developed around the study of
human virtues, psychological attributes such as happiness, encourage, love, forgiveness, and
hope. An individual’s influence over the factors that shape one’s life, and more specifically the
perception of this influence, has formed a key component of positive psychology. Rotter (1954)
was instrumental in pioneering the notion of an individual’s “locus of control,” the belief of
individuals regarding the factors that shape their lives (H.M. Lefcourt 1982, J.B. Rotter 1966,
1954). An individual’s locus of control is conceptualized as being either internal or external or
some combination of these extremes. It is generally defined as a forward-looking assessment of
the determinants of future outcomes, but this is clearly related to past experiences and lessons
learned from these experiences. A peasant, for example, may view a successful harvest as purely
at the mercy of the weather or fate, or may view his own attention to his plot as primary in
determining the harvest.

         Building on Rotter, Bandura (1977) developed the concept of “self-efficacy,” a person’s
perception of his competence in achieving goals and objectives.1 Self-efficacy and the locus of
control are powerful explanatory mechanisms by which an individual explains cause and effect
around life’s happenings, forming one’s so-called “attributional style”. How we assign causality
to the events that happen around us is directed by our attributional style. One student, for
example might explain a bad grade as caused by an unkind teacher, while another may explain it
by a lack of study effort. Attributional style is fundamental to our perception and narrative that
we assign to our lives.

         Snyder expands on these ideas to conceptualize hope as consisting of three key elements:
three important components: goals, agency, and pathways. In this way and individual must
possess a goal, conceive of a pathway to that goal, and finally believe that he or she has the agency
to execute the chosen pathway toward the particular goal. Snyder’s version of aspirational hope




1Judge et al. (2002) argue that these two concepts along with the other two that compose the four dimensions of core self-
evaluations (neuroticism and self-esteem) measure the same, single factor.
                                                              3
thus differentiates itself strongly from a kind of “wishful hope” that is optimistic, but embodies
low agency and views positive change as originating from outside the locus of control.

3. Hope and Aspirations in Development Economics
The traditional approach of development economics has been an approach to poverty that has
almost exclusively focused on the relief of external constraints, where these constraints might
include credit, education, health, infrastructure and so forth. Yet it may be that internal
constraints, one’s locus of control, self-efficacy, and attribution style, are just as important to
economic development as external constraints. In development economics, this forms the basis
of an exciting new literature that tries to break new ground in the understanding of the causes
of poverty traps.

       Economic research related to hope and aspirations has its origin in the work of Appadurai
(2004). In this framework, aspiring to an improved standard of living first requires the “capacity
to aspire.” Appadurai (2004), an anthropologist, considers this capacity to be fundamentally
shaped by social forces in the sense that aspirations form as part of the ethos, possibilities and
norms of an individual’s reference community. While economists might capture some of this
capacity to aspire by adding parameters or constraints to utility functions, this fails to reflect the
richness of the idea that aspirations in the framework of Appadurai are jointly-determined and
shaped through time, suggesting direct social influences on individual preferences. Appadurai
argues that the target, intensity and composition of aspirations in any given community reflect
the dominant worldviews and ideologies about the nature of worldly possessions and their
relative value to social relations, as well as deeper ideas about the meaning of life, family,
community, and death. Appadurai’s work laid the basis for the development of economic models
that have sought to better understand the role that aspirations play in economic development
such as D. Ray (2006), F. Bogliacino and P. Ortoleva (2013), G. Genicot and D. Ray (2014), and
P.S. Dalton et al. (2016).

       Ray (2006) expands Appadurai’s conception of aspirations to introduce a several concepts
that help to structure both theoretical and empirical research on the topic: aspirations window,
the aspirations gap, and aspirations failure. One’s aspirations window is made up of one's
world, or perceptions of one’s world, of individuals similar to oneself. The set of persons in
one’s aspirations window establishes boundaries, or at least reference points, around future
possibilities. The aspirations window is made up of individuals who are perceived to possess


                                                  4
sufficiently similar capability and capacity, individuals likely sharing important traits which
might include skin color, gender, or religion. The degree of social mobility also strongly
influences one’s aspirations window. Ray’s concept of an aspirations gap is the difference
between the standard of living to which one aspires and one’s present circumstances. If the
aspirations gap is too narrow, it reduces the rewards to productive effort, yet if it is too
wide, it produces a sense that the aspiration is unattainable, leading to frustrated
aspirations. Aspirations failure occurs when an individual’s effort is stymied to some degree
by limited aspirations rather than structural constraints.          Thus in the presence of
aspirations     failure,   internal   constraints   may   become binding    relative   to external
constraints.
          Empirical analysis of the determinants and impact of aspirations has become one of the
liveliest research areas in applied development economics. We next review a selection from this
emerging literature. Our objective is not to provide a comprehensive survey of this work, but
rather to summarize a few of the studies that have become – or are likely to become – influential
in this area of inquiry.

          Interesting new evidence appears to show that role-modeling plays a significant role in
driving aspirations among the poor. Beaman et al. (2012), for example, use a natural experiment
in West Bengal to study the impact of role modeling and its effect on aspirations of young girls
and of their parents for the lives of their young girls. In their study area of West Bengal, one-
third of all elected chief councilors of villages, the “Pradhan,” must be reserved for females. The
researchers surveyed 8,453 adolescents aged 11-15 and their parents in 495 villages, where
questions included in the survey strongly focused on aspirations, and the closing of the
aspirations gap between boys and girls. Questions included asking if the parent would like 1) the
child to at least graduate from secondary school; 2) the child to marry at an age above 18; 3) the
child to have an occupation different than housewife or what the in-laws prefer; 4) whether the
desired occupation is a doctor, engineer, scientist, teacher or a legal career; and 5) the child to
become the Pradhan. The same aspirations-focus questions were asked to the children
themselves. The randomized nature of the village-district set aside policy allowed for an
estimation of causal effects from the existence of a female Pradhan to the aspirations of young
girls in that particular village district. What they find is that the existence of a female Pradhan
caused the gender gap in aspirations in these districts to close by 25% in parents’ aspirations
and 32% in adolescents’ aspirations in villages assigned to a female leader for two election
cycles.
                                                    5
They also find that the gender gap in adolescent educational attainment was erased and that girls
in villages with a female Pradhan spent less time on household chores.

       In another study in India, Jensen and Oster (2009) study the impact of cable television in
households and its effect on women’s aspirations. They use a three-year panel data set on
individuals, finding that exposure to cable television to cause increases school enrollment for
younger children, decreases in the adult acceptability of domestic violence toward women,
increases in women's autonomy. The introduction of cable TV is even associated with decreases
in adult women’s fertility. Jensen and Oster also find that differences in attitudes and behaviors
between urban and rural areas decreased between 45 and 70 percent within two years of the
introduction of cable TV.

      Glewwe, Ross, and Wydick (2015) carry out an experiment in Indonesia among 540
children living in the slums of Jakarta, about half of whom were internationally sponsored
through Compassion, one of the leading child sponsorship organizations worldwide. Children
sponsored through Compassion are provided with school tuition, school uniforms, nutritious
meals, healthcare and have access to a an afterschool tutoring program that focuses not only on
supplemental academic training, but on the development of spiritual formation, character growth,
and socio-emotional skills, especially in the area of self-esteem and aspirations. Direct questions
were surveyed with standard questions on self-esteem and aspirations. Children were given a
new box of 24 colored pencils and asked to “draw a picture of yourself in the rain.” The use of
children’s drawings has been well developed in the clinical psychology literature (see for example,
Koppitz, 1968; Thomas and Silk, 1990; and Furth, 2002). A detailed psychology literature has
shown that drawings often yield important information into the minds and feelings of children.
This literature empirically correlates children’s self-portraits that have missing facial features,
fingers, and feet for example, with extreme shyness and insecurity. Those drawn with a dark
color or single colors are indicative of depression, hopelessness and anxiety, tiny figures with
hopelessness and low self-esteem. Monster figures are correlated (not surprisingly) with
aggression.

      In this study, identification of causal impacts was carried out through exploiting an age-
eligibility rule, which dictated that only children nine years old and younger were eligible for
sponsorship when the program was rolled out into the local neighborhood. Factor analysis was
used to generate three factors identified as happiness, hopelessness, and self-efficacy based on
their correlations with survey questions and mainly with drawing characteristics. OLS (ordinary
                                                6
least squares) and IV (instrumental variable) estimations found that child sponsorship caused
children to be 0.24 (OLS) to 0.55 (IV) standard deviations higher in happiness, 0.13 (IV) to 0.33
(OLS) standard deviations higher in self-efficacy, and 0.40 (OLS) to 0.80 (IV) standard deviations
lower in hopelessness. Here we see evidence of substantial impacts from a program with an
intervention comprised not only of tangible economic interventions (that affect avenues and
agency), but of interventions intended to augment noncognitive skills, character, self-esteem,
grit, and aspirations.

       What is the impact of augmented aspirations? Wydick, Glewwe, and Rutledge (2013)
carry out a six-country on the long-term impact of Compassion’s sponsorship program through
a survey obtaining data on 10,144 adults, 1,860 of whom began sponsorship from 1980 to 1992.
A similar age-eligibility rule existed during this period (where a child had to be age 12 or younger
to be sponsored instead of 9 years old as in Indonesia) that facilitated identification of causal
effects from the program. Although it is difficult to separately identify the relative impacts of the
tangible interventions that are a part of sponsorship with the higher aspirations in childhood
created by the program, impacts of sponsorship in adulthood are found to be substantial.
Sponsorship resulted in an increase in schooling completion of 1.03-1.46 years, a 12-18
percentage point increase in secondary school completion (over a baseline rate of 44.5 percent),
and an increase in the probability of white collar employment in adulthood of 6.6 percentage
points over a baseline rate of 18.7 percent. Sponsored children were also more likely in adulthood
to be community and church leaders. In a separate paper studying economic impacts on income
and wealth and demographic impacts on marriage, childbearing, Wydick, Glewwe, and Rutledge
(forthcoming) find sponsorship resulting in an increase in monthly income of $13-19 over an
untreated baseline of $75, mainly from higher labor market participation, positive impacts on
adult dwelling quality in adulthood, and increased probability of mobile phone ownership. There
is also some evidence of modest effects on childbearing later in adulthood among those sponsored
earlier in the program’s history when baseline birthrates were higher.

       In research on a cash transfer program in Nicaragua, Macours and Vakis (2014) utilize a
two-stage randomized intervention that combined conditional transfers with other interventions
aimed at protecting the asset base of the rural poor in six municipalities in the northwest part of
the country. Both subjects and leaders among the 3000 subjects were randomly assigned to one
of three different group interventions within randomly selected treatment communities. The
three interventions consisted of a conditional cash transfer, the conditional cash transfer plus a

                                                 7
scholarship for occupational training, and a productivity treatment that combined a grant for
productive investments with the conditional cash transfer. Macours and Vakis find that the
higher the share of female leaders to a household’s proximity, the larger where the impacts of an
array of outcomes were on that particular household within the productivity intervention.
Leaders were not allocated equally equal among program assemblies during program rollout,
although an average of four leaders per assembly. Having one additional leader (given the
productive investment package) increased household income from nonagricultural activities by
about $US3.30, and the value of the animal stock by roughly $US12.00. Interestingly, like child
sponsorship the intervention Macours and Vakis study is one that not only may improve agency
(in this case through learning from group leaders) but also impact aspirations through the
inspiration and role-modeling effects of leaders, and an intervention that yields large impacts.

          In some cases it may be that the mere articulation of an aspiration is able to establish a
new reference point for enterprise activity that stimulates higher effort and economic outcomes.
Cassar et al. (2016) carry out an experiment in Colombia in which randomly selected
microfinance borrowers were assigned to combinations of treatments, the first of which included
setting an intermediate goal for their training or enterprise.2 Each of the goals was accompanied
by a strict verification procedure and rated in terms of difficulty. Other crosscut treatments
included being included in a goal-realization support group, and the receipt of a small prize from
the experimenter if a goal was realized. The combination of these treatments together comprises
the approach of the Family Independence Initiative (FII) pioneered by Maurice Lim Miller,
recipient of a MacArthur genius grant for the implementation of this model among low-income
households in Oakland, California. Subjects formed into groups representing combinations of the
above treatments were tracked over a six-month period. Results indicate that all of the
treatments, including the support group and the prize, had significant impacts on enterprise
outcomes, and that combined in the full FII package had large and significant impacts on
enterprise revenues. But perhaps most interestingly, the mere articulation of the goal, the
synthetic creation of aspirations, among subjects had by far the most significant impact on the
economic outcomes of subjects.



2Subjects could choose from a menu of attending a marketing workshop, creating a business plan, implementing accounting
practices, paying off an outstanding debt, purchasing a piece of businesss equipment, implementing a marketing strategy,
obtaining one of six different licenses to legalize the enterprise, attending a job fair, saving 15,000 Colombian pesos every week
(US$8.00), making a payment to improve your credit score, purchasing a durable good for your home, applying for an
education grant, attending an adult literacy course, or joining the health security system.
                                                                8
       In work that lays an important foundation for our own experimental results we present
here, Bernard, Dercon, Orkin, and Taffesse (2014) study aspirations through a field experiment
in Ethiopia. In this project, researchers contracted with film producers to create a four 15-minute
documentaries featuring families telling their personal narrative of escape from poverty. From a
total of 64 villages experimenters selected 18 households from each village, and each of these 18
households were allocated to one of three groups: a treatment group (that watched the
documentary), a placebo group (that watched standard Ethiopian TV entertainment), and a
control group that was only surveyed. Local social network data was obtained to study peer
effects of the intervention.

       Bernard et al. found after six months since the intervention at baseline, that the
documentary had a significant impact on an aspirations index with components consisting of
income, wealth, social status, and educational aspirations for children, both in direct effects and
from the number of friends who had attended the documentary. They also report positive impacts
on future-oriented behaviors six months after the screening, including changes in savings, time
spent in business relative to leisure, demand for microfinance, and investments in children’s
education. Bernard et al. find no direct impact on educational enrollments or expenditures on
children’s education, but do report evidence of school enrollment and expenditures based on
every additional friend in the village who viewed the documentary. There are some caveats to
the results of the study related to over-testing, Bernard et al. provide some early evidence that it
may be possible to increase aspirations through the kind of direct intervention we carry out
through our field research in Oaxaca, Mexico.

4. Oaxaca Hope Project: Theoretical Framework
As an initial exploration into the economics of hope, we conducted a randomized controlled trial
in collaboration with a microfinance lender in Oaxaca, Mexico. This experimental work was
structured within a modelling framework that we develop and present in greater detail in
Lybbert and Wydick (forthcoming). In this section, we review the basic components of the model
and describe our empirical strategy that is based on it.

       Our model is derived from the components of aspirational hope developed in Snyder
(1994): goals, agency, and pathways. We find that Snyder’s conception of hope lends itself nicely
to economic modeling, where some of the more basic ideas can be captured in a (non-traditional)
utility maximization subject to productivity parameters and constraints. A simple extension of

                                                 9
the model can account not just for actual agency (productivity) and constraints (closed pathways),
but the perception of agency (self-efficacy) and pathways.

       While goals form the central component of the Snyder framework, Lybbert and Wydick
(2016) broadens this notion through the development of an aspirations-based utility function.
Following Appadurai (2004), we assume that aspirations are exogenous and shaped by household
context, culture, and history. Aspirations may be in discrete space (a secondary school degree) or
form a reference point in continuous space (microenterprise sales of 1000 pesos).

       In Lybbert and Wydick (forthcoming) we propose that an aspirations-based utility function
should satisfy four properties: 1) Discontinuity at the aspiration, where marginal utility is higher
just below it than above it; 2) Convexity in the utility function below the aspiration and concavity
above it; 3) Gains in utility become increasingly a function of whether an aspiration is realized as
aspirations grow in importance; and 4) Utility is increasing in higher realized aspirations.

       These four properties are satisfied by the following, where 𝑢(𝑌|𝐴) is an aspirations-based
utility function over a continuous outcome 𝑌 and an aspiration 𝐴, 𝛼 ∈ [0,1] denotes the strength
of aspirations in utility, and where 1(∙) is the indicator function.
                                     1⁄
                               𝑌 (     1−)                   𝑌 (1−)
                   𝑢(𝑌|𝐴) = 𝐴 ( )             ∙ 1(𝑌 < 𝐴) + 𝐴 ( )      ∙ 1(𝑌 ≥ 𝐴)
                               𝐴                              𝐴
At intermediate values of , the function generates a parameterized version of the Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) value function where the aspiration A serves as a reference point. A handy
property of this function is that it can be seen as a generalization of a neoclassical utility function
that allows for aspirations: If the strength of aspirations is allowed to vary such that 1 reflects
                                                                                               1
the strength of aspirations below A and 2 above A, then in the case where 2 =                       , it
                                                                                              𝛼1 −1

simplifies to the standard concave neoclassical utility function. This allows for the potential
testing of utility against its deviation from the standard neo-classical form in cases where
structural estimation of the function is possible.

       In the most basic formulation of Lybbert and Wydick (forthcoming), agency is modeled
as productivity and the blockage of a pathway is modeled by an output constraint for a given
activity. Effort at time t is given as 𝑒𝑡 and, along with a random shock in the next period 𝜐𝑡+1,
produces the outcome 𝑌𝑡+1 at time t + 1, or 𝑌𝑡+1 = 𝜋𝑒𝑡 + 𝜋𝜐 𝜐𝑡+1 , where the coefficients 𝜋 and
𝜋𝜐 indicate the respective contributions of effort and the random shock to total production.

                                                  10
Pathways in the model are the absence of production constraints for a given outcome. Beyond an
outcome constraint, 𝑌̅, marginal product of effort becomes zero. While the possibility exists that
𝑌𝑡+1 > 𝑌̅, this cannot occur through individual agency, but only via high realizations of the
                                     𝜋𝑒𝑡 𝑖𝑓 𝑒𝑡 < 𝑒̅
random shock 𝜐 such that 𝐸[𝑌𝑡+1 ] = { ̅             , where 𝜋𝑒̅ = 𝑌̅ . The final component to the
                                      𝑌 𝑖𝑓 𝑒𝑡 ≥ 𝑒̅
model is a function which gives the cost of effort, 𝑐(𝑒𝑡 ), where effort is costly at an increasing
rate i.e. 𝑐 ′ (𝑒𝑡 ) > 0 , 𝑐 ′′ (𝑒𝑡 ) > 0 and 𝑐(0) = 0. The agent then solves the problem. Individuals
thus choose optimal effort to maximize 𝐸[𝑢𝑡+1 ] − 𝑐(𝑒𝑡 ).

       While an optimal aspiration A* can be derived as endogenous to the model, we do not
assume that individuals choose aspirations optimally. This is based on evidence that aspirations
in large measure are established exogenously by local context Appadurai (2004). However, we
do allow for the idea that aspirations can be altered exogenous through an intervention.

       An important extension to the model, which is key to the intervention in our experimental
work, allows not just for actual agency and pathways, but the individual’s perception of agency
(self-efficacy) and perception of pathway blockage (what Sen (1999) calls “internal constraints”).
These distinctions are important because traditional approaches in development economics have
focused on increasing productivity (e.g. schooling, vocational and business training) and relieving
real economic constraints (e.g. microcredit, land reclamation, construction of infrastructure), and
in the model these interventions could very well lead to greater levels of effort and economic
welfare. However, the model helps illustrate that interventions that increase self-efficacy and that
remove internal constraints may have equal or greater impact if it is the latter rather than the
former that are binding.

       Consider the impact of a conventional economic intervention in Figure 1. Here a
constraint is released (a pathway is opened) but where aspirations lie below these constraints.
Because aspirations represent the binding constraint (rather than the more obvious economic
constraint), effort, outcomes, expected utility, and net expected utility remain unchanged. In the
case where an intervention that relaxes an economic constraint is released when aspirations are
high, this may result in substantial impacts in the form of greater effort, higher outcomes, higher




                                                 11
expected utility, and higher net expected utility. But when aspirations (or self-efficacy) is low,
release of the economic constraint fails to affect these welfare measures.

         In Figure 2, however, we depict an intervention that increases self-efficacy and internal
constraints in the context of an intervention in which economic constraints have been released.
A primary example of this may be some forms of child sponsorship (Wydick et. al., 2013) in which
the intervention not only increases agency through an after-school tutoring programs (and
avenues through the provision of tuition, uniforms, and other materials so that children may
continue in school), but intentionally devotes resources to increasing aspirations about
educational and vocational outcomes. Some practitioners refer to this kind of multi-faceted
intervention as “integral (or integrated) development,” programs designed to exploit
complementarities between economic, psychological, spiritual, and social interventions.3 Our
hope intervention in Oaxaca takes just such an approach in the context of a group of women who
have had economic constraints ostensibly released via access to microfinance loans, but at least
anecdotally have realized only very small impacts from microcredit.

5. Short-Term Effects in the Oaxaca Hope Project
Here we present one-month follow-up results from experimental work in Oaxaca, Mexico that is
carried out within the theoretical framework of this paper. A presentation of the longer-term
impacts of the intervention will be forthcoming in subsequent work. Our experiment was
implemented with our field partner, Fuentes Libres, a non-profit a faith-based organization
affiliated with the Evangelical Covenant Church that is engaged in a number of activities to
promote justice and economic opportunity for impoverished women of all faith backgrounds in
the state of Oaxaca Mexico.
         Part the work of Fuentes Libres involves the operation of 52 community banks in the state
of Oaxaca. About 60 percent of these community banks are located near the Mexican Isthmus
that separates the Caribbean from the Pacific Ocean in the southern part of the country with the
remaining 40% located in and around the peri-urban regions of the state capital of Oaxaca City.
All of the roughly 600 community bank members are female. Meetings in the community banks
occur weekly, where women pay off current loans and make savings deposits. A minimum savings




3The United Nations Development Programme, the Organization of American States, Save the Children, World Vision,
Compassion International are several of many development organizations that espouse an integrated development approach.
                                                           12
contribution of 20 pesos per week is required of each community bank member. The size of the
52 community banks range from about six to thirty members, the median size being 13 members.
         We carried out a stratified cluster randomization using pairwise matching. Groups were
matched into pairs by a hierarchical process based on focus group interviews with loan officers
to rank factors in order of the importance to community bank performance. To form matched
pairs, community banks were first clustered by loan officer, then among those with the same loan
officer, banks were matched by size. When there were more than two banks of nearly identical
size, community banks were then matched by number of loan cycles, then if close similarities
continued to exist, respectively by age of members, and then by similarity of microenterprises
within the group until 26 matching pairs consisting of A and B groups were formed. A single
coin was then flipped to determine whether the 26 A-banks or 26 B-banks would be selected into
treatment status, the other chosen for control. In total, 601 community bank members took part
in the experiment, 326 in the 26 treatment banks and 275 in the 26 control banks. Table 1 shows
that treatment and control were well-balanced over 24 variables at baseline.

         The baseline survey obtained data on basic control variables such as age, marital status,
and education. It also contains sets of five questions each on aspirations, agency, and
conceptualization of avenues out of poverty.4 These questions were designed to create indices
capturing changes in Snyder’s three components of hope. The survey also contained questions
obtaining subjective measures of well-being and happiness, optimism, future orientation, risk-
aversion, and spiritual questions oriented toward ascertaining an individual’s perception of locus
of control. Subjects also filled out a 3x3 matrix of hypothetical levels of sales based on interactions
of three levels of work effort (high, medium, low) and three levels of “luck” (good, normal, and
bad). Variation in sales across levels of effort relative to the total variation in the matrix yields a




4 Questions to gauge aspirations included “It is better learn to accept the reality of things than to dream for a
better future.” “It is better to have aspirations for your family than to accept each day as it comes.” “I am satisfied
with the current sales and profits from my business.” “It is wiser to establish business goals than to address
situations as they arrive.” “I have specific goals and plans for the future growth of my business.” Questions
regarding agency included a) On a scale of 0 to 10 how important is hard work/being lucky to prospering in
business? hard work_____ being lucky______ “My future is shaped mainly by my own actions rather by than the
actions of others.” “I often have difficulty leading and influencing my friends and neighbors.” “Women like me can
help bring about positive change in our community.” Questions addressing pathways out of poverty included “I
can find a way to solve most problems.” “If my business sales are low, I know how to explore new markets.” “I
become discouraged easily when I encounter obstacles in my business.” “If my current business fails, I could start a
new business selling a different product.” “I understand the different ways to succeed in business.”


                                                          13
measure of self-efficacy or agency from an ANOVA-type calculation on the ratio of the variation
in sales due to changes in effort over the total variation in sales within the matrix.

Treatment
       There are three aspects to the hope intervention carried out among the community banks
selected for treatment. First, a film crew from Sacramento State University produced a
documentary on the four of the women who were deemed by the directors and loan officers to
have been among the most successful in using their microloans to expand their enterprises. The
35-minute documentary was filmed in Oaxaca and produced and edited in Sacramento, California
under the direction of film studies professor and documentary producer Robert Machoian. The
documentary film was screened to treatment banks immediately after the baseline survey was
carried out in these locations. Initial impressions were that the women took pleasure in seeing
the film, and focus groups carried out after the film indicated that women found the film to be
highly inspiring to them.
       After viewing the documentary, the borrowers in the 26 treatment groups received a
3x8-inch refrigerator magnet, articulating Snyder’s three components of hope which were
translated as Aspiraciones, Habilidades, and Avenidas in Spanish. Congruent with the faith-based
nature of the NGO, an inspirational scripture verse was given under each of these three words
(see Figure 3). At the bottom of the refrigerator magnet there were three spaces for women to
write in personal goals for weekly sales in their enterprise, weekly savings in the community
bank, and a long-term goal. Common goals were leasing a stall in a market, sending a son or
daughter to high school or college, or adding a room to the house.
       The third aspect of the intervention was a 4-week “hope curriculum,” in which each of the
components of hope were discussed for approximately half an hour during the weekly community
bank meeting and a fourth week consisted of the discussion of several case studies. In these case
studies women had to learn how to apply the different components of hope to practical
microenterprise problems. The curriculum, however, was designed as much as possible to be
scrubbed of any traditional type of business or financial training. Only the “soft-skills” of
developing goals and aspirations, enhancing self-efficacy, and the practice of visualizing
pathways from poverty were emphasized in the curriculum.
       Five weeks after the baseline survey and the completion of the hope curriculum, a follow-
up survey was undertaken that was virtually identical to the baseline survey. We present
ANCOVA regressions that estimate impact at one-month (more specifically five weeks) after the

                                                 14
intervention is estimate impacts on psychological and business variables. We estimate
intervention impacts using ANCOVA due to its greater efficiency than difference indifferences
using experimental data with baseline and follow-up surveys (McKensie, 2012). Our
specification is
                               𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝜏𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑗 + 𝑦𝑖𝑗𝑡−1 + 𝑿𝒊 ′ 𝜷+𝜀𝑖𝑡 ,
where 𝑿𝒊 ′ 𝜷 are a vector of variables that include controls for age, education, religion, number
of children, children under 18, bank leader, dwelling index, loan officer, type of business, and
missing baseline data. ANCOVA estimates also control for the baseline value of the impact
variable. The coefficient 𝜏 measures impact. The results we present are for only the first (one-
month) follow-up survey.

Results
We created indices of our variables based on Kling et al. (2007) in which the dependent variables
are de-meaned and standardized to give them equal weighting in an index that is also then
standardized to give it mean zero and unit variance to provide a more comparable interpretation
for impacts.
          Our first results show impacts on psychological variables and are given in Table 2 and
Figure 4. Our intervention clearly strongly impacted aspirations, and our aspirations index
increased by 0.24, significant at the 0.01% level. Point estimates point to increases in agency
and pathways but these are much smaller (0.054 and 0.036) and not statistically significant,
roughly half the size of their standard error. Columns 1 and 2 in Table 2 show point estimates
indicating that happiness and optimism increased approximately 0.10 under treatment, but the
95% confidence intervals of these estimates contain zero. Future orientation increases among the
treated by 0.13, significant at the 10% level. Smaller point estimate increases are seen in risk-
aversion reduction (0.03) and our ANOVA-based measure of agency actually shows a slight
reduction (-0.005).
          Nevertheless our Hope-7 Index (which includes all seven of our variables potentially
related to hope: aspirations, agency, avenues, happiness, optimism, future orientation, risk
aversion reduction) increases significantly (at the 5% level) by 0.17 and our Hope-3 index
(which contains only Snyder’s three components, aspirations, agency, and pathways) increases
by 15. The increase in the overall hope indices, however is due to two factors: first, that nearly
every hope-related factor displayed positive point estimates, and secondly that the impact on
                                                15
aspirations was substantial. Indeed the overall impact on hope was driven largely by increases
in aspirations. It seems that, at least in the short-term, it is easier to raise aspirations than it is
to increase self-efficacy or conceptualization of pathways out of poverty.
       Impacts on small enterprise outcomes of the women in our study are shown in Table 3
and Figure 8. We expected the number of hours per week that a women dedicated to her
business to increase with increased aspirations, however our point estimates indicate a
negative impact here, although statistically insignificant. Our ANOVA point estimates find
positive impacts on log sales (increase of 17.7%), log profits (increase of 19.1%), and log
community bank savings (increase of 14.2%) although the 95% confidence interval for all of
these includes zero. As we suspected after only a little more than a month after treatment, we
find no increase in employees, or even plans for new employees. A standardized business
performance index increases by 0.095σ, but is statistically insignificant.
       In summary, we find some evidence that after one month our intervention
increased aspirations and future orientation among women in treated community banks who
received the hope intervention, but less evidence that other important psychological variables,
such as agency, were impacted by the treatment. We find modest evidence for positive
impacts on business performance, where point estimates are quite large, but cannot reject the
null hypothesis of no impact at this early stage of follow-up.
       Our hope intervention continued for 12 months during which subjects in treatment
continued to engage in goal-setting exercises, self-esteem development, and exercises in
conceptualizing pathways out of poverty via their microenterprises. In future work we will
report one-year impacts from this longer-term intervention.

6. Reflections on Hope and Poverty Dynamics
Hopelessness can create a vicious cycle in which pessimistic beliefs can create a self-fulfilling
prophecy leading to prolonged episodes of poverty. Indeed in this volume, Haushofer and
de Quidt (2016) present a model in which depression induced by a negative shock makes an
individual so pessimistic regarding returns to any effort that effort is reduced to zero, creating a
poverty trap dynamic. Hope is directly related to escape from this kind of trap in that hope
creates optimism about the returns to effort. But while hope embodies optimism, aspirational
hope as defined in modern positive psychology is different from optimism. Aspirational hope is
a much richer concept that embodies not only optimism about the returns to effort (agency/self-
efficacy), but is characterized first by a clear direction in which an individual wants to progress
(goals/aspirations), and by a means of realizing these aspirations (conceptualization of
pathways).
                                                  16
       Is it possible to break poverty traps through interventions aimed at increasing these
three components of hope? We believe this may be possible, but there are a number of caveats
that must be taken into consideration. Relieving internal constraints should rarely be
viewed as a substitute for relieving external constraints. In most instances they are likely to
be strong complements, but in other instances it may be that external constraints are binding
and that interventions targeting internal constraints will have little impact at all. In other
instances practitioners will have implemented an intervention to relieve external constraints
with little effect, and in these circumstances it may be that interventions in the area of internal
constraints are necessary to overcome long periods of pessimism and “learned helplessness”
that have developed over protracted periods of poverty and deprivation. This is the situation, at
least anecdotally described to us by practitioners, that has existed among many indigenous
women in Oaxaca, who have enjoyed access to resources such as microcredit for many years,
but have realized very little real gain from these interventions.
       As such, the ability to diagnose different varieties of poverty traps in practice is a critical
but highly underutilized skill among both development economists and practitioners. Learning
to differentiate between poverty traps in which psychological factors or strictly economic
factors constitute the binding constraint is fertile new ground for development
economists and practitioners alike and should form an important component to our collective
research agenda.




                                                 17
References
Aker, J.C. 2010. Information from Markets Near and Far: Mobile Phones and Agricultural
        Markets in Niger. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 46-59(14).
Aker, J.C., Ksoll, C. and T. Lybbert. 2012. Can Mobile Phones Improve Learning? Evidence
        from a Field Experiment in Niger. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
        4(4): 94-120.
Appadurai A. 2004. The Capacity to Aspire: Culture and the Terms of Recognition. Culture and
      Public Action. 59-84.

Averill J.R., Catlin G., Chon K.K. Rules of Hope. 1990. Springer, Verlag: New York.

Bandura A. 1977. Self-Efficacy: Toward a Unifying Theory of Behavioral Change. Psychological
      Review, 84; 191.

Banerjee A., Duflo E. 2011. Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global
       Poverty. Public Affairs. New York, NY.

Banerjee A., Duflo E., C. Raghabendra, and J. Shapiro. 2011. Targeting the Hard-Core Poor: An
       Impact Assessment. Jameel Poverty Action Lab Working Paper.

Banerjee, A., D. Karlan and J. Zinman. 2015. Six Randomized Evaluations of Microcredit:
       Introduction and Further Steps. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1) 1-21.
Banerjee, A. and S. Mullainathan. 2010. The Shape of Temptation: Implications for the
       Economic Lives of the Poor. NBER Working Paper No. 15973.
Basu, K. 2011. Hyperbolic Discounting and the Sustainability of Rotational Savings
      Arrangements. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(4) 143-171.

Beaman, E. E Duflo, R Pande, P Topolova. 2012. Female Leadership Raises Aspirations and
      Educational Attainment for Girls: A Policy Experiment in India. Science, 335 (6068): 582-
      586

Bernard, T., S Dercon, K Orkin, and AS Taffesse. 2013. Learning with Others: A Field
      Experiment on the Formation of Aspirations in Rural Ethiopia. Working Paper, Oxford
      University.

Bertrand, M., S. Mullainathan and E. Shafir. 2004. A Behavioral Economics View of Poverty.
       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 94(2) 419-423

Bloch E. 1986. The Principle of Hope. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Bogliacino F., Ortoleva P. 2013. The Behavior of Others as a Reference Point. Research Paper,
       Columbia Business School.

Cantril H. 1964. The Human Design. Journal of Individual Psychology. 20; 129-136.


                                              18
Cardenas, J.C. and Carpenter, J. 2008. Behavioural Development Economics: Lessons from
      Field Labs in the Developing World. Journal of Development Studies. 44(3) 311-38.
Cassar, A., Aguinaga, P., Graham, J., Skora, L., and B. Wydick. 2016. Goals, Incentives and
       Support Groups to Improve Economic Conditions: A Field Experiment in Medellin,
       Colombia. University of San Francisco Working Paper.
Giacomo C., and O. Jeanne. 2001. Status, the Distribution of Wealth, and Growth, Scandinavian
      Journal of Economics,103(2): 283–293.
Curry L.A., Snyder C., Cook D.L., Ruby B.C., Rehm M. 1997. The Role of Hope in Academic and
       Sport Achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 73; 1257.

Dalton P.S., Ghosal S., Mani A. (forthcoming) Poverty and Aspirations Failure. Economic Journal.

de Mel, S., McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff. 2008. Returns to Capital in Microenterprises:
      Evidence from a Field Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 123(4) 1329-1372

Del Vecchio Good M.J., Good B.J., Schaffer C., Lind S.E. 1990. American Oncology and the
      Discourse on Hope. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 14; 59-79.

Diamond, P.A. 1982. Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium. Journal of Political
      Economy, 90(5): 881-894

Duflo E. 2012. Hope as Capability. Tanner Lecture.

Duflo, E., Dupas, P., and M. Kremer. 2014. Education, HIV, and Early Fertility: Experimental
       Evidence from Kenya. NBER Working Paper No. 20784.
Dupas, P. and J. Robinson. 2011. Why Don't the Poor Save More? Evidence from Health
       Savings Experiments. NBER Working Paper No. 17255
Eliott J.A. 2005. What Have We Done with Hope? A Brief History. In Interdisciplinary Perspectives
        on Hope. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers, pp. 3-45.
Fafchamps, M. and B. Minten. 2012. Impact of SMS-Based Agricultural Information on Indian
      Farmers, World Bank Economic Review, 26(3): 383-414.

Frankl V.E. 1985. Man's Search for Meaning. Simon and Schuster.

Froh J.J. 2004. The History of Positive Psychology: Truth Be Told. NYS Psychologist. 16: 18-20.
Furth, Gregg M. 2002. The Secret World of Drawings: A Jungian Approach to Healing through Art.
       Toronto: Inner City Books.
Gallagher, M.W. and S.J. Lopez. 2009. Positive Expectancies and Mental Health: Identifying the
      Unique Contributions of Hope and Optimism. Journal of Positive Psychology, 4: 548-56.

Genicot G, and D. Ray. 2014. Aspirations and Inequality. National Bureau of Economic Research
      working paper.


                                               19
Glewwe, P., Ross, P. and B. Wydick. 2015. Developing Hope: The Impact of Child Sponsorship
     on Aspirations and Self-Esteem. Working Paper, University of Minnesota.

Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., and S. Moulin. 2009. Many Children Left Behind? Textbooks and
     Test Scores in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 112-135.

Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., and Moulin, S., and E. Zitzewitz. 2004. “Retrospective vs. Prospective
     Analyses of School Inputs: The Case of Flip Charts in Kenya,” Journal of Development
     Economics, 74: 251-268

Gottschalk, L.A. 1974. A Hope Scale Applicable to Verbal Samples. Archives of General Psychiatry,
      30; 779-785.

Groopman J. 2005. The Anatomy of Hope: How People Prevail in the Face of Illness. Random House
      LLC.
Haushofer, J. and de J. Quidt. 2016. Depression for Economists. NBER Working Paper.

Haushofer, J., and J. Shapiro. 2014. Impacts of Unconditional Cash Transfers. MIT Working
      Paper.

Heath C., Larrick R.P. and G. Wu. 1999. Goals as Reference Points. Cognitive Psychology, 38; 79-
      109.

Heckman J. J. and T. Kautz. 2012. Hard Evidence on Soft Skills. Labour Economics. 19; 451-464.

Heckman J.J., Pinto R., Savelyev P.A. 2012. Understanding the Mechanisms Through Which an
     Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes. National Bureau of
     Economic Research.

Heckman J.J., Stixrud J., and S. Urzua. 2006. The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive Abilities
     on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior. National Bureau of Economic Research
     working paper.

Herth K. 1988. The Relationship between Level of Hope and Level of Coping Response and Other
       Variables in Patients with Cancer. Oncology Nursing Forum, 16: 67-72.

Irving LM, Snyder C, Crowson Jr JJ. 1998. Hope and Coping with Cancer by College Women.
       Journal of Personality 66; 195-214.
Jäntti, M. Kanbur, R. Nyyssölä, M., and J Pirttilä. 2014. Poverty and Welfare Measurement on
        the Basis of Prospect Theory. Review of Income and Wealth, 60(1)182–205.
Jensen, R. The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling. 2010. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics. 125 (2): 515-548.

Judge TA, Erez A, Bono JE, Thoresen CJ. 2002. Are Measures of Self-Esteem, Neuroticism,
      Locus of Control, and Generalized Self-Efficacy Indicators of a Common Core Construct?
      Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83; 693.

                                               20
Kahneman D, Tversky A. Prospect Theory: 1979. An Analysis of Decision under Risk.
      Econometrica; 263-291.

Kant I., Guyer P., Wood A.W. 1998. Critique of Pure Reason. Cambridge University Press.
Karlan, D., Ratan, A. L. and J. Zinman. 2014. Savings by and for the Poor: A Research Review
       and Agenda. Review of Income and Wealth, 60(1)36-78.
Kling, J., J. Liebman, and L. Katz, “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects,” Econometrica
       75 (2007), 83-119.

Koppitz, E.M. 1968. Psychological Evaluation of Children’s Human Figure Drawings. New York:
       Grune and Stratton.
Kremer, M, Miguel, E., 2007. The Illusion of Sustainability. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
      122 (3): 1007–1065.
Lefcourt H.M. 1976. Locus of control and the response to aversive events. Canadian
       Psychological Review/Psychologie Canadienne, 17(3): 202-209.
Lefcourt H.M. 1982. Locus of Control: Current Trends in Theory and Research. Psychology Press.

Locke E.A., Latham G.P. 1990. A Theory of Goal Setting & Task Performance. Prentice-Hall.

Locke E.A., Latham G.P. 2002. Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal Setting and Task
      Motivation: A 35-Year Odyssey. American Psychologist, 57: 705.

Luther M. 1848. The Table Talk or Familiar Discourse of Martin Luther. (D. Bogue).

Lybbert, T. and B. Wydick. Poverty, Aspirations, and the Economics of Hope. (Forthcoming)
      Economic Development and Cultural Change.

Maier S.F., Seligman M.E. 1976. Learned Helplessness: Theory and Evidence. Journal of
      Experimental Psychology: General, 105(3).
Marcel, G. and H. Viato. 1951. Introduction to a Metaphysics of Hope. Harper & Row: New York.
Mani, A. Mullainathan, S. Shafir, E and J Zhao. 2013. Poverty Impedes Cognitive Function.
       Science, 341 (6149): 976-980
McKensie, D. and C. Woodruff. 2013. What Are We Learning from Business Training and
     Entrepreneurship Evaluations around the Developing World? World Bank Research
     Observer. July. doi: 10.1093/wbro/lkt007

Menninger K. 1959. The Academic Lecture Hope. American Journal of Psychiatry,116: 481-491.

Meredith, J. Robinson, J. Walker, S., and B. Wydick. 2013. Keeping the Doctor Away;
      Experimental Evidence on Investment in Preventative Health Products. Journal of
      Development Economics, 105: 196-210.



                                               21
Miceli M. and C. Castelfranchi. 2010. Hope the Power of Wish and Possibility. Theory &
       Psychology, 20: 251-276.

Moltmann J. 1968. Hoping and Planning: Future Anticipated through Hope and Planned Future.
     Cross Currents, 18; 307-318.
Mullainathan, S. 2005. Development Economics Through the Lens of Psychology. Annual
       World Bank Conference on Development Economics. World Bank.

Murphy, K., Shleifer, A. and R.Vishny. 1988. Industrialization and the Big Push. NBER
     Working Paper No. 2708.
Ong, A. L Edwards, and C.S. Bergeman. 2006. Hope as a Source of Resilience in Later Adulthood.
       Personality and Individual Differences, 41(7): 1263

Ray D. 2006. Aspirations, Poverty, and Economic Change. In Understanding Poverty. Oxford:
      Oxford University Press. 409-421.

Reardon B.M.G. 1966. Religious Thought in the Nineteenth Century, Cambridge University Pres
      Archive.

Rotter J.B. 1954. Social Learning and Clinical Psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, US: Prentice-Hall.

Rotter J.B. 1966. Generalized Expectancies for Internal Versus External Control of
      Reinforcement. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 80 (1) 1-28.

Seligman M.E. 1972. Learned Helplessness. Annual Review of Medicine, 23 407-412.

Seligman M.E., Csikszentmihalyi M. 2000. Positive Psychology: An Introduction. American
      Psychologist, 55(1) 5-14

Sen A. 1992. Inequality Reexamined. Oxford University Press.

Sen A. 1992. Development as Freedom. Oxford University Press.

Snyder C. 1989. Reality Negotiation: From Excuses to Hope and Beyond. Journal of Social and
      Clinical Psychology, 8; 130-157.

Snyder C, LaPointe A.B., Jeffrey Crowson J., and S. Early. 1998. Preferences of High-and Low-
      Hope People for Self-Referential Input. Cognition and Emotion 12: 807-823.

Snyder C.R. 2002. Hope Theory: Rainbows in the Mind. Psychological Inquiry 13: 249-275.

Snyder C.R., Harris C., Anderson J.R., Holleran S.A., Irving L.M., Sigmon S.T., Yoshinobu L.,
      Gibb J., Langelle C., and P. Harney. 1991. The Will and the Ways: Development and
      Validation of an Individual-Differences Measure of Hope. Journal of Personality and Social
      Psychology, 60: 570-78.



                                                22
Snyder C.R, Shorey H.S., Cheavens J., Pulvers K.M., Adams III V.H., Wiklund C. 2002. Hope and
       Academic Success in College. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94: 820.

Stark O. 2006. Status Aspirations, Wealth Inequality, and Economic Growth. Review of
      Development Economics 10: 171-176.

Stotland E. 1969. The Psychology of Hope. Jossey-Bass: San Francisco, CA.

Tillich P. 1965. The Right to Hope. Harvard Divinity School.
Timmer, C.P. Behavioral Dimensions of Food Security. 2012. Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences, 109 (31) 12315–12320.
Thomas, G. and M.J. Silk. 1990. An Introduction to the Psychology of Children's Drawings. New York:
     New York University Press.
Trouton, D. 1957. Placebos and their Psychological Effects. Journal of Mental Science. 103: 344-
      354.

Vivalt, E. 2014. How Much Can We Generalize from Impact Evaluations? New York University
        Working Paper.

Wydick B, Glewwe P, and L. Rutledge. Forthcoming. Does Child Sponsorship Pay Off in
      Adulthood? An International Study of Impacts on Income and Wealth. Forthcoming,
      World Bank Economic Review.

Wydick B., Glewwe P., and L. Rutledge. 2013. Does Child Sponsorship Work? A Six-Country
      Study of Impacts on Adult Life Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy, 121(2): 393-426.
Yoshikawa, H. Lawrence, A. J. and W.R. Beardslee. 2012. The Effects of Poverty on the
      Mental, Emotional, and Behavioral Health of Children and Youth: Implications for
      Prevention. American Psychologist, 67(4): 272-284.




                                                23
Figure 1: A new pathway opens, such as releasing a credit constraint, but this fails to
have substantial impacts due to low aspirations.




                                        24
Figure 2: Graphical depiction of the economic model of hope with optimal
effort (e*) with “pathways” constraint binding below aspiration and
optimal expected utility net of cost of effort depicted by E[u]-c. Increased
perception of self-efficacy drives the individual from a low-effort trap to a
higher effort and higher utility.




                                        25
Figure 3




   26
Figure 4




   27
Figure 5




   28
                                           Table 1: Means and Balancing Tests
                      (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)         (7)          (8)
VARIABLES             Age      Education      Religion    Number       Number           Bank      Clothing       Food
                                                          Children    children<1       leader     business      business
                                                                           8

Hope group          2.670*        0.547        -0.068       0.099       -0.282**       -0.024        0.022       0.073*
                    (1.350)      (0.601)       (0.062)     (0.218)       (0.130)       (0.028)      (0.037)      (0.042)
Baseline Control      41.0         7.31          0.27        2.91         1.34           0.28         0.13         0.30
Group Mean
                     (9)          (10)          (11)       (12)          (13)          (14)          (15)         (16)
VARIABLES          Grocery       Hope3         Hope7     Happiness     Optimism      Aspiratio     Agency       Avenues
                   business      Index         Index      Index         Index        ns Index       Index        Index

Hope group          -0.013        0.068         0.025      -0.022        -0.070        -0.047       -0.002        0.089
                    (0.024)      (0.131)       (0.125)     (0.160)       (0.169)       (0.118)      (0.130)      (0.134)
Baseline Control     0.064        -0.34        -0.054        8.68         8.62         -0.010        0.041       -0.112
Group Mean
                     (17)         (18)          (19)        (20)         (21)           (22)        (23)     (24)
VARIABLES           Future      Spiritual     Business    Weekly        Weekly        Weekly      Employee Plans for
                    Orient.       Obv.         Hours       Sales        Profits       Savings         s    Employee
                                 Index                                                                         s

Hope group          -0.044        0.005        -0.181      85.478        100.423       17.279       -0.001       -0.056
                    (0.123)      (0.109)       (3.319)    (317.135)     (121.387)     (11.041)      (0.039)      (0.060)
Baseline Control    -0.004       -0.062          35.3      2,274.1        827.2         46.5         0.106        0.543
Group Mean
Regression of variable on treatment only. Clustered standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *p < 0.10




                                                           29
                            Table 2: ANCOVA Estimations: Psychology
                                 (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)
VARIABLES                     Happiness       Optimism        Aspirations        Agency       Pathways

Hope group                       0.099           0.098          0.244***          0.054          0.036
                                (0.094)         (0.077)          (0.077)         (0.073)        (0.084)
Observations                      555             555              555             555            555
R-squared                        0.096           0.118            0.206           0.191          0.237

                                 (6)             (7)              (8)              (9)           (10)
VARIABLES                      Future       Risk Aversion       ANOVA            Hope3          Hope7
                             Orientation     Reduction          Agency           Index          Index

Hope group                       0.125*          0.031           -0.005            0.149*        0.174**
                                 (0.073)        (0.092)         (0.021)           (0.074)        (0.085)
Observations                       555            592             548                555           555
R-squared                         0.148          0.173           0.073              0.298         0.291
ANCOVA egressions include controls for baseline value of impact variable, age, education, religion,
number of children, children under 18, bank leader, dwelling index, loan officer, type of business, and
missing baseline data. Clustered standard errors at community group level in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                   30
                       Table 3: ANCOVA Estimations: Business Outcomes
                            (1)            (2)                (3)                      (4)
VARIABLES             Business hours  Log Weekly         Log Weekly                Log Weekly
                                         Sales             Profits                   Savings

Hope group                -1.104              0.177               0.191                0.142
                          (1.800)            (0.150)             (0.134)              (0.091)
Observations                550                551                 549                  544
R-squared                  0.352              0.280               0.271                0.167

                           (5)                (6)                  (7)                 (8)
VARIABLES               Employees          Plans for         Bus. Perform.        Anderson BP
                                          Employees?             Index               Index

Hope group                 -0.006              -0.005               0.095                  0.085
                           (0.025)            (0.041)              (0.091)                (0.088)
Observations                 550                 549                 555                    555
R-squared                   0.354               0.242               0.336                  0.335
ANCOVA egressions include controls for baseline value of impact variable, age, education, religion, number of
children, children under 18, bank leader, dwelling index, loan officer, type of business, and missing baseline
data. Clustered standard errors at community group level in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                 31
