                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PAY NOW OR PAY LATER?:
            THE ECONOMICS WITHIN THE PRIVATE EQUITY PARTNERSHIP

                                          Victoria Ivashina
                                            Josh Lerner

                                        Working Paper 22660
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22660


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2016




We thank participants in the CalTech/USC Private Equity Finance Conference, the London
Business School Private Equity Symposium, Ashwini Agrawal (discussant), Yael Hochberg
(discussant), Anna Kovner, Edward Lazear, Ludovic Phalippou and a number of seminar
participants at various schools and practitioners for helpful comments. Grace Kim, Andrew
Green, Lucy Zhang, Yulin Hswen, and Kaveh Motamedy provided remarkable assistance with
the analysis. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research and the Private Capital Research
Institute provided support for this project. One of the authors has advised institutional investors in
private equity funds, private equity groups, and governments designing policies relevant to
private equity. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Victoria Ivashina and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Pay Now or Pay Later?: The Economics within the Private Equity Partnership
Victoria Ivashina and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 22660
September 2016
JEL No. G24,J33,L26

                                          ABSTRACT

The economics of partnerships have been of enduring interest to economists, but many issues
regarding intergenerational conflicts and their impact on the continuity of these organizations
remain unclear. We examine 717 private equity partnerships, and show that (a) the allocation of
fund economics to individual partners is divorced from past success as an investor, being instead
critically driven by status as a founder, (b) the underprovision of carried interest and ownership—
and inequality in fund economics more generally—leads to the departures of senior partners, and
(c) the departures of senior partners have negative effects on the ability of funds to raise
additional capital.


Victoria Ivashina
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 233
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu

Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
                                        I.      Introduction

    Partnerships were the dominant organizational form of businesses for several millennia and,

even today, remain critical to the way in which the professional service and investment sectors

are run. Several theories have been offered about the prevalence and persistence of this

ownership form. The classic formulation of Alchian and Demsetz (1972) suggests that in settings

where employees are difficult to monitor, a partnership structure may provide optimal incentives

for hard work. 1 Alternatively, Morrison and Wilhelm (2004, 2008) suggest that it may serve as a

commitment device, ensuring that the senior partners properly monitor and train successors, at

least until the need for physical investment in an industry becomes too great. In yet another

variation, Levin and Tadelis (2005) argue that partnerships with equal sharing rules can actually

overcome their clients’ concerns about the lack of the observability of partner effort: because of

the sharing rule, partners have a powerful incentive to closely monitor partners and ensure that

they are productive.

    At the same time, the partnership structure raises issues. Dividing profits according to some

set formula may lead to moral hazard problems, where partners’ awareness that they are only

capturing a portion of the profits that they are generating reduces their motivation to work hard

(Alchian and Demsetz, 1972; Holmstrom, 1982). This hypothesis has been empirically supported

in a variety of settings, from Gaynor and Gertler’s (1995) study of medical practices to

Abramitzky’s (2008) analysis of Israeli kibbutzim. Several mechanisms had been shown to be

effective, however, in alleviating this free-riding problem, including the peer pressure posited by



1
   Literature on executive compensation has also emphasized the benefits of the partnership
structure, such as the ability to screen for optimistic employees and increased retention (e.g.,
Oyer and Schaefer, 2005).
Kandel and Lazear (1992) and the relational contracts studied in the partnership setting by Rayo

(2007).

    While the cross-sectional moral hazard issues in partnerships are well understood, the

intergenerational problems that can emerge in these settings have been less well appreciated.

Because of the opaqueness of partnerships and the difficulty of determining individual

contributions—the very reasons that the literature suggests partnerships exist in the first place—

the founders and senior members of partnerships may not appropriately reward younger

contributors. Were the younger partners to leave to begin their own organization, they may find

it difficult to establish a comparable reputation and status. As a result, the founders may

command a disproportionate share of the economics generated by the partnership, even to the

point that the other partners provide less-than-optimal effort (for discussions in the labor

literature, see Card, et al., 2012, Charness and Kuhn, 2007, and Cullen and Pakzad-Hursony,

2016). 2

    In this paper, we analyze these issues in the context of private equity funds. In particular, we

examine approximately 700 partnerships analyzed in the course of the due diligence process by a

major institutional investor. In each case, we have detailed data on how the economics of the

fund—in particular, the carried interest (the profit share) and ownership of the management

company—is split between the individual partners. We link this information to that on the past

performance of individual partners’ investments, the characteristics of the current, subsequent,

and prior funds raised by the group, and the backgrounds and career paths of the individual

partners.


2It should be noted that the workers in the listed studies have substantially lower levels of
compensation and autonomy than those examined here.


                                                                                                  2
    Three clear patterns emerge from our analysis. First, the allocation of fund economics is

typically weighted toward the founders of the firms. Individual investors’ past performance

seems to have little influence on economic allocation, even among the most senior group of

partners. Second, the distributions of carried interest and ownership appear to substantially affect

the stability of the partnership. Individual senior partners with a smaller economic share are more

likely to leave the partnership, even after controlling for their past performance. Partnerships

with a more unequal distribution of economics are less stable. Third, partners’ departures have a

negative effect on private equity groups’ ability to raise additional funds.

     This topic is not merely of academic interest. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission

Chair Mary Jo White has indicated repeatedly that the commission is currently drafting

recommendations regarding “transition planning for advisers.” 3 Few regulations on this topic

currently exist in the U.S. except for Section 205 of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, which

includes a provision requiring managing partners with significant control over a firm to gain

investor consent before transferring a significant amount of control over to a colleague, third-

party firm, or investor. More generally, the appropriate tax treatment of compensation in the

form of carried interest has been intensely controversial in the U.S. and Europe.

    Meanwhile, press accounts suggest that numerous groups have come to grief over these

issues. Already in the late 1990s, industry observers were attributing the dissolution of Golder

Thoma Cressey Rauner into multiple firms to “its history of losing bright associates to




3
  “Enhancing Risk Monitoring and Regulatory Safeguards for the Asset Management Industry,”
speech by SEC Chair Mary Jo White at The New York Times DealBook Opportunities for
Tomorrow              Conference,             December                11,           2014,
https://www.sec.gov/News/Speech/Detail/Speech/1370543677722.


                                                                                                  3
competitors willing to share equity.” 4 More recently, the internal pressures related to these issues

seemed to have escalated. According to the news accounts, “future ownership of the firm” was a

major factor that drove president and successor-designate Justin Wender away from Castle

Harlan. 5 In 2015, the 28-year old private equity firm gave up trying to raise capital following a

dispute over succession, despite substantial success in its earlier funds. 6 In 2014, 23 years after

its inception, Weston Presidio suspended its fund raising after a group of partners left to start a

new investment firm. 7 In 2015, Doughty Hanson’s demise was explained by one investor as

follows: “Historically there was an issue with the top guys having all the power and the

economics, so there were quite a few spinouts in the past.” According to another investor who

chose not to invest in the firm’s funds, “One of the things that we never got comfortable with

was the economics between the two founders and the rest of the team, and as far as I’m

concerned that did cause [staff] turnover to a large extent.” 8 Earlier that same year, Charterhouse,

“the elder statesman of British private equity,” was exposed to be “a scene of frictions, involving

both how its earnings are divided among the staff and how to hand power to a new generation.” 9




4
       “Venture     Lesson,” Crain's   Chicago     Business,      December       13,   1997,
http://www.chicagobusiness.com/article/19971213/ISSUE01/10003805/venture-lesson.
5
   “Justin Wender Statement on Quitting Castle Harlan,” PE Hub, August 6, 2010,
https://www.pehub.com/2010/08/justin-wender-statement-on-departure-from-castle-harlan/.
6
   “Castle Harlan Stops Fundraising Efforts for Fund VI,” PE Hub, July 15, 2015,
https://www.pehub.com/2015/07/castle-harlan-stops-fundraising-efforts-for-fund-vi/.
7
  “Weston Presidio Partners Said to Exit and Firm Cancels New Fund,” BloombergBusiness,
April 30, 2014, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-04-30/weston-presidio-partners-
said-to-exit-as-firm-cancels-new-fund.
8
    “What Went Wrong at Doughty Hanson?,” Financial News, April 16, 2015,
http://www.efinancialnews.com/story/2015-04-15/douhgty-hanson-private-equity-abandons-
fundraising.
9
  “Behind the Genteel Facade of the London-Based Private-Equity Firm Lurk Internal Frictions,
Wall Street Journal, January 5, 2015, http://www.wsj.com/articles/infighting-roils-veteran-
british-buyout-firm-1420515182.


                                                                                                   4
As illustrated by discussions of succession tensions at the hedge fund Bridgewater, these issues

are not unique to private equity partnerships. 10

     The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II provides background, reviews the

construction of the data-set, and provides key summary statistics. Section III presents the

analyses. The final section concludes the paper.



                                              II.     Data

     After a brief introduction to compensation in the private equity industry, this section provides

an overview of the data collection process and the key dependent and independent variables

employed.



     A. Compensation in Private Equity Funds

     To date, the academic and practitioner literature on compensation in venture capital and

private equity partnerships has focused on the aggregate split between the investors in the funds

(limited partners, or LPs) and fund managers (general partners, or GPs), rather than the division

between the GPs. Press accounts often implicitly assume that funds conform to the “two and

twenty” template: an annual management fee of 2% of committed capital or net asset value (or

some modification thereof) and 20% of the fund profits (sometimes after some minimum rate of

return, or hurdle rate, is achieved). But, as the literature shows, the reality is more complex.

     Gompers and Lerner (1999) find differences in the compensation schemes of new and

established firms. Examining 419 U.S. VC partnerships formed between 1978 and 1992, they

10
  “Bridgewater Succession Plan in Flux as Heir Greg Jensen Steps Back,” Financial Times,
February      7,       2016,       http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/12ef2de6-cc72-11e5-be0b-
b7ece4e953a0.html#axzz41qrrASOy.


                                                                                                   5
show that new and smaller firms tended to have higher fixed base compensation (i.e., from fees),

while the compensation of established firms was more variable and more sensitive to

performance. The authors ascribe this pattern to a learning model of performance, wherein GPs

must be motivated by the prospect of financial gains once their reputation has been established.

In a related work, Chung, et al. (2012) show that the current fund’s performance affects GPs’

abilities to raise capital for future funds, which can also provide a powerful motivation.

   Metrick and Yasuda (2010) analyze the economics of the private equity industry using a

dataset from a large investor in private equity funds. With detailed information on 238 funds

raised between 1993 and 2006, the authors model the net present value of expected revenue that

managers receive. They find that roughly 66% of expected revenue comes from fixed

components, especially management fees. Robinson and Sensoy (2013) show that for a large

sample of buyout and venture capital funds from 1984 to 2010, compensation is largely unrelated

to net-of-fee cash flow performance. Market conditions during fundraising are an important

driver of compensation, as payments rise and shift to fixed components during fundraising

booms. They argue that compensation is distorted by agency problems, but at the same time,

managers with higher compensation earn back their pay by delivering higher gross performance.

Phalippou, Rauch, and Umber (2015) show that transaction fees charged by private equity

groups are significant in magnitude, vary substantially across GPs, and increase when private

equity groups go public.

   Turning to the compensation at the level of the individual partners within funds, there are at

least five strands of income:

   •   A share of carry gives a professional a claim on the capital gains from fund investments.

       In some cases, the division of these payments between partners is fixed at the beginning



                                                                                               6
    of the fund’s life; in other cases, there is a combination of fixed and performance-

    contingent elements; and in a small number of instances, the shares are entirely

    determined ex post based on performance. It should be noted that some carry may be

    assigned outside the ranks of senior and junior partners. Among the claimants may be

    lower-level employees (particularly at larger firms), retired partners, anchor LPs (key

    investors, especially in young funds), and large institutions that sometimes purchase

    equity stakes in private equity management companies.

•   Second, there are often “excess” fees, that is, fees in excess of actual expenses. These can

    be large, especially for larger funds, whose management fees often substantially exceed

    the actual costs of running the funds. In addition, private equity funds have traditionally

    charged a variety of transaction and monitoring fees, which may far exceed the actual

    costs incurred (though in recent funds, these have been largely reimbursed to the LPs).

    Based on our discussions with GPs, firm ownership allocation is typically used to

    distribute excess fees (i.e., they are treated as dividends), but in a few cases, they are

    allocated to the partners according to the same formula that is used to divide carried

    interest.

•   A less common, but potentially significant, form of compensation associated with

    ownership stakes comes from liquidity events, such as sales of minority stakes to

    financial institutions, sovereign wealth funds, and the like; or, in rarer instances, sales of

    entire management companies. The proceeds from these sales (to the extent they are not

    reinvested in the businesses) are divided among the GPs in proportion to their ownership

    stakes. In addition, the equity stakes of senior partners may be sold to the next generation

    of partners, though often at a discount to the value that would be garnered in an arms-



                                                                                                7
         length transaction (see, for instance, Lerner and Leamon, 2013). Most dramatically, when

         a management company is taken public, these stakes can become quite valuable and

         liquid.

     •   Individual partners are almost invariably paid a salary and a bonus, which are frequently

         a relatively modest share of senior professionals’ compensation. 11 Consistent with this

         observation, these revenue streams are rarely reported in investment proposals compiled

         by our LP (see discussion below).

     •   Partners may also be able to participate in transactions alongside the funds, whether

         through co-investments on a deal-by-deal basis, an investment in the main fund (partners

         are often expected to contribute at least one percent of the capital in their funds, though

         they may do so with money borrowed from the bank or by using management fees), or

         through a fund that is a companion to the main one (whose investments are frequently

         made on a no fee-no carry basis).

Some or all of the deferred compensation may be forfeited if the partner leaves the fund before

the returns are distributed or before a vesting period expires.



     B. The Sample and Potential Biases

     Our analysis employs a proprietary and novel dataset that has been assembled from due

diligence reports of one of the world’s largest limited partners (LPs). The data on the economics




11
   For instance, Steven Schwartzman, Blackstone’s co-founder who held the title of Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer in 2015, received total compensation of over $799 million that year.
He received no bonus and a salary of $350,000 (The Blackstone Group, 2015 Form 10-K,
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1393818/000119312516481948/d129194d10k.htm).
Also see Glocap (2013) for survey-based evidence on this point.


                                                                                                  8
of the partnerships was collected from the investment proposals prepared by the investment

professionals at the LP during the process of fund assessment.

     Table I provides an overview of sample composition. As Panel A reports, of the total number

of funds in our sample, 62% are buyout partnerships; the rest are venture capital partnerships or

those focusing on growth capital, mezzanine, and distressed debt transactions. 12 Among the

largest quartile of funds in the sample, the overwhelming majority (89%) of the funds are (not

surprisingly) buyout groups; in other quartiles, the share of such groups is lower.

     The vast majority of the partnerships in our sample were formed between 2000 and 2015 (the

median vintage is 2007), although some funds were raised in earlier vintage years. 52% of the

funds in our sample targeted transactions in the United States and Canada, and the rest were

almost evenly split between Europe and the rest of the world.

     Our sample is not identical to the investment portfolio of the LP. While most of the funds for

which an investment proposal was completed were eventually funded by the LP, our sample is

not conditional on the LP’s investment. Furthermore, in a significant number of cases, the due

diligence documents on individual partnerships included detailed information of the economics

and characteristics of predecessor funds, regardless of whether the LP invested in them or not.

Thus, our sample includes a significantly larger number of funds than those the LP has actually

invested in.

     Given the sophistication and size of the LP, the funds in our sample might be more

successful than the industry average. At least historically, there has been considerable

heterogeneity in the performance of LPs (Lerner, Schoar, and Wongsunwai, 2008). There also



12
   The group also invests in funds focused on secondary interests. We excluded these to avoid
introducing unwanted heterogeneity.


                                                                                                 9
might be a “backfill bias”: earlier funds in which the LP did not invest are likely to have done

disproportionately well.

   In collecting the information on partners’ compensation, the LP tries to follows the same

format, and so, for the majority of the funds, we have clear information on the distribution of

carry. In cases where a range of values was indicated for partner carry, e.g., “3.37%-6.16%,” we

used the mid-point of that range (6% of partner×fund observations).

   In many cases, the actual carry scheme had a combination of contingent and deterministic

components. This was the case, for instance, when partners received a base level of carry and an

additional amount based on the success of his or her individual deals. These were coded by the

LP using the best anticipation of the final expected carry division, as determined in consultation

with the partners in the fund (42% of partner×fund observations).

   In 12% of the investment proposals, the LP was not able to discern meaningful data on

carried interest allocations. The cases with missing data fell into two distinct categories. First, the

GP may not have had a set carried interest scheme but instead allocated it dynamically as the

fund’s portfolio and performance evolved (sometimes termed an “eat what you kill” system), or

else employed an extremely complex scheme. Second, the GP may have refused to include

information about the distribution of the economics in its disclosures to the LP. These refusals

were most common with very high-demand venture capital organizations, who frequently

quantity-ration the amount of funds they raise (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005). This second issue does

not typically occur in the buyout sub-sample (throughout the analysis, we control for the type of

the private equity fund).



   C. Measuring Fund Economics



                                                                                                    10
    We are able to collect two central measures of fund economics: distribution of carried

interest (“carry”) and ownership of the management company among fund professionals. Our

full sample contains data on carried interest distribution for just under 300 general partner (GP)

organizations and 6,344 investment professionals managing 717 private equity funds. GP

ownership distribution is available for 2,041 investment professionals managing 191 funds and

corresponding to 124 private equity management companies. The scarcity of ownership

information is attributed to the GPs’ resistance to providing this information, citing its sensitive

nature and the fact that it was not normally provided to LPs as part of the due diligence process.

As Table I, Panel A illustrates, we are capturing ownership for 36% of the funds in the smallest

size quartile, but only for 15% of the funds in the largest size quartile. Across the sample, carry

and ownership stake appear to be complements: the correlation between the two variables is 0.69

and is strongly statistically significant.

    Although we observe all compensation information reported to the LP, we focus our analysis

on two levels of partners: (i) those in the top echelon of private equity partnerships (whom we

term “senior partners”), and (ii) those in the second echelon (“junior partners”). Collectively, we

refer to the top two bands as “all partners” or “senior professionals.” To assign investment

professionals into one of these groups, we rely on their professional titles. There is very little

consistency in the titles used across private equity groups. In all, 161 different job titles of

professionals were recorded from the original documents. To standardize this listing, we create a

measure of hierarchy within GP organizations, with the numerical value decreasing as seniority

increased within organizations. (The relative seniority was determined as part of the LP’s due

diligence process.) Coding the individuals’ biographies in this way allows us to make inter-firm

comparisons, regardless of the titles that different firms use. For instance, in a representative



                                                                                                 11
firm, a senior managing partner is given a value of 1, a managing partner a value of 2, a principal

3, an associate 4, and an analyst 5.

   Based on this classification, if a given fund has more than one partner with the top title,

partners with values of 1 and 2 are counted as senior and junior partners, respectively. In cases

where there is only one individual with the top title (e.g., senior managing director), those in the

first and second bands (e.g., managing directors) are counted as senior partners, and individuals

in the third band (e.g., directors) are counted as junior partners.

   In total, there are 674 partnerships (out of 717 funds with carry information) in our sample

for which we have information on carry division for one of the two top tiers of partners. This

sample includes 2,577 individuals who are classified as senior partners and 1,394 individuals

who are classified as junior partners. We also collect information on founders: there are 1,032

investment professionals in our sample who are classified as founders. We were not able to find

information on who the founders were for 41 firms (82 funds). Excluding these cases, founders

are present in 77% of the funds. The size of the sample will be smaller if we condition it on the

availability of other variables; we will report the actual size of the sample when doing the

analysis.



   D. Other Fund- and Partner-Level Information

   In addition to the carry split and ownership data, we collected a variety of data on the

partners and the funds. We collected information on the performance and size of earlier and

subsequent funds. For those funds to which the LP committed capital, we use detailed

information on cash flows, which allows us to calculate public market equivalents (PMEs). This

information is augmented by cash flow data provided by Preqin, a data vendor whose data are



                                                                                                 12
largely collected through Freedom of Information Act requests to public pensions and

endowments. For the rest, we use the internal rate of return (IRR) and the multiple of invested

capital (MOIC), two standard performance measures that are widely used in the private equity

industry. This information is collected from various sources, including Bison, Pitchbook, and

Preqin. We obtain information on the final size of funds using information from the LP and

public databases such as Preqin and Pitchbook. One subtle issue was posed by larger private

equity organizations that had different “fund families”: e.g., a distinct series of buyout funds

raised for U.S., European, and Asian transactions. In these cases, we examined earlier and later

funds within the same fund family (e.g., European Buyout Funds I, II, and III).

   From investment proposals, in addition to titles, we gathered information on the individual

characteristics of each investment professional, including their name, age, educational

background, and previous work experience.

   In addition, the LP undertook an attribution analysis, in which they assessed the performance

of each partner’s earlier investments over his or her past two to four funds (whether within the

same firm or elsewhere). These analyses can be challenging to undertake, as the mapping

between individual partners and transactions may not be readily apparent (for instance, funds

may seek to downplay the role of a departed partner). In some cases, the LP either could not

obtain the needed data from the GPs or did not have the resources needed to complete the

analysis. As a result, we have information on performance in prior funds for about 1,290

investment professionals (248 different funds) in one of the top two tiers of seniority. In some

analyses below, we focus on what we term “top” investors, which we use to designate those with

a gross investment multiple of two times or more. In unreported robustness checks, we use a

three-times gross multiple as the cut-off for top investors.



                                                                                             13
   Furthermore, we record the timing of partners’ departures. This information is based on due

diligence documents, as well as on extensive web research using news stories, firm web sites,

and professional databases such as LinkedIn and Spokeo.



                                 III.    Analysis of Fund Economics

   We seek to understand the causes and consequences of the division of the economics of

funds in four parts. First, we present summary statistics on the fund economics. Then, we

analyze the determinants of the distribution of the economics across the partners. Third, we

examine the relationship between fund economics and the departure of investment professionals.

Finally, we examine the consequences of these departures for the GPs’ future fundraising.



   A. The Division of Fund Economics

   Table I, Panels B and C show a basic summary of the division of carried interest and

ownership at the time of the raising of the fund. We present in Panel B the distribution of carried

interest and ownership for all partners by fund geography, type, and size quartile. We then look

in Panel C at the economics for the senior and junior partners separately, as well as departure

rates of all partners and those with superior prior investment performance (as defined above).

The two panels also summarize the primary measurement that we will use to examine the overall

distribution of the economics of funds, a measure that we term “inequality”: the ratio of the

carried interest or ownership share of the individual with the largest such allocation to the

average share. We report in the upper part of Panel C measures for the senior and junior partners

separately. When we undertake the inequality calculations in the lower part of Panel C, we

present these for the senior partners and then across all partners.



                                                                                                14
     Panel B reveals substantial differences across groups. European groups have substantially

lower carried interest and ownership per partner, while venture groups have larger shares. Not

surprisingly, larger funds have a smaller share of carry and ownership per partner. Venture

groups display significantly lower levels of carry inequality than buyout funds, perhaps

reflecting the greater uncertainty in outcomes and, consequently, a desire of the partners for risk-

sharing. Larger groups tend to be less equal in their carry splits.

     In Panel C, we find substantial differences between the senior partners and junior partners.

First, the senior partners (not surprisingly) receive a greater share of the economics. The mean

(median) senior partner receives 15% (13%) of the carried interest and 21% (18%) of the

ownership, while for junior partners, the corresponding numbers are 7% (5%) and 3% (0%).

     Second, the measures of inequality increase substantially when we look at all partners. For

senior partners alone, the mean (median) measure of carry inequality measured as maximum to

mean carry is 1.41 (1.27); when all partners are considered, the corresponding ratio is 1.80

(1.63). These patterns are even starker for ownership. For senior partners alone, the mean

(median) measure of ownership inequality is 1.68 (1.33); when all partners are considered, the

corresponding ratio is 2.63 (2.17). As Panel C also reports, the magnitudes are very similar if we

use an alternative measure of inequality: the average carry for the top quartile scaled by the mean

carry. 13

     Finally, the table reveals that departures of partners are relatively rare. The median fund has

no departures of any partners between the closing of the current and the next fund. For the mean




13
  In what follows, we use maximum to mean carry and ownership as a measure of inequality.
All the results are robust to using average for the top quartile instead of the maximum.


                                                                                                 15
fund, the probability that a given senior partner will depart is 9%, for junior partners, 12%. The

probability of the departure of a top performer is slightly lower.

                                               [TABLE I]

   Figure 1 provides a richer look of the division of the key economic drivers of compensation.

In each of the two panels, the distribution is presented for the senior and junior partners. In

Panel A, the distribution of carried interest for senior partners reaches its peak at about 10%,

while the modal junior partner (using not only the partition shown in the graph, but also coarser

and finer divisions) has no carry. There is a long tail of senior partners with carry shares

exceeding 20%, while there are many fewer junior partners with such a large share of the

economics.

   The patterns with ownership are more skewed, as Panel B reveals. While abut three-quarters

of the senior partners have some ownership in the firm, only about 30% of the junior partners do.

Thus, ownership of the management company is much more concentrated than carried interest.

Using the partition scheme in the graph, the distribution of ownership for the senior partners is

essentially flat between a zero and twenty-five percent share, while for junior partners with some

ownership, the share falls off very quickly.

                                               [FIGURE 1]

   Figure 2 depicts the measures of carry and ownership inequality. Panel A shows the

distribution of carry inequality for the senior partners for funds of various sizes, as well as all

partners. For all funds, the modal outcome (using this and other partition schemes) is a very even

distribution of carry—in fact, for 24% percent of the funds, the carry inequality is exactly one.

But as we look at progressively larger funds, the carry inequality increases. We present here the

smoothed distribution (kernel density) for funds with more than three and more than eight senior



                                                                                                16
partners. With funds with three or more partners, the distribution peaks at about 1.25; for those

with eight or more partners, near 1.75. When we examine the carry inequality computed using all

partners, the distribution not only has a higher mean (as we saw in Table I), but peaks about 1.5.

   In Panel B, we examine the distribution of ownership inequality in a similar manner. There is

a long tail of observations, with some groups exhibiting extreme ownership inequality. Again,

the inequality is substantially greater when we examine all partners than when just senior

partners are analyzed.

                                           [FIGURE 2]

   In Figure 3, we look at the dynamics of these patterns. In Panels A and C, we look across

different fund numbers (for instance, the third fund raised by a group as opposed to the second).

We present in each case the mean inequality measure for a fund of a given number. Of course,

there are many more observations of the organizations’ second funds than their twelfth ones. We

see that carry and ownership inequality falls as private equity organizations mature, though the

pattern is more diffuse when it comes to ownership inequality. This pattern holds whether we

look at just the senior partners or all the partners (where, as seen above, the measure of carry

inequality is typically higher).

   In Panels B and D, we look at the evolution across funds of different vintage years. Because

of the maturation effect identified in Panels A and C, we might anticipate that carry inequality

would fall over time. At the same time, new funds enter the industry, whose carry splits may be

less or more equal than the others. We see only a modest change in carry and ownership

inequality over time.

                                           [FIGURE 3]




                                                                                                17
   In unreported analyses, we look at these patterns for two subsets of individuals. First, we

restrict the analysis exclusively to founders and examine their share over time. We find that the

founders’ share not only falls as funds mature, but has also decreased in more recent vintages. In

a second analysis, we restrict the analysis to partners in “young” organizations (those in the first

three funds). We find here only modest decreases in inequality over time.



   B. Determinants of Fund Economics Distributions

   The first empirical question relates to the drivers of the distribution of fund economics. We

examine what are the key factors that drive how large carried interest and ownership stakes

individuals receive.

   As we will see in the regressions in Table II, an important driver of fund economics is

whether the individual is a founder. Because the founders are overwhelmingly senior partners,

we focus on them in Figure 4. Conditional on founder(s) being present, the top left chart shows

that the mean founder receives a much larger share of the carried interest than the mean non-

founder: 19.2% vs. 10.9%. If the founder is no longer with the firm, senior partners, on average,

earn 12.1% carry, and the distribution of carry is more compressed (top right chart). The lower

chart shows that a similar pattern holds when we examine ownership. Again, the senior partner

who is a founder has an average ownership stake of 30.8%, while the mean non-founder has a

stake of only 13.6%.

                                            [FIGURE 4]

   The relationship with past performance is much less consistent, as we see in Figure 5. We

depict for each senior (the left graphs) and junior (the right ones) partner the partner’s past

performance (measured as a multiple of invested capital) and the partner’s share of carry (Panel



                                                                                                 18
A) and ownership (Panel B). The R2s are presented from linear regressions using all observations

and all observations with a multiple less than five. The relationships that do appear in the data

appear to be driven by one or two outliers in each case, as is seen by the generally poorer

goodness-of-fit when the samples are restricted to observations of partners with a multiple less

than five.

    These impression are corroborated in the regression analyses reported in Table II. We present

separate analyses of carry and ownership stakes for senior and junior partners. We begin with the

broadest possible sample, controlling for status as a founder. We then control for fund

characteristics, add a control variable for the past investment multiple of the partner’s

investments (a step which substantially reduced the sample size), and finally add instead a

variety of controls for the partner’s characteristics (which again substantially limits the sample

size).

    In Panel A, we focus on senior partners. In each case, status as a founder has a strong and

significant impact on carry and ownership, increasing the former by 7-8% (relative to a mean of

15%) and the latter by 10-19% (relative to a mean of 21%). Turning to the junior partners in

Panel B (where, not surprisingly, far fewer individuals are founders), the effects continue to be

strong, though smaller in magnitude: 3-5% for carried interest (relative to a mean of 7%) and 4-

5% for ownership (relative to a mean of 3%).

    In addition to a strong founder effect, we also see in the regressions that funds with a higher

sequence number are associated with a declining share of carried interest for senior partners and

a larger share for junior partners, consistent with the evidence around decreasing carry inequality

shown in Figure 3. Larger funds have reduced carry and ownership stakes for all partners,

perhaps because of the increasing likelihood that some of the economics were held by investment



                                                                                                19
professionals outside of the top two bands or by a third party (i.e., as a result of a founding

sponsorship or a subsequent financing arrangement). (Results in Table II are robust to the

addition of controls for the number of partners in unreported regressions.)

   Most strikingly, past performance of senior partners has explanatory power for their

ownership stake, but not for their carried interest. For junior partners, the pattern is

contradictory: while better performing partners have a larger carry share, they actually have

reduced ownership. (Although we have to keep in mind that the sub-sample of junior partners for

whom we have ownership data is much smaller.)

                                             [TABLE II]



   C. Fund Economics and Departures of Partners

   A natural next question relates to the implications of these carry distribution schemes. As

noted in the introduction, the simple fact that carry distributions are unequal may not be

problematic. The investment skills of partners may vary (as shown, for instance, in Ewens and

Rhodes-Kropf, 2015), and the compensation scheme may reflect this fact. Partners may

contribute to the success of the firm in a variety of ways in addition to selecting and overseeing

attractive investments, from managing the raising of capital, to communicating with LPs, to

overseeing the investment review process.

   One natural place to look to understand the consequences of these economic choices is at the

decision of professionals to leave the firms. In Figure 5, we take a first look at these patterns. In

Panel A, we compare senior partners who left by the time of the closing of the next fund to those

who were still there then; in Panel B, we undertake a similar comparison of departing and

remaining junior partners.



                                                                                                  20
    We find that for senior and junior partners, partners who stay have significantly higher carry

stakes, though the magnitudes of the levels and differences are larger for the senior partners

(16% vs 9%, as opposed to 6% vs. 5%). There is an even more dramatic differentiation in

ownership stake than in the case of carried interest among the senior partners: while those who

stay until the next fund have 23% of the ownership, those who leave only have 13%. Among the

junior partners, these differences are insignificant, doubtless reflecting the low probability that

junior partners receive ownership stakes in the first place.

    A natural concern is whether the departing partners are underachievers and thus more likely

to be asked to leave the partnership. The same poor performance may explain their low share of

the fund economics. To address the possibility that correlations are leading to spurious

conclusions, we examine the performance attributed to the investors who ultimately stay or

leave. Recall that the performance attribution is done at the time of due diligence on the funds,

before closing of the fund (and any departures of partners). Thus, these evaluations should not be

dragged down by the temptation that fund managers may experience to saddle a departed partner

with the poorest transactions. Here, we see no significant patterns: while the departing senior

partners do slightly worse (a multiple of 1.9 vs. 2.3), and the departing junior partners do better

(a multiple of 2.8 vs. 2.2), none of these differences are statistically significant.

    Finally, we examine how the overall carry inequality at a fund affects the decision to stay or

leave. We find that senior partners are statistically significantly more likely to stay at a firm with

lower carry inequality (an inequality measure of 1.5 for the stayers vs. 1.6 for the leavers).

Among the junior partners, the effect seemed to go the other way.

                                              [FIGURE 5]




                                                                                                   21
   To examine these patterns in regression analyses, we proceed in two ways. First, in Table III,

we remain at the level of the individual partner. We then turn, in Table IV, to examining these

patterns at the fund level.

   In Table III, the unit of observation is that of an individual partner-fund pair. The dependent

variable takes on the value one if the individual departed before the closing of the next fund, and

zero otherwise. We employ an OLS regression specification. We first present that analysis with

the carry or ownership share as the key independent variable (specifications (1), (4), and (7)),

then with an additional control for the individual’s attributed investment multiple at that point

(specifications (2), (5), and (8). The remaining three specifications use the residual from

regressing the carry and ownership stake on the founder status dummy and a set of fund

characteristics (i.e., the residuals from the analyses reported in Table II, specifications (2) and

(6), respectively.) As before, we undertake separate analyses for senior and junior partners.

   The results in Table III point out that both carried interest and ownership stakes are

associated with the decision of senior partners to leave funds: individuals with a lower share of

the economics are significantly more likely to leave a fund. Carry stake is also important in

explaining departures of both junior partners, but not the ownership stake. As before, this latter

result is most likely due to the fact that few junior partners hold ownership stake in the firm.

                                             [TABLE III]

   Table IV examines decisions to depart on the fund-wide level. Here, we use the share of

senior or junior partners leaving before the closing of the next fund as the dependent variable.

We examine the share of departures of all partners, as well as those who are top performers

(again, using those whose attributed performance is greater than a two times gross multiple,

though we also repeat the analysis using a three times threshold, and find that the results are



                                                                                                   22
robust).The key independent variable is the measure(s) of carry or/and ownership inequality at

the fund.

     Here, the results diverge sharply among the senior and junior partners. The share of

departures among the senior partners is significantly greater in cases where the inequality of the

carry or ownership is greater.     In Panel A, a one-standard deviation increase in the carry

inequality measure (0.49) in regression (1) increases the rate of departures by 2.2%; a one-

standard deviation increase in the ownership inequality measure in regression (3) (0.88)

increases the rate by 3.7%, both of which are economically meaningful relative to the mean

departure rate of senior partners of 9.0%. The results when we look at the share of high-

performing departers are equally significant and similar in magnitude. The inequality of

compensation levels has much less of an impact on junior partner-level departures in Panel B,

suggesting that their departure decisions may be swayed more by the probability of promotion

rather than by the distribution of fund economics. 14

                                            [TABLE IV]



     D. The Consequences of Departures

     A related question is whether these departures affect the private equity firms from which they

depart. Even if high achievers are departing firms with unequal economics, as Table IV suggests,

one might hypothesize that they can be readily replaced with no detrimental consequences for the

performance of subsequent funds. On the other hand, sophisticated LPs (e.g., Swensen, 2005)

14
   A natural follow-on analysis would examine the change in carry split and overall economics
that departing partners experience (conditional on staying in the private equity industry).
Unfortunately, we cannot create a reasonably sized sample of such departers: while our LP is a
large one, it still invests in (and thus has compensation data on) a small fraction of the overall
pool of PE funds.


                                                                                                23
often argue that team stability is an important prerequisite to a partnership’s enduring investment

success. In particular, they highlight that even when a departing GP is replaced by a comparable

investor, performance frequently suffers, because of the challenges that investment professionals

working together for the first time frequently encounter. Because sophisticated LPs frequently

hope to nurture relationships with investment firms for many years, they frequently look askance

at such staffing changes.

   One challenge with exploring the consequences of the departures relates to the relatively

recent vintages of many of the funds in our sample (as noted above, the median vintage year in

our sample is 2007). In particular, it is difficult to assess what the impact of departures has on the

ultimate performance of subsequent funds, because many successor funds do not have

meaningful performance numbers as of yet. So here, we do a more limited analysis, focusing on

the consequences of departures on the sizes of the subsequent funds.

   Cornelli, Simintzi, and Vig (2015) examine the consequence of investor turnover on the

performance of roughly two thousand individual investments. They find that investments

performed worse when a key investor responsible for the investment left during the period the

firm remained within the fund’s portfolio. They suggest, though, that the departure of the

individual did not cause the underperformance of the deal, but rather that the departure was

driven by the underperformance of the investment. Here, we are examining how the size of

future funds changes as a consequence of departures.

   We look at these patterns in a regression framework. In Table V, we use each fund in the

sample that raised a follow-on fund through the end of 2015 as an observation. We use as the

dependent variable the natural logarithm of the size of the next fund raised. We use as

independent variables the logarithm of the current fund size, the characteristics of the fund, and



                                                                                                   24
(critically for our purposes) the share of departures of the senior partners (in Panel A) and junior

partners (Panel B) in the two years after the closing of the fund. We focus on early departers

because of concerns about interpretation raised by Cornelli, Simintzi, and Vig (2015): it could be

that troubled firms take a long time to raise, end up with smaller amounts of capital, and

experience extensive turnover due to health issues or changing preferences during the long

ensuing gap, but the departures do not cause the fundraising difficulties. By focusing on

departures over a set period of time soon after the fund closing, when the performance of the

investments is still unclear, we minimize these issues of interpretation.

   We also control for the performance of the current fund in some regressions using various

metrics (all measured using cash flows in U.S. dollars): the internal rate of return, the multiple of

invested capital, and the Kaplan-Schoar public market equivalent (PME) relative to the S&P 500

index. We also look at top-performing departers as a share of the partners.

                                             [TABLE V]

   The results suggest a relationship between the extent of departures and performance. This

relationship is very strong for senior partners, and also true if the departing partners are the top

performers. For instance, the second regression in Panel A implies that the loss of one senior

partner at an average-sized firm (i.e., one with four senior partners) is associated with the next

fund, all else being equal, being 17% smaller (= exp(0.76 * .25)). The departure of junior

partners has much less of an implication for future fundraising. We also see from the control

variables that buyout funds are more likely to grow quickly, as are funds with a higher IRR.

   The results are robust to the use of longer windows (e.g., departures in the three years after

the fund was raised) as well to the use of alternative dependent variables (for instance, time to




                                                                                                  25
the raising of the next fund, though the results here are less statistically significant). These

findings suggest that departures have real consequences for funds’ ability to access capital. 15



                                           IV.    Conclusion

     The economics of partnerships have been a topic of enduring interest to economists. While

the cross-sectional moral hazard issues posed by the sharing of partnership economics are well

understood, the dynamic problems that can emerge have been less well scrutinized. Here, we

examine roughly 700 private equity partnerships, and show that (a) the allocation of fund

economics to individual partners seems divorced from past success as an investor, being instead

critically driven by status as a founder, (b) the underprovision of carried interest and

ownership—and inequality in fund economics more generally—leads to the departures of senior

partners from these funds, and (c) the departures of partners have significant negative effects on

the ability of the funds to subsequently raise additional capital.

     It must be acknowledged that even if high achievers are disproportionately departing, and

these departures negatively impact funds, having funds with a high degree of carry or ownership

inequality may still be privately optimal for the founders. They may prefer to have the proverbial

larger share of a smaller pie, especially if there is a considerable income to be gleaned from

management and transaction fees. But such outcomes are unlikely to be in the interest of the LPs,

who seek to build long-term relationships with stable, high-performing funds.




15
  It might be thought that such departures would be “good news” for the remaining partners, as
the benefits from not having to split the fund with the additional partner would make up for the
smaller size. In actuality, there are substantial economies of scale in running a private equity
fund, so the fall in excess management fees (i.e., fees net of operating expenses) after raising a
smaller fund may be substantial.


                                                                                                   26
       While this paper takes a first look at fund economics, there is much more to learn here.

One particularly interesting question relates to the generalizability of the findings to other asset

classes. The assets under management by investment partnerships of many types—from the

familiar hedge and real estate funds to more novel ones targeting natural resources, distressed

debt, and infrastructure—have exploded in recent decades. To what extent do the same types of

issues appear in these settings?




                                                                                                 27
                                        References

Abramitzky, Ran, 2008, “The Limits of Equality: Insights from the Israeli Kibbutz,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 123, 1111-59.

Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz, 1972, “Production, Information Costs, and. Economic.
Organization,” American Economic Review, 62, 777-795.

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez, 2012, “Inequality at Work:
The Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction," American Economic Review, 102, 2981-3003.

Charness, Gary and Peter Kuhn, 2007, “Does Pay Inequality Affect Worker Effort?
Experimental Evidence," Journal of Labor Economics, 25, 693-723.

Chung, Ji-Woong, Berk A. Sensoy, Léa Stern, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2012 “Pay for
Performance from Future Fund Flows: The Case of Private Equity,” Review of Financial Studies,
25, 3259-3304.

Cornelli, Francesca, Elena Simintzi, and Vikrant Vig, 2015, “Team Stability and Performance:
Evidence from Private Equity,” Unpublished working paper, http://sfs.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/Team-Stability-and-Performance.pdf.

Cullen, Zöe, and Bobak Pakzad-Hursony, 2016, “Equal Pay for Equal Work? Evidence from the
Renegotiation of Short-Term Contracts Online,” Unpublished working paper, Stanford
University, http://web.stanford.edu/~zcullen/ep_mrkt_eq.pdf.

Ewens, Michael, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2015, “Is a VC Partnership Greater Than the Sum
of Its Partners?,” Journal of Finance, 70, 1081-1113.

Gaynor, Martin, and Paul Gertler, 1995, “Moral Hazard and Risk Spreading in Partnerships,”
Rand Journal of Economics, 26, 591-613.

Glocap, 2013, Glocap Private Equity Compensation Study, New York, Glocap.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 1999, “An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S. Venture
Capital Partnership,” Journal of Financial Economics, 51, 3-44.

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1982, “Moral Hazard in Teams,” Bell Journal of Economics, 13, 324-340.

Kandel, Eugene, and Edward Lazear, 1992, “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of
Political Economy, 100, 801-817.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, “Private Equity Performance: Returns,
Persistence, and Capital Flows,” Journal of Finance, 60, 1791-1823.




                                                                                           28
Lerner, Josh, and Ann Leamon, 2013, "Innova Capital: The Transition," Harvard Business
School Case no. 813-064.

Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Wan Wongsunwai, 2007, “Smart Institutions, Foolish
Choices: The Limited Partner Performance Puzzle,” Journal of Finance, 62, 731–764.

Levin, Jonathan, and Steven Tadelis, 2005, Profit Sharing and the Role of Professional
Partnerships, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 131-171

Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2010, “The Economics of Private Equity Funds,” Review
of Financial Studies, 23, 2303-2341.

Morrison, Alan D., and William J. Wilhelm, 2004, “Partnership Firms, Reputation, and Human
Capital, American Economic Review, 94, 1682-92.

Morrison, Alan D., and William J. Wilhelm, 2008, “The Demise of Investment Banking
Partnerships: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 63, 311-350.

Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer, 2005, “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options to All
Employees?: An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 76, 99–133.

Phalippou, Ludovic, Christian Rauch, and Marc P. Umber, 2015, “Private Equity Portfolio
Company Fees,” Unpublished working paper, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2702938.

Rayo, Luis, 2007, “Relational Incentives and Moral Hazard in Teams,” Review of Economic
Studies, 74, 937-963.

Robinson, David T., and Berk Sensoy, 2013, “Do Private Equity Fund Managers Earn Their
Fees? Compensation, Ownership, and Cash Flow Performance,” Review of Financial Studies, 26,
2760-97.

Swensen, David F., 2005, Unconventional Success: A Fundamental Approach to Personal
Investment, New York, Free Press.




                                                                                        29
                                               .8
          .25
                                                             Senior partners        Junior partners
          .2




                                               .6
            .15
    Fraction




                                               .4
          .1




                                               .2
          .05
          0




                  0       .2    .4   .6   .8   0    0      .2       .4         .6        .8           1
                  a. GP carry                       b. Ownership




Figure 1. Distribution of partners’ share of carried interest and ownership. We present for
each senior and junior partner the share of the economics of the funds in our sample.




                                                                                                          30
                                                               a. Carry
               3




                                                                     3
                                               All funds
                                               > 3 partners
                                               > 8 partners
               2




                                                                     2
     Density
               1




                                                                     1
               0




                                                                     0

                      1            2       3               4                1       2         3       4       5        6
                     Senior partners                                       All partners




                                                       b. Ownership
               2.5




                                                                     2.5
               2




                                                                     2
          1.5




                                                                     1.5
     Density
               1




                                                                     1
               .5




                                                                     .5
               0




                                                                     0




                      1        2       3       4               5                2         4       6       8       10
                     Senior partners                                       All partners



Figure 2. Ratio of maximum to mean carry and ownership stake. We present for each fund
in the sample our measure of the inequality of carried interest and ownership, computed for
senior partners only in the left panel and for all partners on the right. We present the smoothed
(kernel density) distribution for funds with more than three and eight senior partners in the upper
left panel.

                                                                                                                           31
32
                                                                                       a. Fund sequence

                       2




                                                                                                 2
    Mean(Maximum to average carry share)
                                    1.8




                                                                                                 1.8
                         1.6




                                                                                                 1.6
              1.4




                                                                                                 1.4
    1.2




                                                                                                 1.2
                       1




                                                                                                 1
                                           0               5                   10          15          0                5                    10        15
                                                               Fund sequence                                                 Fund sequence
                                           R-sq.=0.071                                                 R-sq.=0.535
                                           Senior partners                                             All partners




                                                                                        b. Fund vintage
                       3




                                                                                                 3
    Mean(Maximum to average carry share)
                                 2.5




                                                                                                 2.5
                    2




                                                                                                 2
      1.5




                                                                                                 1.5
                       1




                                                                                                 1




                                               1995      2000       2005        2010     2015              1995       2000        2005        2010   2015
                                                                Fund vintage                                                  Fund vintage
                                           R-sq.=0.010                                                 R-sq.=0.118
                                           Senior partners                                             All partners




Figure 3. Evolution of carry and ownership inequality. Each observation in the plot
corresponds to the mean inequality measure for a given fund sequence number (Panels a and c)
or fund vintage (b and d).




                                                                                                                                                            33
                                                                                Figure 3—continued

                                                                                 c. Fund sequence
                  3




                                                                                               3
Mean(Maximum to average ownership)
                         2.5




                                                                                               2.5
            2




                                                                                               2
 1.5




                                                                                               1.5
                  1




                                                                                               1
                                     0               5                   10             15           0                5                   10          15
                                                         Fund sequence                                                    Fund sequence
                                     R-sq.=0.017                                                     R-sq.=0.068
                                     Senior partners                                                 All partners




                                                                                     d. Fund vintage
                  2.2




                                                                                               5
Mean(Maximum to average ownership)
                              2




                                                                                               4
                 1.8




                                                                                               3
     1.6




                                                                                               2
                  1.4




                                                                                               1




                                         1995      2000        2005           2010      2015             1995       2000        2005           2010   2015
                                                          Fund vintage                                                     Fund vintage
                                     R-sq.=0.013                                                     R-sq.=0.007
                                     Senior partners                                                 All partners




                                                                                                                                                             34
                                                               a. GP carry
               .2




                                                                       .2
                                       Founder       Non-founder
               .15




                                                                       .15
    Fraction
       .1




                                                                       .1
               .05




                                                                       .05
               0




                     0           .2        .4        .6          .8    0     0            .2        .4        .6        .8
                     Funds with an active founder                            Funds without an active founder



                                                               b. Ownership
               .3




                                                                       .3




                                       Founder       Non-founder
               .2




                                                                       .2
    Fraction
               .1




                                                                       .1
               0




                                                                       0




                     0      .2        .4        .6        .8       1         0       .2        .4        .6        .8   1
                     Funds with an active founder                            Funds without an active founder


Figure 4. Founders’ and non-founders’ share of carried interest and ownership. These are
presented for all senior partners in the sample.




                                                                                                                             35
                                                                               a. Carry

                 1




                                                                                     1
                 .8




                                                                                     .8
    Partner's share of carry
                     .6




                                                                                     .6
         .4




                                                                                     .4
                 .2




                                                                                     .2
                 0




                                                                                     0
                               0           10           20           30        40         0          5         10         15        20   25
                                          Partner's past performance (MOI)                            Partner's past performance (MOI)
                               R-sq.=0.004                                                R-sq.=0.061
                               R-sq.(MOI<5)=0.022                                         R-sq.(MOI<5)=0.035
                               Senior partners                                            Junior partners




                                                                             b. Ownership
                 1




                                                                                     1
                 .8




                                                                                     .8
    Partner's ownership
                  .6




                                                                                     .6
      .4




                                                                                     .4
                 .2




                                                                                     .2
                 0




                                                                                     0




                               0           10           20           30        40         0          5         10         15        20   25
                                          Partner's past performance (MOI)                            Partner's past performance (MOI)
                               R-sq.=0.079                                                R-sq.=0.005
                               R-sq.(MOI<5)=0.012                                         R-sq.(MOI<5)=0.000
                               Senior partners                                            Junior partners




Figure 5. Partners’ share of carried interest and ownership and past performance. We
present for each senior (the left graphs) and junior (the right ones) partner in the sample the
partner’s past performance (measured as a multiple of invested capital) and the partner’s share of
carry (Panel A) and ownership (Panel B). The R2s are presented from linear regressions using all
observations and all observations with a multiple less than five.



                                                                                                                                              36
                                 .4




                                                                                                     .6
        Partner's share of carry




                                                                                 Partner's ownership
                                                                 Stayed   Left


                         .3




                                                                                              .4
                   .2




                                                                                     .2
            .1           0




                                                                                                    0
                                           Mean(Stayed) =0.157                                                          Mean(Stayed) =0.228
                                           Mean(Left) =0.093                                                            Mean(Left) =0.125
                                           t-test =10.31                                                                t-test = 4.57




                                                                                 Ratio of Maximum to Mean Carry Share
        Partner's past performance (MOI)




                                                                                                              3
                                  4




                                                                                                       2.5
                             3




                                                                                                   2
                       2




                                                                                            1.5
           0     1




                                                                                       1
                                           Mean(Stayed) =2.287                                                          Mean(Stayed) =1.512
                                           Mean(Left) =1.901                                                            Mean(Left) =1.635
                                           t-test = 1.09                                                                t-test =-3.54




a. Senior partners
Figure 6. Factors associated with partners’ departure. The table compares for senior partners (Panel A) and junior partners
(Panel B) the characteristics of those partners who remain through the next fund and those who depart before the next fund’s
closing: the share of carry and ownership in the current fund, past performance (expressed as a gross multiple of investment), and
the overall carry inequality of the current fund. The t-test corresponds to the differences in means between the two groups.

                                                                                                                                              37
                                                                 Figure 6—continued




                                                                       .02 .04 .06 .08 .1
                                .2
        Partner's share of carry




                                                                       Partner's ownership
           .05     .1   .15
                         0




                                                                                          0
                                           Mean(Stayed) =0.062                                                Mean(Stayed) =0.031
                                           Mean(Left) =0.046                                                  Mean(Left) =0.031




                                                                       Ratio of Maximum to Mean Carry Share
                                           t-test = 4.68                                                      t-test =-0.05
        Partner's past performance (MOI)




                                                                                                 4
                                  4




                                                                                            3
                             3




                                                                                      2
                  1     2




                                                                                 1
           0




                                                                                                                              Stayed   Left
                                           Mean(Stayed) =2.181                                                Mean(Stayed) =2.085
                                           Mean(Left) =2.841                                                  Mean(Left) =1.959
                                           t-test =-1.50                                                      t-test = 2.27




b. Junior partners




                                                                                                                                              38
                                                                           Table I
                                                                  Summary Statistics

Panel A. Reporting of carry and ownership by fund, segmented by fund size. We look at all available carry information. (As compared to the
unconditional sample, this sample is reduced by nine funds due to lack of the fund-size information.) Funds are sorted into size quartiles for each
vintage year.

                                                        Buyout funds         Funds with           Buyout funds with
                                                        (% of all funds      ownership data       ownership data
                                                        with carry data)     (% of all funds      (% of buyout funds
                                                                             with carry data )    with carry data)

                                        Size quartile
                                         1 (smallest)                  44%                  36%                 40%
                                         2                             51%                  28%                 38%
                                         3                             68%                  26%                 34%
                                         4 (largest)                   89%                  15%                 17%
                                        Total                          62%                  27%                 30%




                                                                                                                                                  39
                                                                                 Table I – continued

        Panel B. Distribution of all partners with carried interest or ownership data, by fund type and geography. The t-test statistics test the differences in
        means with North American funds for the fund geography category, the differences in means with buyout funds for the funds type category, and
        the differences in means between the largest and the lowest fund size quartile. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
        1% levels, respectively.

                                   Carried interest                            Firm ownership                   Carry inequality: Max/Mean         Ownership inequality: Max/Mean
                        Obs.       Std.      Mean     t-test        Obs.         Std.     Mean    t-test       Obs.    Std.     Mean     t-test      Obs.    Std.    Mean    t-test
                      (partners)   dev.                           (partners)     dev.                        (funds)   dev.                        (funds)   dev.
Fund geography:
 North America            2,103     0.102     0.125       --            463      0.191    0.151    --           296    0.701    1.842     --           66    2.206   3.026     --
 Europe                   1,118     0.101     0.097   -7.49***          477      0.156    0.123   -2.45**       154    0.639    1.849    0.10          61    1.423   2.490   -1.61
 Rest of the world          743     0.102     0.132     1.69*           246      0.190    0.153   0.15          130    0.745    1.878    0.48          36    1.179   2.656   0.93
Fund type:
 Buyout                   2,568     0.106     0.113     --              908      0.174    0.131    --           385    0.688    1.884     --          124    1.870   2.828     --
 Mezzanine                  176     0.105     0.109   -0.56              46      0.229    0.173   1.59           25    0.895    2.157     1.88*         7    0.504   2.854   0.04
 VC/Growth                1,227     0.094     0.130   4.79***           232      0.178    0.169   2.96***       171    0.656    1.734    -2.41**       32    1.387   2.394   -1.23
Fund size quartile:
 1 (smallest)               917     0.107     0.147                     371      0.174    0.156                 154    0.689    1.774                  57    1.733   2.603
 2                          956     0.097     0.125                     283      0.170    0.153                 146    0.696    1.803                  43    1.563   2.467
 3                        1,017     0.101     0.117                     309      0.191    0.130                 147    0.640    1.870                  40    1.880   3.088
 4 (largest)              1,055     0.096     0.088                     210      0.169    0.103                 129    0.745    1.976                  20    1.944   3.159
 4-1                                         -0.058   -12.77***                          -0.053   -3.57***                      0.202    2.36**                      0.556   1.20
Total                     3,971     0.102     0.118                   1,186      0.178    0.140                 674    0.685    1.802                 187    1.695   2.635




                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                     Table I – continued

                    Panel C. Distribution of economics (by partner) and fund characters.
                                                   Obs.    Std. dev.   Mean         10th %    Median   90th %   Obs.    Std. dev.     Mean         10th %         Median        90th %
                                                                            Senior partners                                                 Junior partners
Carry                                              2,577   0.106       0.147        0.031     0.130    0.278    1,394   0.070         0.066        0.000          0.050         0.138
Ownership                                          733     0.192       0.210        0.000     0.180    0.500    453     0.053         0.027        0.000          0.000         0.100
Across funds:
 Number of partners                                673     2.499       3.976        2.000     3.000    7.000    540     2.865         2.620         1.000          1.000         5.000
 Fraction of partners leaving by next fund         673     0.198       0.089        0.000     0.000    0.333    540     0.269         0.122         0.000          0.000         0.500
 Fraction of top-performers leaving by next fund   673     0.189       0.080        0.000     0.000    0.333    540     0.256         0.110         0.000          0.000         0.500
                                                                            Senior partners                                 All partners (Senior and junior partners identified)
Across funds:
 Carry inequality: Max /Mean                       673     0.489       1.408        1.000     1.268    2.000    674     0.685         1.802         1.125         1.634         2.733
 Carry inequality: Top quartile/Mean               673     0.390       1.341        1.000     1.238    1.829    674     0.445         1.607         1.091         1.532         2.200
 Ownership inequality: Max/Mean                    187     0.884       1.677        1.000     1.333    3.000    187     1.695         2.635         1.250         2.172         4.550
 Ownership inequality: Top quartile /Mean          187     0.694       1.540        1.000     1.255    2.333    187     0.730         1.937         1.140         1.791         3.000




                                                                                                                                                                          41
                                                               Table II
                                                       Who Gets the Money?

Each observation in the regressions is an individual partner in a given fund. The dependent variable is the share of carried interest or
management company ownership accruing to the individual partner. The independent variables include a dummy denoting whether an
individual is a founder of the respective firm, the sequence number of the fund and logarithm of its size, a dummy for whether the
fund is a buyout one, the individual’s past track record (expressed as a gross multiple of invested capital), the individual’s years of
private equity experience and with the firm, dummies for the individual’s experience and education, and geography and vintage year
controls. Panel A presents the results for senior partners; Panel B for junior partners. The founder dummy is dropped from regression
(7) of Panel B due to the small number of observations. Standard errors (reported in brackets) are clustered at the firm×fund-type
level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                     42
                                                              Table II – continued

    Panel A. Senior partners
                                                           Carried interest                                    Firm ownership
                                          (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
Founder                                   0.0785***   0.0695***      0.0818***   0.0772***    0.1721***   0.1696***    0.1037***   0.1945***
                                          [0.004]     [0.004]        [0.007]     [0.010]      [0.013]     [0.014]      [0.026]     [0.043]
Fund sequence                             --          -0.0031*** 0.0010          -0.0042**    --          -0.0004      0.0030      -0.0090
                                                      [0.001]        [0.002]     [0.002]                  [0.003]      [0.008]     [0.009]
Log(Fund size)                            --          -0.0251*** -0.0270***      -0.0189***   --          -0.0071      -0.0223     -0.0286
                                                      [0.002]        [0.004]     [0.006]                  [0.008]      [0.018]     [0.027]
Buyout                                    --          0.0176***      0.0217***   -0.0092      --          -0.0038      -0.0101     0.0846
                                                      [0.004]        [0.007]     [0.012]                  [0.018]      [0.040]     [0.060]
Past performance (MOI)                    --          --             0.0003      --           --          --           0.0200***   --
                                                                     [0.001]                                           [0.004]
Years in PE                               --          --             --          -0.0003      --          --           --          0.0022
                                                                                 [0.001]                                           [0.003]
Years with the firm                       --          --           --            0.0003       --          --          --           0.0029
                                                                                 [0.001]                                           [0.005]
Experience: Banking                       --          --           --            -0.0049      --          --          --           0.0453
                                                                                 [0.009]                                           [0.038]
Education: MBA                            --          --           --            0.0074       --          --          --           0.0157
                                                                                 [0.009]                                           [0.040]
Education: MD                             --          --           --            0.1128***    --          --          --           0.6834***
                                                                                 [0.037]                                           [0.202]
Education: JD                             --          --           --            -0.0377**    --          --          --           -0.0814
                                                                                 [0.016]                                           [0.087]
Education: Ph.D.                          --          --           --            0.0240       --          --          --           0.1128
                                                                                 [0.020]                                           [0.092]
Education: Ivy league                     --          --           --            0.0024       --          --          --           0.0482
                                                                                 [0.015]                                           [0.085]
Education: Top school U.S. (Bachelor)     --          --           --            0.0027       --          --          --           -0.1209
                                                                                 [0.014]                                           [0.082]
Education: Top school Europe (Bachelor)   --          --           --            0.0122       --          --          --           0.0520
                                                                                 [0.023]                                           [0.113]
Fixed effects: Vintage                    --          Yes          Yes           Yes          --          Yes         Yes          Yes
Fixed effects: Geography                  --          Yes          Yes           Yes          --          Yes         Yes          Yes
Observations                              2,369       2,346        787           320          724         712         192          126
R-squared                                 0.15        0.25         0.32          0.45         0.20        0.26        0.30         0.46




                                                                                                                                               43
                                                              Table II – continued


    Panel B. Junior partners
                                                           Carried interest                                    Firm ownership
                                          (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)
Founder                                   0.0288***   0.0328***      0.0530***   0.0253**     0.0408***   0.0526***    --           0.0073
                                          [0.005]     [0.005]        [0.011]     [0.013]      [0.013]     [0.014]                   [0.023]
Fund sequence                             --          0.0030***      0.0035***   0.0050**     --          0.0032*      -0.0094**    -0.0001
                                                      [0.001]        [0.001]     [0.002]                  [0.002]      [0.004]      [0.007]
Log(Fund size)                            --          -0.0158*** -0.0224***      -0.0254***   --          -0.0108*** -0.0272***     -0.0363***
                                                      [0.001]        [0.002]     [0.005]                  [0.004]      [0.010]      [0.007]
Buyout                                    --          0.0128***      0.0196***   0.0193       --          0.0010       0.0035       0.0756***
                                                      [0.003]        [0.006]     [0.013]                  [0.008]      [0.027]      [0.022]
Past performance (MOI)                    --          --             0.0021**    --           --          --           -0.0145***   --
                                                                     [0.001]                                           [0.005]
Years in PE                               --          --             --          -0.0000      --          --           --           0.0024*
                                                                                 [0.001]                                            [0.001]
Years with the firm                       --          --           --            0.0010       --          --          --            -0.0002
                                                                                 [0.001]                                            [0.002]
Experience: Banking                       --          --           --            0.0100       --          --          --            0.0148
                                                                                 [0.007]                                            [0.010]
Education: MBA                            --          --           --            0.0007       --          --          --            -0.0023
                                                                                 [0.008]                                            [0.011]
Education: MD                             --          --           --            0.0048       --          --          --            --
                                                                                 [0.042]
Education: JD                             --          --           --            0.0062       --          --          --            0.0154
                                                                                 [0.019]                                            [0.025]
Education: Ph.D.                          --          --           --            0.0624*      --          --          --            --
                                                                                 [0.034]
Education: Ivy league                     --          --           --            0.0438       --          --          --            0.0268
                                                                                 [0.027]                                            [0.037]
Education: Top school U.S. (Bachelor)     --          --           --            -0.0326      --          --          --            -0.0267
                                                                                 [0.025]                                            [0.028]
Education: Top school Europe (Bachelor)   --          --           --            0.0111       --          --          --            0.0069
                                                                                 [0.031]                                            [0.044]
Fixed effects: Vintage                    --          Yes          Yes           Yes          --          Yes         Yes           Yes
Fixed effects: Geography                  --          Yes          Yes           Yes          --          Yes         Yes           Yes
Observations                              1,166       1,148        407           147          404         393         91            85
R-squared                                 0.02        0.19         0.37          0.42         0.02        0.14        0.37          0.62



                                                                                                                                                 44
                                                                  Table III
                                                   Departure of Partners: Individual Level

Each observation in the regressions is an individual partner in a given fund. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the
partner left by the time the next fund was closed, and zero otherwise. The independent variables are the share of carried interest or
ownership allocated to that partner and the individual’s past track record (expressed as a gross multiple of invested capital). The
economic measures in the third, sixth and ninth regressions are residuals from a regression of the economic measure on partner and
fund characteristics. Panel A presents the results for senior partners; Panel B for junior partners. Standard errors (reported in brackets)
are clustered at the firm×fund-type level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

    Panel A. Senior partners
                               (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)
Carry                          -0.7485***   -0.3653***   -0.2574**   --           --           --         -0.5478***   -0.7776**   -0.5739*
                               [0.073]      [0.089]      [0.107]                                          [0.171]      [0.303]     [0.339]
Ownership                      --           --           --          -0.2882***   -0.3621***   -0.2317*   -0.0828      -0.0474     -0.0418
                                                                     [0.063]      [0.118]      [0.129]    [0.090]      [0.175]     [0.177]
Past performance (MOI)         --           -0.0035      -0.0041     --           0.0084       0.0051     --           0.0037      0.0025
                                            [0.004]      [0.004]                  [0.008]      [0.008]                 [0.008]     [0.008]

Fixed effects: Vintage         --           --           Yes         --           --           Yes        --           --          Yes
Observations                   2,133        700          697         686          175          175        680          172         172
R-squared                      0.05         0.03         0.01        0.03         0.05         0.02       0.04         0.09        0.04


    Panel B. Junior partners
                               (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)          (9)
Carry                          -1.2971***   0.0395       -0.5463     --           --           --         -1.7996***   -1.7244*     -1.8071*
                               [0.277]      [0.354]      [0.421]                                          [0.543]      [0.973]      [1.050]
Ownership                      --           --           --          0.0173       0.6722       0.2642     0.6843       1.5138*      1.1865
                                                                     [0.384]      [0.658]      [0.713]    [0.426]      [0.824]      [0.896]
Past performance (MOI)         --           0.0080       0.0099      --           -0.0271      -0.0292    --           -0.0154      -0.0185
                                            [0.006]      [0.006]                  [0.028]      [0.028]                 [0.029]      [0.029]

Fixed effects: Vintage         --           --           Yes         --           --           Yes        --           --           Yes
Observations                   1,020        355          354         358          75           75         339          73           73
R-squared                      0.02         0.01         0.01        0.00         0.03         0.02       0.03         0.07         0.06


                                                                                                                                              45
                                                                               Table IV
                                                                   Departure of Partners: Fund Level

  Each observation in the regressions is a fund. The dependent variable is the fraction of senior partners (Panel A) or junior partners
  (Panel B) that left by the time of the next fund. Top performers are partners with a gross multiple of invested capital greater than two
  times. The independent variables are the fund’s carry and ownership inequality, the fraction of the partners who are founders, the
  sequence and logarithm of the size of the fund, and controls for the type, vintage year, and geography of the fund. Standard errors
  (reported in brackets) are clustered at the firm×fund-type level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
  levels, respectively.

         Panel A. Senior partners
                                       Fraction of partners leaving by next fund                             Fraction of top performers leaving by the next fund
                    (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)           (9)           (10)         (11)         (12)

Carry inequality:
Max /Mean           0.0457***   0.0472***       --            --           0.0860**   0.0860**   0.0416***   0.0450***     --           --           0.0741**      0.0751**
                    [0.016]     [0.016]                                    [0.034]    [0.038]    [0.015]     [0.015]                                 [0.034]       [0.038]
Ownership
inequality: Max
/Mean               --          --              0.0394**      0.0385**     0.0076     0.0091     --          --            0.0375**     0.0398**     0.0100        0.0141
                                                [0.017]       [0.019]      [0.021]    [0.023]                              [0.016]      [0.019]      [0.021]       [0.022]
Fraction of
founding partners   --          0.0025          --            -0.0320      --         -0.0217    --          0.0063        --           -0.0162      --            -0.0072
                                [0.022]                       [0.048]                 [0.048]                [0.021]                    [0.047]                    [0.047]
Fund sequence       --          0.0105***       --            0.0026       --         0.0035     --          0.0102***     --           0.0031       --            0.0039
                                [0.004]                       [0.008]                 [0.008]                [0.004]                    [0.008]                    [0.008]
Log(Fund size)      --          0.0002          --            0.0215       --         0.0172     --          -0.0009       --           0.0096       --            0.0058
                                [0.008]                       [0.019]                 [0.019]                [0.007]                    [0.019]                    [0.019]
Buyout              --          -0.0418**       --            -0.0577      --         -0.0605    --          -0.0315*      --           -0.0423      --            -0.0448
                                [0.018]                       [0.041]                 [0.041]                [0.017]                    [0.040]                    [0.040]
Fixed effects:
Vintage             --          Yes             --            Yes          --         Yes        --          Yes           --           Yes          --            Yes
Fixed effects:
Geography           --          Yes             --            Yes          --         Yes        --          Yes           --           Yes          --            Yes
Observations        673         666             187           183          187        183        673         666           187          183          187           183
R-squared           0.01        0.07            0.03          0.15         0.06       0.18       0.01        0.07          0.03         0.13         0.05          0.15




                                                                                                                                                                     46
                                                                              Table IV – continued
         Panel B. Junior partners
                                           Fraction of partners leaving by next fund                             Fraction of top performers leaving by next fund
                       (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)      (6)          (7)       (8)           (9)          (10)          (11)       (12)

Carry inequality:
Max /Mean              -0.0098      0.0046         --            --           -0.0433   -0.0617      -0.0053   0.0079       --           --            -0.0389     -0.0630
                       [0.016]      [0.017]                                   [0.045]   [0.050]      [0.015]   [0.016]                                 [0.044]     [0.048]
Ownership
inequality: Max
/Mean                  --           --             -0.0100       -0.0105      -0.0014   0.0011       --        --           -0.0068      -0.0064       0.0009      0.0054
                                                   [0.014]       [0.017]      [0.017]   [0.020]                             [0.014]      [0.017]       [0.016]     [0.019]
Fraction of founding
partners               --           -0.0164        --            -0.1077      --        -0.1258      --        0.0006       --           -0.0588       --          -0.0773
                                    [0.047]                      [0.123]                [0.124]                [0.045]                   [0.119]                   [0.120]
Fund sequence          --           0.0109*        --            -0.0040      --        -0.0057      --        0.0083       --           -0.0055       --          -0.0072
                                    [0.006]                      [0.013]                [0.013]                [0.006]                   [0.013]                   [0.013]
Log(Fund size)         --           -0.0220*       --            0.0156       --        0.0237       --        -0.0168      --           0.0298        --          0.0381
                                    [0.012]                      [0.030]                [0.031]                [0.011]                   [0.029]                   [0.030]
Buyout                 --           -0.0073        --            -0.0881      --        -0.0904      --        -0.0119      --           -0.1286**     --          -0.1310**
                                    [0.026]                      [0.067]                [0.067]                [0.025]                   [0.065]                   [0.065]
Fixed effects:
Vintage                --           Yes            --            Yes          --        Yes          --        Yes          --           Yes           --          Yes
Fixed effects:
Geography              --           Yes            --            Yes          --        Yes          --        Yes          --           Yes           --          Yes
Observations           581          574            163           159          163       159          581       574          163          159           163         159
R-squared              0.00         0.08           0.00          0.18         0.01      0.19         0.00      0.07         0.00         0.18          0.01        0.19




                                                                                                                                                                     47
                                                                    Table V
                                          Partner Departures and Fund Continuity: Size of the Next Fund

Each observation in the regression is a fund. The dependent variable is logarithm of the next fund size. The independent variables are
the fraction of partners leaving within two years of the closing of the fund (or top-performing partners, that is, partners with a gross
multiple of invested capital greater than two times), the logarithm of current fund size, the fraction of partners who are founders, the
sequence number of the fund, a dummy denoting whether the fund is a buyout one, the performance of the fund (measured using
internal rate of return, multiple of invested capital, or Kaplan-Schoar public market equivalent based on the S&P 500) through the end
of 2015 or the latest prior available data, and controls for the vintage year of the fund and fund geography. Panel A presents the results
for senior partners; Panel B for junior partners. Standard errors (reported in brackets) are clustered at the firm×fund-type level. *, **,
and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A. Senior partners
                                                                     Any partners                                Top-performing partners
                                                  (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)
      Fraction of partners leaving by next fund   -0.4355     -0.7612*** -0.6364**      -0.6459**   -0.4062     -0.7163**    -0.5922**     -0.6028**
                                                  [0.310]     [0.291]       [0.279]     [0.280]     [0.319]     [0.299]      [0.287]       [0.289]
      Log(Fund size)                              0.8327***   0.8687***     0.8582***   0.8579***   0.8328***   0.8689***    0.8585***     0.8583***
                                                  [0.023]     [0.028]       [0.028]     [0.028]     [0.023]     [0.028]      [0.028]       [0.028]
      Fraction of founding partners               -0.0511     -0.0854       -0.0974     -0.0922     -0.0508     -0.0857      -0.0976       -0.0924
                                                  [0.074]     [0.087]       [0.089]     [0.087]     [0.074]     [0.088]      [0.089]       [0.087]
      Fund sequence                               0.0091      0.0081        0.0080      0.0076      0.0089      0.0078       0.0077        0.0073
                                                  [0.013]     [0.014]       [0.014]     [0.014]     [0.013]     [0.014]      [0.014]       [0.014]
      Buyout                                      0.4058***   0.3873***     0.4090***   0.4017***   0.4064***   0.3889***    0.4099***     0.4027***
                                                  [0.069]     [0.078]       [0.079]     [0.079]     [0.069]     [0.078]      [0.080]       [0.079]
      IRR                                         --          0.5418***     --          --          --          0.5345***    --            --
                                                              [0.163]                                           [0.162]
      MOI                                         --          --            0.0723      --          --          --           0.0717        --
                                                                            [0.046]                                          [0.045]
      PME (S&P 500)                               --          --            --          0.0941      --          --           --            0.0933
                                                                                        [0.070]                                            [0.069]

      Fixed effects: Fund vintage                 Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
      Fixed effects: Geography                    Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
      Observations                                475         324          324          324         475         324          324           324
      R-squared                                   0.84        0.85         0.85         0.85        0.84        0.85         0.85          0.85



                                                                                                                                                       48
                                                                      Table V – continued


Panel B: Junior partners
                                                                      Any partners                               Top-performing partners
                                                   (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)
       Fraction of partners leaving by next fund   0.2543      0.1080        0.1228      0.1259      0.2811      0.0410      0.0453        0.0441
                                                   [0.205]     [0.125]       [0.129]     [0.127]     [0.260]     [0.168]     [0.171]       [0.170]
       Log(Fund size)                              0.8562***   0.8913***     0.8822***   0.8815***   0.8596***   0.8906*** 0.8813***       0.8805***
                                                   [0.025]     [0.031]       [0.030]     [0.030]     [0.027]     [0.031]     [0.030]       [0.030]
       Fraction of founding partners               0.0156      -0.0901       -0.0983     -0.0910     -0.0082     -0.0950     -0.1041       -0.0970
                                                   [0.097]     [0.109]       [0.111]     [0.111]     [0.101]     [0.109]     [0.111]       [0.111]
       Fund sequence                               0.0078      0.0070        0.0069      0.0070      0.0069      0.0075      0.0076        0.0076
                                                   [0.014]     [0.016]       [0.015]     [0.015]     [0.012]     [0.016]     [0.015]       [0.015]
       Buyout                                      0.3836***   0.3588***     0.3761***   0.3708***   0.3563***   0.3600*** 0.3776***       0.3724***
                                                   [0.075]     [0.083]       [0.084]     [0.083]     [0.069]     [0.084]     [0.085]       [0.084]
       IRR                                         --          0.4647**      --          --          --          0.4671**    --            --
                                                               [0.181]                                           [0.182]
       MOI                                         --          --            0.0680      --          --          --          0.0681        --
                                                                             [0.049]                                         [0.050]
       PME (S&P 500)                               --          --                        0.0840      --          --          --            0.0839
                                                                                         [0.062]

       Fixed effects: Fund vintage                 Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
       Fixed effects: Geography                    Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
       Observations                                414         282          282          282         417         282         282           282
       R-squared                                   0.84        0.85         0.85         0.85        0.83        0.85        0.85          0.85




                                                                                                                                                       49
