                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 A SIMPLER THEORY OF OPTIMAL CAPITAL TAXATION

                                         Emmanuel Saez
                                       Stefanie Stantcheva

                                      Working Paper 22664
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22664


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2016, Revised October 2017




We thank Alan Auerbach, Stephen Coate, Emmanuel Farhi, Mike Golosov, Henrik Kleven,
Thomas Piketty, Joel Slemrod, Matthew Weinzierl, Nicolas Werquin, Daniel Waldenström, and
numerous seminar and conference participants for useful discussions and comments. We
acknowledge financial support from the MacArthur Foundation, and the Center for Equitable
Growth at UC Berkeley. We thank Nina Roussille for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Simpler Theory of Optimal Capital Taxation
Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 22664
September 2016, Revised October 2017
JEL No. H20,H21

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper develops a theory of optimal capital taxation that expresses optimal tax formulas in
sufficient statistics. We first consider a simple model with utility functions linear in consumption
and featuring heterogeneous utility for wealth. In this case, there are no transitional dynamics, the
steady-state is reached immediately and has finite elasticities of capital with respect to the net-of-
tax rate. This allows for a tractable optimal tax analysis with formulas expressed in terms of
empirical elasticities and social preferences that can address many important policy questions.
These formulas can easily be taken to the data to simulate optimal taxes, which we do using U.S.
tax return data on labor and capital incomes. Second, we show how these results can be extended
to the case with concave utility for consumption. The same types of formulas carry over by
appropriately defining elasticities. We show that one can recover all the results from the simpler
model using a new and non standard steady state approach that respects individual preferences
even with a fully general utility function.


Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu

Stefanie Stantcheva
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 232
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu
1         Introduction
The public debate has long featured an important controversy about the proper design of capital
taxation. Arguments typically center around an equity-efficiency trade-off: who owns the capital
and how strongly would capital react to higher taxes? The economics literature has developed
dynamic, complex models, which have emphasized different results depending on the structure
of individual preferences and shocks, the government’s objective, and the policy tools available.
Many of the highly salient questions in the policy debate on capital taxation have been very
difficult to address in these complex models. A few examples are how to take into account
income shifting between the capital and labor income bases, different types of capital assets,
heterogeneity in individuals’ preferences or returns to capital, nonlinear taxation, and broader
social fairness and equity considerations. Bridging the gap between economic theory and the
policy debate seems especially important in the current context with growing income and wealth
inequality, and where a large fraction of top incomes comes from capital income (Saez and
Zucman, 2016; Piketty et al., 2016).
        The goal of this paper is to connect the theory of optimal capital taxation to the public
debate by providing a framework in which many policy questions related to capital taxation can
be addressed. This framework permits the derivation of robust optimal capital tax formulas
expressed in terms of elasticities of capital supply with respect to the net-of-tax rate of return
that can be estimated in the data, and distributional considerations which society may have.
The aim is to build a model which generates an empirically realistic response of capital to taxes,1
is sufficiently tractable to yield results for a variety of policy topics related to capital taxation,
but general enough for these results to be robust to a broader set of models.
        We start in Section 2 with a simple model in continuous time with the following two in-
gredients. First, individuals derive utility from wealth. We provide several microfoundations
for this wealth in the utility specification: bequest motives, entrepreneurship, or services from
wealth. It implies that the steady-state features finite supply elasticities of capital with respect
to tax rates.2 It also implies that there is bi-dimensional heterogeneity in capital and labor
    1
     Our model generates finite elasticities of capital responses to capital taxes. In contrast, the famous result
of Chamley (1986) and Judd (1985) that in the long-run the optimal capital tax should be zero–arises because
the elasticity to a long-run tax increase is infinite due to anticipation effects (see Piketty and Saez (2013b)).
   2
     The magnitude of capital income elasticities is an empirical question. Our model nests the case of infinite
steady state elasticities from the standard Chamley-Judd model as a special case. Other possible modeling
devices to obtain finite elasticities would be introducing uncertainty as in the Aiyagari (1995) model as shown


                                                        1
incomes across individuals. As a result, the famous zero capital tax result of Atkinson and
Stiglitz (1976) does not apply. Second, utility of consumption is linear so that there are no
consumption smoothing issues and individual responses to tax changes are immediate.3 While
necessary to analyze insurance issues as in the New Dynamic Public Finance literature,4 con-
sumption smoothing due to concave utility seems, at a first pass, less important for thinking
about taxation of top incomes, where most of the capital is ultimately concentrated, and long-
run taxation.5
    While we generalize this model later on to allow for concave utilities (and the anticipatory
and sluggish responses of capital to taxation they generate), the simpler version with linear
consumption is extremely tractable and amenable to studying a wide range of issues about
optimal capital taxation, such as nonlinear capital taxation, income shifting, cross-elasticities
between capital and labor income, consumption taxation and others in Section 3. It highlights
the main forces shaping capital taxation which are obscured in more complex models. Another
key (and perhaps the main) advantage is that it resolves the highly thorny issue of how to tax
the existing capital stock and does not require making a judgment about what type of reform to
consider (e.g.: anticipated, unanticipated, steady state focused). Confronting these dilemmas
in earlier papers required making normative judgments on the social welfare objective, none of
which are entirely satisfactory (see Section 5). We can describe four sets of findings that we
obtain by putting this newly gained simplicity to use.
    First, we derive formulas for optimal linear and nonlinear capital income taxation that can
be expressed in terms of the elasticity of the supply of capital income with respect to the
by Piketty and Saez (2013b) or discount rates that depend on consumption (as in Judd (1985)). We argue
that utility of wealth is much simpler and fits the data better in Section 2.3, but do relate our results to these
alternative models in Section 5.
    3
      Anticipated tax reforms do not create any effect until they actually take place, which greatly simplifies the
analysis by eliminating the need to model anticipation effects and expectations about policy. This is unlike in
the Chamley (1986) and Judd (1985) theory where unanticipated capital taxes are desirable while anticipated
long-distance capital taxes are not.
    4
      Golosov et al. (2003) founded this literature. Golosov et al. (2006) provide a comprehensive overview.
    5
      To draw the analogy to the labor income tax literature, responses of labor to taxes are also part of a dynamic
decision process if we acknowledge longer-term and slowly adjusting margins such as occupational choice and
human capital acquisition. Two strands of the literature have thought of labor taxation in a dynamic way: the
heterogeneous agents macro literature as in Jones et al. (1993) and the modern New Dynamic Public Finance
literature. While providing useful insights, this literature has not been central in the public policy debate on
taxation. The missing piece in optimal capital tax theory that we propose here is an approach that can yield
a static-equivalent model, which abstracts from transitional dynamics, and as was adopted for labor income
following the seminal contribution of Mirrlees (1971).



                                                         2
net-of-tax rate of return, the shape of the capital income distribution, and the social welfare
weights at each capital income level. We also derive formulas which take into account policy
issues that have traditionally been hard to deal with in dynamic optimal capital tax models.
These include, among others, income shifting between capital and labor, economic growth,
heterogeneous returns to capital across individuals, and different types of capital assets and
heterogeneous tastes for each of them.
       Second, we derive a formula for the optimal tax on comprehensive income (labor plus capital
income) that takes exactly the same form as the traditional optimal labor income formula. This
formally justifies the use of the optimal labor income formulas to discuss optimal income taxation
as has been done without rigorous justification in a number of studies (e.g., Diamond and Saez
(2011)). The comprehensive income tax is the fully optimal tax if there is perfectly elastic
income shifting between the labor and capital income bases when labor and capital are taxed
differentially.
       Third, we can analyze consumption taxation in this model as well by making the assumption
that real wealth (i.e., the purchasing power of wealth) enters individual utilities. In this case, a
consumption tax makes people accumulate more nominal wealth so that their steady-state real
wealth is unchanged. Hence, consumption taxation ends up being equivalent to labor taxation
plus an initial wealth levy.6 It is thus not a sufficient tool to address capital inequality when
capital inequality re-emerges even after an initial wealth equalization as in our model and as
seems to be the case from empirical experiences (e.g., Eastern Europe’s transition to a market
economy and in particular Russia as recently analyzed in Novokmet et al. (2017)).
       Fourth, our approach is very amenable to considering a broader range of justice and fairness
principles related to capital taxation, through the use of generalized social welfare weights as
in Saez and Stantcheva (2016). Given the prevalence of discussions about fairness and equity
with regard to capital taxation, having a tractable way to incorporate broader and more diverse
equity considerations is key.7 We consider several salient ethical standpoints from the policy
debate. To give just one example, if wealth inequality is considered fully fair (i.e., the generalized
social welfare weights are uncorrelated with capital and capital income is not a tag) the optimal
   6
     The same equivalence holds in standard OLG models traditionally used to discuss transitions from income
to consumption taxation (Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1987).
   7
     Put simply, to obtain the optimal tax for different justice and fairness principles, the reader can use all the
formulas derived and “plug in” the corresponding generalized social welfare weights.



                                                         3
capital tax is zero.
        In Section 4, we put our formula in sufficient statistics to use by calibrating optimal taxes
based on U.S. tax data on labor and capital income. Because capital income is much more
concentrated than labor income, we find that, if the supply elasticities of labor and capital with
respect to tax rates were the same, the top tax rate on capital income would be higher than
the top tax rate on labor income. The model highlights which elasticities should fruitfully be
estimated in the data, including the cross-elasticities between capital and labor (Section 3.2.2)
and the elasticities and cross-elasticities for different types of capital assets (Section 3.3.3).
        In Section 5, we show that the tax formulas obtained in the specific model of Section 2
carry over to the general case with concave utility for consumption as long as the elasticity of
the capital income tax base is appropriately defined. However in the general case, there are
transitional dynamics and as a result, there is no single way to pose the optimal tax problem.
We consider three cases: unanticipated tax changes, anticipated tax changes, and a focus on
the long-run steady-state with a new and non standard approach which we call the “utility
based steady state approach.”8 In each case, the same qualitative formulas expressed in terms
of elasticities apply, but the quantitative elasticities are different. Choosing one of these cases is
a policy choice that entails a normative judgment. We discuss the pros and cons of each case.9
        The proofs of the Propositions in the text are gathered in the Appendix. Additional results
and many extensions are presented in the Online Appendix.



2         A Simpler Model of Capital Taxation
In this section, we present a simpler model of capital taxation. The key simplification comes
from having utility linear in consumption, which implies immediate convergence to the steady
state. The key additional component is to introduce wealth in the utility, which allows for
smooth responses of capital to taxation. This model usefully highlights the key efficiency-equity
    8
     The simpler model in Section 2, in addition to its tractability, does not require such a normative judgment
in the choice of the type of reform, as they are all equivalent.
   9
     The results of this section relate to earlier work by Piketty and Saez (2013b) who consider a model of
bequest taxation with stochastic shocks in earnings abilities over generations. In contrast, we consider a model
with certainty. This makes the derivations simpler. We can do this because our wealth in the utility model
generates finite elasticities. As we shall see, for the anticipated and unanticipated reform approaches, many of
the formulas from Piketty and Saez (2013b) are similar to ours, illustrating the virtue of the sufficient statistics
approach.


                                                         4
trade-off for capital taxation, often obscured in more complex models.


2.1      Model
Time is continuous. Individual i has instantaneous utility with functional form ui (c, k, z) =
c + ai (k) − hi (z), linear in consumption c, increasing in wealth k with ai (k) increasing and
concave, and with a disutility cost hi (z) of earning income z increasing and convex in z. The
individual index i can capture any arbitrary heterogeneity in the preferences for work and
wealth, as well as in the discount rate δi . We justify the assumption of wealth in the utility in
great detail below. The discounted utility of i from an allocation {ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t≥0 is:
                                                        Z   ∞
             Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t≥0 ) = δi ·           [ci (t) + ai (ki (t)) − hi (zi (t))]e−δi t dt.             (1)
                                                        0


We normalize utility by the discount rate δi so that an extra unit of consumption in perpetuity
increases utility by one unit uniformly across all individuals. The net return on capital is r. At
time 0, initial wealth of individual i is kiinit . For any given time-invariant tax schedule T (z, rk)
based on labor and capital incomes, the budget constraint of individual i is:

                            dki (t)
                                    = rki (t) + zi (t) − T (zi (t), rki (t)) − ci (t).                                     (2)
                              dt

TL0 (z, rk) ≡ ∂T (z, rk)/∂z denotes the marginal tax with respect to labor income and TK0 (z, rk) ≡
∂T (z, rk)/∂(rk) denotes the marginal tax with respect to capital income.
    The Hamiltonian of individual i at time t, with co-state λi (t) on the budget constraint, is:


Hi (ci (t), zi (t), ki (t), λi (t)) = ci (t)+ai (ki (t))−hi (zi (t))+λi (t)·[rki (t)+zi (t)−T (zi (t), rki (t))−ci (t)].


Taking the first order conditions, the choice (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)) is such that:


  λi (t) = 1,    h0i (zi (t)) = 1 − TL0 (zi (t), rki (t)),           a0i (ki (t)) = δi − r[1 − TK0 (zi (t), rki (t))],   and


                                     ci (t) = rki (t) + zi (t) − T (zi (t), rki (t)).

In this model, (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)) jumps immediately to its steady-state value (ci , ki , zi ) charac-
terized by h0i (zi ) = 1 − TL0 , a0i (ki ) = δi − r(1 − TK0 ), ci = rki + zi − T (zi , rki ). This is achieved

                                                                 5
by a Dirac quantum jump in consumption at instant t = 0, so as to bring the wealth level from
the initial kiinit to the steady state value ki . Because of this immediate adjustment and the lack
of transition dynamics, we have that:


                  Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t≥0 ) = [ci + ai (ki ) − hi (zi )] + δi · (kiinit − ki ),


where the last term (kiinit − ki ) represents the utility cost of going from wealth kiinit to wealth
ki at instant 0, achieved by the quantum Dirac jump in consumption.


Heterogeneous wealth preferences and a smooth steady state. Wealth accumulation
in this model depends on the heterogeneous individual preferences, as embodied in the taste
for wealth ai (·) and in the impatience δi . It also depends on the net-of-tax return r̄ = r(1 −
TK0 (z, rk)): capital taxes discourage wealth accumulation through a substitution effect (there
are no income effects). Because of a possibly arbitrary heterogeneity in preferences for capital,
steady state wealth holdings are heterogeneous across individuals and capital exhibits a smooth
behavior in the steady state, with a finite elasticity of capital supply with respect to the net-
of-tax return. This also implies that there is heterogeneity in wealth even conditional on labor
earnings. Therefore, the famous zero tax result of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) does not apply:
Even without any heterogeneity in labor earnings, there is heterogeneity in wealth and capital
income and hence scope for a capital income tax.
       The wealth-in-the-utility feature puts a limit on individuals’ impatience to consume. Intu-
itively, if δi > r̄, with linear consumption and no utility for wealth, the individual would like to
consume all his wealth at once at time 0. With utility of wealth, there is value in keeping some
wealth. At the margin, the value lost in delaying consumption δi − r̄ is equal to the marginal
value of holding wealth a0i (k) and the optimum for capital holding is interior. Note that we need
to impose the condition that δi > r̄ for all individuals to avoid wealth going to infinity.10


Instant adjustments to the steady state and equivalence to the static model. With
utility linear in consumption, there are no consumption smoothing considerations. As a result,
all dynamic adjustments occur instantaneously and there are no transitional dynamics.
  10
    In practice, wealth does not go to infinity because of shocks to the rate of return or to preferences (Piketty
(2011, 2014)). Uncertainty makes the model less tractable. We relate our results to models with stochastic
shocks in Section 5.


                                                           6
    The dynamic model of equation (1) is mathematically equivalent to a static representation.
I.e., the optimal choice (ci , ki , zi ) from the dynamic problem also maximizes the static utility
equivalent:


                        Ui (ci , ki , zi ) = ci + ai (ki ) − hi (zi ) + δi · (kiinit − ki ),                    (3)


subject to the static budget constraint ci = rki + zi − T (zi , rki ).

    Therefore a social welfare objective based on the original discounted utility Vi from equation
(1) is equivalent to a social welfare objective based on the static equivalent Ui from equation
(3). It also seems natural to impose a constraint k ≥ 0 for those who do not like wealth (i.e.,
who have ai (k) ≡ 0). Such individuals optimally choose k = 0 and behave entirely like in the
static labor supply model.


Anticipated vs. unanticipated tax reforms and taxing the existing capital stock. A
thorny issue in the capital taxation literature has been how to tax the existing stock of capital.
Should the government announce reforms in advance or not? This is a policy choice that is
itself normative and has important implications for the optimal capital tax. In Section 5, we
discuss why none of the approaches adopted so far has been satisfactory. A key advantage of our
simpler model is that, with linear utility of consumption and the resulting lack of transitional
dynamics, announced and unannounced tax reforms have exactly the same effect. If at time
t = 0 a capital tax reform is announced to take place at time T , there is no behavioral response
until the actual time of the reform. At time T , the capital stock jumps to its new steady level
thanks to a Dirac quantum jump in consumption, exactly as in the unannounced tax reform
case. The same optimal taxes apply in the short-run and long-run. As a result, as long as the
tax on the return to capital is bounded (e.g. limited to 100%), issues of policy commitment and
policy discretion are irrelevant in our model.11
  11
     There is no temptation to increase the tax rate on capital returns unannounced, as individuals adjust
instantaneously, so that the gain from such a tax hike goes to zero. If unanticipated wealth levies are allowed then
the capital stock can always be expropriated. In our time continuous model, a wealth levy can be approximated
by an infinite tax on capital income for an infinitesimal time. If the capital income tax rate is bounded (say at
100%), wealth levies are ruled out. If wealth levies are anticipated, they can be fully avoided in our model with
a suitable Dirac quantum consumption just before the wealth levy followed by a corresponding Dirac quantum
saving just after the wealth levy.



                                                           7
2.2      Optimal Tax Formulas
The government sets the time invariant tax T (z, rk), subject to budget-balance, to maximize
its social objective:
                                                   Z
                                        SW F =             ωi · Ui (ci , ki , zi )di,                     (4)
                                                       i


where ωi ≥ 0 is the Pareto weight on individual i. We denote by gi = ωi · Uic the social marginal
welfare weight on individual i. With utility linear in consumption, we have gi = ωi . Without
loss of generality, we further normalize the weights to sum to one over the population so that
R
  ω di = 1. We first consider linear taxes and then turn to nonlinear taxes.
 i i



2.2.1     Optimal Linear Capital and Labor Taxation

We start by studying the optimal linear taxes at rates τK and τL on capital and labor income.
Recall that r̄ ≡ r · (1 − τK ) denotes the net-of-tax return on capital. The individual maximizing
choices are such that a0i (ki ) = δi − r̄ and h0i (zi ) = 1 − τL so that ki depends positively on r̄ and
zi depends positively on 1 − τL . For budget-balance, tax revenues are rebated lump-sum and
                                                                                                R
the transfer to each individual is G = τK · rk m (r̄) + τL · z m (1 − τL ) where z m (1 − τL ) = i zi di
                                                                          R
is aggregate labor income that depends on 1 − τL and k m (r̄) = i ki di is aggregate capital
which depends on r̄. The government chooses τK and τL to maximize social welfare SWF in
(4), with ci = (1 − τK ) · rki + (1 − τL ) · zi + τK · rk m (r̄) + τL · z m (1 − τL ) and Ui (ci , ki , zi ) =
ci + ai (ki ) − hi (zi ) + δi · (kiinit − ki ).
    Let the elasticity of aggregate capital k m with respect to r̄ be denoted by eK and the elasticity
of aggregate labor income z m with respect to the net of tax rate 1 − τL be eL . Because there
are no income effects, we have eL > 0 and eK > 0. Standard optimal tax derivations using the
individuals’ envelope theorems for the choice ki yield:
                                                  Z                                             
                            dSW F                             ki                       τK
                                  = rk m ·           ωi · 1 − m                 di −        · eK
                             dτK                   i         k                       1 − τK

The social marginal welfare weight on individual i is gi = ωi . At the optimal τK , we have
dSW F/dτK = 0, leading to the following proposition.




                                                                  8
Proposition 1. Optimal linear capital tax. The optimal linear capital tax is given by:
                                                           R
                    1 − ḡK                                    g · ki
                                                            iR i                   r̄ dk m
            τK =                      with    ḡK =                     and   eK = m ·     > 0.               (5)
                 1 − ḡK + eK                                    k
                                                                i i
                                                                                  k    dr̄

   The optimal labor tax can be derived exactly symmetrically:
                                                R
               1 − ḡL                               g · zi
                                                    iR i                       1 − τL     dz m
        τL =                    with ḡL =                         and eL =           ·            > 0.       (6)
             1 − ḡL + eL                              z
                                                      i i
                                                                                 zm     d(1 − τL )

Remarks. The optimal capital tax is zero if ḡK = 1 or eK = ∞. ḡK = 1 happens when there
are no redistributive concerns along the capital income dimension (gi is uncorrelated with ki ).
   We discuss social preferences embodied in the social welfare weights gi in Section 3.1. Briefly,
as long as wealth is concentrated among individuals with lower social marginal welfare weights
(such that gi is decreasing in ki and, hence ḡK < 1) the optimal capital tax is strictly positive.
   The revenue maximizing tax rates (which arise when ḡK = 0 and ḡL = 0) are

                                             1                             1
                                  τKR =                    and τLR =            .                             (7)
                                          1 + eK                         1 + eL

   As is standard with the sufficient statistics approach, all elasticities can depend on the tax
system. Our approach is valid for evaluating small reforms using local elasticities. Evaluating
large tax reforms (or finding the optimum far from the status quo at which elasticities are
estimated) requires estimating structural elasticities.


2.2.2    Optimal Nonlinear Separable Taxes

We now turn to the nonlinear tax system separable in labor and capital income, characterized
by the tax schedules TL (z) and TK (rk). The individual’s budget constraint is given by:


                                     ci = rki − TK (rki ) + zi − TL (zi ),                                    (8)


so that utility is:


          Ui (ci , ki , zi ) = rki − TK (rki ) + zi − TL (zi ) + ai (ki ) − hi (zi ) + δi · (kiinit − ki ).   (9)




                                                               9
The first-order conditions characterizing the individual’s choice of capital and labor income are:


                          a0i (ki ) = δi − r(1 − TK0 (rki )) and h0i (zi ) = 1 − TL0 (zi ).


We denote the average relative welfare weight on individuals with capital income higher than
rk, by ḠK (rk) and the average relative welfare weight on individuals with labor income higher
than z, by ḠL (z):
                                       R                                        R
                                                      g di
                                           {i:rki ≥rk} i                            {i:zi ≥z}
                                                                                                gi di
                          ḠK (rk) =                         and ḠL (z) =                              .        (10)
                                        P (rki ≥ rk)                             P (zi ≥ z)

Let the cumulative distributions of capital and labor income be HK (rk) and HL (z). We denote
by hK (rk) and hL (z) the corresponding densities when the tax system is linearized at points rk
and z.12 We define the local Pareto parameters of the capital and labor income distributions
as:
                                           rk · hK (rk)                         z · hZ (z)
                            αK (rk) ≡                        and αL (z) ≡                  .
                                           1 − HK (rk)                         1 − HZ (z)
Clearly, the income distributions and local Pareto parameters depend on the tax system. The
local elasticity of k with respect to the net of tax return r(1 − TK0 (rk)) at income level rk is
denoted by eK (rk), while the local elasticity of z with respect to 1 − TL0 (z) is denoted by eL (z).
       Because wealth and labor choices are separable, due to the lack of income effects and sepa-
rable preferences, each tax satisfies the standard Mirrlees (1971) formula and can be expressed
in terms of elasticities as in Saez (2001), as shown in the next proposition (the proof is in
appendix).

Proposition 2. Optimal nonlinear capital and labor income taxes.
       The optimal nonlinear capital and labor income taxes are:

                              1 − ḠK (rk)                                              1 − ḠL (z)
       TK0 (rk) =                                            and   TL0 (z) =                                 .   (11)
                    1 − ḠK (rk) + αK (rk) · eK (rk)                           1 − ḠL (z) + αL (z) · eL (z)
  12
    To be precise, these are the densities that would arise if the actual nonlinear tax system were replaced by
the linearized tax system at points rk and z. They are related to the actual densities but have the advantage of
not being locally affected by the nonlinearity of the tax system, and hence are useful to write more parsimonious
optimal tax formulas. Saez (2001) introduced this concept to simplify the presentation of optimal nonlinear
labor income taxation and provides complete details. Our analysis exactly parallels Saez (2001) analysis.




                                                             10
Asymptotic Nonlinear Formula. In Section 4 we show that capital income is very concen-
trated, with top 1% capital income earners earning more than 60% of total capital income. The
asymptotic formula when rk → ∞ in (11) is therefore relevant for most of the tax base.

                                                          1 − ḠK (∞)
                                     TK0 (∞) =                                 .                            (12)
                                                 1 − ḠK (∞) + αK (∞) · eK (∞)

The revenue maximizing rate obtains if ḠK (∞) = 0.


Optimal linear tax rate in top bracket. Paralleling Saez (2001) optimal labor income
analysis, it is also easy to derive a formula for the optimal linear tax rate in the top bracket
above a given capital income threshold:

                                                                        top
                                                                  1 − ḡK
                                                 τKtop =         top
                                                           1 − ḡK   + atop   top
                                                                         K · eK

       top
with ḡK   the average social marginal welfare weight in the top bracket, etop
                                                                           K the elasticity in the

top bracket, and atop
                  K the Pareto parameter in the top bracket. The Pareto parameter is defined
               E[ki |ki ≥ktop ]
as atop
    K =      E[ki |ki ≥ktop ]−ktop
                                     where k top is the threshold for the top bracket. As capital income is so
concentrated, this formula has wide applicability (see our numerical simulations below).


2.3       Foundations of Wealth in the Utility
Wealth in the utility is needed technically in order to generate finite steady state elasticities,
but is also attractive per se because it helps generate a non degenerate steady state even with
arbitrary heterogeneity in discount rates or returns and allows to better match the data by
capturing relevant non consumption benefits of capital.13
       Utility for wealth has long been recognized as important. Smith (1759) noted (and lamented)
that wealth could lend social status and moral prestige.14 Max Weber called the phenomenon of
individuals valuing wealth per se the “capitalist spirit” (Weber, 1958). Keynes (1931) regretted
people’s “love of money as a possession” and noted that saving was in large part done for the
  13
     Technically, the standard dynamic model with only utility for consumption leads to a degenerate steady
state, where δi = δ = r̄. This precludes heterogeneity in time preferences and implies an infinite elasticity of
capital to taxes in the steady-state.
  14
     Social status concerns due to wealth may lead to externalities and to corrective taxation, which could be an
interesting extension for future research.


                                                                11
sake of holding wealth “Saving was for old age or for your children; but this was only in theory–
the virtue of the cake was that it was never to be consumed, neither by you nor by your children
after you.”
       There is no compelling empirical evidence that a model with only utility for consumption
captures microeconomic behavior better than the model with wealth in the utility. Quite the
contrary, it has been shown that the standard Bewley models as in Aiyagari (1994) cannot
match the empirical wealth distribution. First, precautionary savings in themselves cannot
rationalize high wealth holdings at the top without “the capitalist spirit” (Carroll, 1997, 2000;
Quadrini, 1999). Second, it is difficult to generate a saving behavior that makes the distribution
of wealth much more concentrated than that of labor earnings (Benhabib and Bisin, 2016).15
Third, as we show in Section 4, there is an important two-dimensional heterogeneity in capital
and labor income: even conditional on labor income, capital income is unequally distributed,
which means a second dimension of heterogeneity, in addition to differences in labor earnings
ability, is required.
       We next discuss formally three possible microfoundations for wealth in the utility.


2.3.1      Bequest Motive

The wealth in the utility specification can arise from bequest motives. With a warm-glow
bequest motive, if an agent dies at date T , his utility is:
                                          Z    T
                            Vi (T ) =              ui (ci (t))e−ρi t dt + e−ρi T φi (ki (T )),                (13)
                                           0


where ρi is the discount rate of agent i and φi (ki (T )) is the warm glow utility from the bequest
ki (T ) left at time T . If the death time T is stochastic and follows a Poisson process with rate
pi for agent i, then, as in the “perpetual youth” model of Yaari (1965) and Blanchard (1985),
the expected utility can be rewritten in infinite horizon with:
                                 Z    ∞
                          Vi =            e−(ρi +pi )t · [ui (ci (t)) + pi · φi (ki (t))] dt.                 (14)
                                  0
  15
     That households want to keep wealth for purposes other than consumption is also suggested by behavior in
retirement: very little wealth is annuitized, especially among the very wealthy, many assets are still available at
death, and indeed, wealthy households do not appear to be rapidly de-accumulating wealth closer to their death.




                                                                 12
This amounts to our wealth in the utility formulation with δi = ρi +pi and ai (ki (t)) = pi ·φi (ki (t)).
       On the empirical side, De Nardi (2004) shows quantitatively that a model with a bequest
motive can both explain large wealth holdings at the top and better match the lifecycle profiles
of savings. Cagetti and De Nardi (2007) combine a bequest motive with a model of entrepreneur-
ship, also discussed next.


2.3.2       Entrepreneurship

Wealth in the utility can also arise from a model of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship has
been used as a key explanatory factor for the shape of the wealth distribution according to
Quadrini (1999, 2000).16
       In this model, there is a utility flow from running a business, which captures the non-
pecuniary private benefits net of the effort or disutility costs of being an entrepreneur. Non-
pecuniary benefits or costs from entrepreneurship have been shown to be substantial and im-
portant explanations for occupational choice (Hamilton, 2000; Hurst and Pugsley, 2010). En-
trepreneur i receives a return on their capital ri (Section 3.3.2 deals formally with heterogeneous
returns).17 For instance, if ai (k) = ηi kiγ /γ with γ < 1, and there is a linear tax on capital τK ,
entrepreneur i would chose a capital level such that: ri (1 − τK ) = δi − ηi kiγ−1 .
       More generally, the wealth in the utility specification can apply to agents managing a wealth
portfolio. This is an activity which entails not only a financial return, but also potential non-
pecuniary benefits and/or time and effort costs.


2.3.3       Service Flows From Wealth

Capital is embodied in tangible or financial assets, which yield service flows. One salient example
is housing, which yields a stream of utility in terms of housing services. But even financial assets
provide utility in the form of security or potential liquidity beyond and above their financial
return.
       In that sense, our model resembles “money in the utility” models. Money is a special asset
that yields zero nominal return and high liquidity. Other capital assets have different liquidities
and returns. As explained in Poterba and Rotemberg (1987), wealth held in the form of different
  16
       A useful extension for future research would be to have stochastic returns to capital.
  17
       It is possible for ai (k) to be on net negative in which case we need δi < ri .



                                                         13
assets is akin to other durables in that it provides services (e.g., security or liquidity) even when
it is not consumed. Whether those services from wealth enter utility the exact same way as other
durable goods is an empirical question that would merit careful estimation of utility functions.
Poterba and Rotemberg (1987) argue that “many goods provide different ‘types’ of utility” and
that to single out wealth services as being “unworthy of inclusion in a consumer’s utility seems
arbitrary at best.”
    The utility flows from assets are widely documented in the finance literature as being needed
to better fit the financial data. Examples of papers which model housing capital as both an
asset with returns and as a consumption good providing utility flows are Piazzesi et al. (2007),
Stokey (2009), and Kiyotaki et al. (2011). The latter specifically assigns a different utility to
renting a house and owning a house (e.g., the owner can modify the house to fit their own taste,
which yields utility), which is exactly in the spirit of our specification.
    In Section 3.3.3, we explicitly consider differentiated taxation of various types of capital
assets.



3      Policy Issues
We now put this newly gained simplicity to use, and consider how our framework can shed light
on several salient issues in the public debate about capital taxation.


3.1       Ethical Considerations
We start by discussing four ethical standpoints which are often encountered in the public debate,
and what level of capital tax they would imply. We can do this because our approach in terms
of estimable sufficient statistics is very amenable to the use of generalized social welfare weights
gi as in Saez and Stantcheva (2016), which can better capture the normative considerations
which are relevant for capital taxation.18
   18
      The generalized social welfare weights are given by gi = g(ci , ki , zi ; xbi , xsi ) where xbi is a vector of character-
istics which enter both utility and the weights, while xsi is a vector of characteristics that only enters the weights.
This allows to introduce a gap between individual preferences and social considerations. Hence, it allows for a
wider range of normative considerations to be taken into consideration than with standard welfare weights.




                                                             14
Is wealth inequality fair? In practice, inequality in wealth may be viewed by some as
unfair as it arises from inheritances, preferences for wealth, higher patience, or higher returns
on capital.19 Conversely, others may consider inequality in wealth fair, arising from a higher
taste for savings (rather than consuming). It is through the sacrifice of earlier consumption that
an individual has accumulated wealth. There is no compelling reason to redistribute “from the
ant to the grasshopper” because the grasshopper had the same opportunity to save.
       In our simpler model, there are no transitional dynamics so that initial wealth has no effect
on steady state wealth. Steady state wealth inequality arises solely due to preferences for wealth
and patience. In the real world, wealth inequality is more likely to be viewed as unfair when
it arises from inheritances than when it is due to one’s own savings. In our model with no
transitional dynamics, the two aspects are conflated. People with strong taste for wealth or
patience inherit a large wealth stock from their past self and perpetuate it for their future
selves. Wealth can be seen as either fair or unfair and the social welfare weights can be set
accordingly.
       If wealth inequality is – for any reason– seen as unfair, redistributing from wealth lovers to
non-wealth lovers is socially desirable. Social welfare weights gi are then decreasing in ki . For
linear taxes, then, ḡK < 1 and τK > 0.
       If wealth inequality is seen as fair, social welfare weights do not depend on ki and are
uncorrelated with ki . In this case, if we further assume that wealth ki is uncorrelated with
other characteristics affecting social welfare weights (see discussion just below), then ḡK = 1
and τK = 0.


Wealth as a tag. Wealth can be a marker and tag for a characteristic that society cares about,
but that taxes cannot directly condition on. In this case, gi may not depend on ki directly (as
discussed in the previous paragraph), but is correlated with ki , leading to ḡK 6= 1. For instance,
society may care about equality of opportunity and may want to compensate people from poorer
backgrounds for their difficult start in life. Even if society does not care about tastes for wealth
and wealth per se, higher wealth could be a tag for a richer family background. For example and
following Saez and Stantcheva (2016), if gi = 1 for people from a low background and is zero for
  19
    Higher patience could for instance be considered a skill that allows some individuals to save more and be
better off in the long-run, much in the same way that a higher earning ability allows people to earn more and
be better off in the traditional optimal labor income tax model. Higher returns on capital could be perceived as
“luck.”

                                                      15
others, then ḠK (rk), the average social welfare weight on those with capital income above rk
will be the representation index of those from a low background among individuals with capital
income above rk. If people with high capital income come disproportionately from wealthy
backgrounds, then ḠK (rk) is less than one, leading to a positive nonlinear capital income tax
rate using formula (11).
      Similarly, wealth can be a tag for earnings ability. Suppose there is inequality in both capital
and labor income, but that the government only cares about the latter, so that gi only depends
on zi and TL (zi ). If capital and labor income are uncorrelated, then ḡK = 1 and the optimal τK
is zero. If they are positively correlated, then k̄ < 1 and hence τK > 0: in this case, high wealth
individuals also have higher labor income on average, and wealth acts as a form of tag.20


Horizontal equity concerns. Horizontal equity concerns mean that society does not want to
treat differently people with the same “ability to pay.” The key issue, which involves non-trivial
value judgements, is to define “ability to pay”. It could be total income, capital income, labor
income, or even the consumption of some particular goods. For instance, should ability to pay
be measured by labor income only?
      On the affirmative side are those who criticize the “double taxation” of income, first in the
form of earned labor income and then in the form of an additional tax on capital income earned
on savings out of labor income. In addition “equality of opportunity” type of arguments for
savings (as opposed to equality of outcomes, in analogy to labor taxation) state that conditional
on a given labor income, everybody has the same opportunities to save (assuming everybody
starts with zero wealth). This is the view that the grasshopper and the ant, with the same labor
income, simply made different choices the consequences of which they have to bear.
      On the negative side, an increase in returns on assets more generally would benefit savers
and, conditional on a given labor income, individuals with a strong preference for wealth could
end up with much higher incomes if the rate of return on capital is high. Indeed, in conceptual
debates about the desirability of taxing capital income in the law and economics literature on
taxation, proponents of the capital tax tend to use high rate of return scenarios (e.g., Warren
(1980)) while opponents tend to use low rate of return scenarios (e.g., Weisbach and Bankman
(2006)).
 20
      Gordon and Kopczuk (2014) propose an analysis both theoretical and empirical along this line.



                                                      16
   Overall, the most natural concept seems total income y = z + rk. A higher return on
capital r is an advantage for wealth lovers, but this advantage is taken into account by the
comprehensive income concept. With strong horizontal equity preferences, this justifies the
comprehensive income tax (barring a Pareto improvement of providing a component specific
tax break) (see Online Appendix A.4).


3.2     Choosing the Tax Base
3.2.1   Comprehensive Income Tax System T (z + rk)

An important policy question is how the tax rate should be set if all income – whether stemming
from capital or labor– were to be treated the same way for tax purposes. In many countries,
most “ordinary” capital income, such as interest from a standard savings account, is taxed
jointly with labor income by the individual income tax. Within our framework, we can easily
solve for the optimal nonlinear tax on comprehensive income y ≡ rk + z, of the form TY (y),
i.e., for the optimal system within the class of tax systems that treat capital and labor income
perfectly symmetrically. We then discuss when such a tax system is optimal. In this case, the
optimal tax formula turns out to take the same form as in Mirrlees (1971) and Saez (2001).
   Define the average welfare weight on individuals with total income higher than y as:
                                                  R
                                                   {i:yi ≥y}
                                                               gi di
                                      ḠY (y) =                        .                         (15)
                                                   P (yi ≥ y)

Let HY (y) be the cumulative distribution of the total income distribution and hY (y) the asso-
                                                                                     yhY (y)
ciated density (assuming again a linearized tax system at point y). Let αY (y) ≡    1−HY (y)
                                                                                               be the
local Pareto parameter for the distribution of total income y and eY (y) is the elasticity of total
income to the net of tax rate 1 − TY0 (y) at point y.
   Using the envelope theorem, we obtain a standard optimal tax formula on full income.

Proposition 3. Optimal tax on comprehensive income.
   (i) The optimal nonlinear tax on comprehensive income y = rk + z is given by:

                                                   1 − ḠY (y)
                              TY0 (y) =                                 .
                                          1 − ḠY (y) + αY (y) · eY (y)



                                                  17
    (ii) The optimal linear tax on comprehensive income is:

                                                              1 − ḡY
                                                τY =                    .                                                    (16)
                                                           1 − ḡY + eY


                  R
                      i
                       gi yi   z m ḡL + rk m ḡK                            dy m (1 − τY )   z m eL + rk m eK
  with    ḡY ≡              =                            and     eY ≡                      =                  . (17)
                      ym          z m + rk m                              d(1 − τY ) y m         z m + rk m

    A tax system based on comprehensive income may be optimal for equity reasons (discussed
in Section 3.1) or for efficiency reasons, due to the existence of income shifting opportunities
between the capital and labor income bases, which we discuss next.


3.2.2     Income Shifting

A salient issue in the policy debate is the possibility of shifting income between the labor and
capital bases (see e.g., Saez et al. (2012) for a survey of the empirical literature).
    To model this, suppose that individuals can shift an amount of labor income x from the labor
to the capital tax base at a utility cost di (x), increasing and convex in x. Hence, if reported
labor income at time t is ziR (t), we have xi (t) = zi (t) − ziR (t). The aggregate shifted amount at
                  R
time t is xm (t) ≡ i xi (t)di. We consider linear taxes in this section.
    We can easily show that in this case again, the dynamic and static problems are equivalent.
The discounted normalized utility of individual i,
                                                      Z   ∞
   Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t), xi (t)}t≥0 ) = δi ·           [ci (t) + ai (ki (t)) − hi (zi (t)) − di (xi (t))]e−δi t dt,
                                                      0


under the budget constraint:


k̇i (t) = r̄ki (t) + (1 − τL )zi (t) − ci (t) + (τL − τK )xi (t) + τL (z m (t) − xm (t)) + τK (rk m (t) + xm (t)),


is equivalent to the static model:

                                                                                  i
                          Ui (c, k, z, x) = c + ai (k) − hi (z) − di (x) + δi · (kinit − k),


subject to the static budget constraint c = r̄k+(1−τL )z+(τL −τK )x+τL (z m −xm )+τK (rk m +xm ).


                                                                  18
This static model of tax shifting was analyzed in Piketty et al. (2014), as well as in the Piketty
and Saez (2013a) survey of the static optimal income tax literature. Our analysis shows that
this static model is actually consistent with a dynamic model of savings. The individual’s choice
is characterized by the following conditions:


                                      h0i (zi ) = 1 − τL   and a0i (ki ) = δi − r̄,


 d0i (xi ) = τL − τK      and ci = r̄ki + (1 − τL )zi + (τL − τK )xi + τL (z m − xm ) + τK (rk m + xm ).

Hence, labor income zi is a function of the net-of-tax rate 1 − τL , capital income rki is a function
of the net-of-tax return r̄, and shifted income xi is a function of the tax differential ∆τ ≡ τL −τK .
    In the same way that we previously defined the distributional factors for capital and labor
income in (5) and (6), we can define the distributional factor for shifted income as: ḡX =
R
   ω x /z m . As long as the distributional factor ḡX is small enough (in a way made precise in the
  i i i
proof in the Appendix) so that allowing income shifting is not an attractive way of redistributing
income, we have the following results.

Proposition 4. Optimal Labor and Capital Taxes with Income Shifting.
                       1−ḡK             1−ḡL                      1−ḡK                                    1−ḡK
    i. If eK > eL ·    1−ḡL
                             ,   then  1−ḡL +eL
                                                   ≥ τL > τK ≥    1−ḡK +eK
                                                                              and conversely, if eK < eL ·   1−ḡL
                                                                                                                   ,
         1−ḡL                       1−ḡK
then   1−ḡL +eL
                   ≤ τL < τK ≤     1−ḡK +eK
                                              .
    ii. If there is no shifting, the linear tax rates are set according to their usual formulas in (5)
and (6).
    iii. If shifting is infinitely elastic, then the tax differential ∆τ goes to 0 and τK = τL = τY =
  1−ḡY                   z m ḡL +rkm ḡK                                                            z m eL +rkm eK
1−ḡY +eY
            where ḡY =      z m +rkm
                                             is the distributional factor of total income, and eY =      z m +rkm
is the elasticity of total income.


    Thus as long as there is shifting with a finite elasticity the labor and capital taxes are
compressed toward each other, away from their optimal values with no shifting. With an
infinite shifting elasticity, the optimum is to set a comprehensive tax on full income y = rk + z,
as solved for in (16). Strong shifting opportunities, with elasticities tending to infinity, provide
a justification for a tax based on total comprehensive income which is orthogonal to the social
ethical considerations discussed in Section 3.1.



                                                            19
3.2.3      Consumption taxation

Can a consumption tax achieve more redistribution than a wealth tax and be more progressive
than a tax on labor income? Our simple model allows us to cleanly assess the role of and the
scope for a consumption tax.
       Let us define real wealth as wealth expressed in terms of purchasing power, or, equivalently,
wealth as normalized by the price of consumption. It seems natural that individuals should
care about real wealth rather than nominal wealth for the real economic power or status that
it confers. As long as individuals care about real wealth, a consumption tax is equivalent to a
tax on labor income augmented with a tax on initial wealth as in the standard model with no
utility for wealth (see e.g., Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987); Kaplow (1994); Auerbach (2009)).
Hence the consumption tax cannot achieve a more equal steady state than the labor tax. In
the simplest case with a linear consumption tax, it is immediate to see this equivalence.21
       If the tax exclusive rate is tC so that the implied price of consumption is 1+tC the equivalent
tax inclusive rate is τC which is such that 1 − τC = 1/(1 + tC ). Real wealth is k r = k · (1 − τC )
and flow utility is ui = c + ai (k r ) − hi (z). The budget constraint of the individual becomes
k̇ = [r̄k + z − TL (z)] − c/(1 − τC ) + G, where G = τL z m + τK rk m + tC cm is the lump-sum
transfer rebate of tax revenue. The budget constraint can be rewritten in terms of real wealth
as: k̇r = r̄k r + (z − TL (z)) · (1 − τC ) + G · (1 − τC ) − c.
       In real terms, the consumption tax τC then just adds a layer of taxes on labor income,
leaving r̄ unchanged. For the individual, the steady state (i.e., the static model) (r̄, TL , τC ) is
equivalent to (r̄, T̂L , τC = 0) with T̂L such that z − T̂L (z) = (z − TL (z)) · (1 − τC ).
       The difference between these two tax systems is that consumption taxation also taxes ini-
tial wealth by reducing its real value from kiinit to kir,init = (1 − τC ) · kiinit . This means that a
consumption tax does successfully tax initial wealth, but has no long term effect on the distri-
bution of real wealth. If the government undoes this initial wealth redistribution by giving a
lump-sum transfer τC · kiinit /(1 − τC ) to an individual i with initial wealth holdings kiinit , the
equivalence between a consumption tax system (r̄, TL , τC ) and a modified labor tax system with
no consumption tax (r̄, T̂L , τC = 0) becomes fully complete in the dynamic consumer problem,
the steady-state of the consumer, and the intertemporal government budget. Hence we have:
  21
    With a progressive consumption tax, the equivalence is less immediate, but nevertheless present and we
consider this case in Online Appendix A.5.



                                                    20
Proposition 5. Equivalence of consumption taxes and labor taxes. A linear consump-
tion at inclusive rate τC is equivalent to a tax on labor income combined with a tax on initial
wealth.

   To refute a common fallacy on the redistributive power of consumption taxes, suppose that
there is no initial wealth (and, hence, no need for a compensating transfer if a consumption
tax were to be introduced) and that labor income is inelastic and uniform across individuals.
Differences in wealth then only arise from differences in tastes for wealth. It is clear that a
pure labor income tax achieves no redistribution in this setting. It just taxes the inelastic and
equal labor income and rebates it back as an equal lump-sum transfer to all individuals. If
there were a consumption tax in this setting, those with higher preferences for wealth would
end up having higher income, higher consumption, and pay higher taxes than those with lower
preferences for wealth in steady state. But recall that the consumption tax is fully equivalent
to the labor income tax in this setting and that the labor income tax achieves no redistribution.
Thus, while wealth lovers look like they pay higher taxes in the steady state on their higher
consumption, this is because they paid less taxes while building up their wealth at instant 0.
This initial wealth accumulation is what gives them higher steady state consumption in the first
place. Wealth lovers build up more nominal wealth with consumption taxation so that their
real wealth is the same as under the equivalent labor income tax (and no consumption tax).
   It is hence important to draw a distinction between the observed cross-section and the life-
time distribution of resources. In our simple model, in the cross-sectional steady-state, the
consumption tax looks redistributive, when, in reality, it is not.


3.3       Extensions
3.3.1     Jointness in preferences for labor and capital

There could be jointness in the preferences for work and wealth, which introduces cross-elasticities
between the capital and labor taxes. It is indeed reasonable to think that work incentives could
be affected by wealth.
   The discounted utility is:
                                                        Z   ∞
               Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t≥0 ) = δi           [ci (t) + vi (ki (t), zi (t))]e−δi t dt,   (18)
                                                        0


                                                            21
with vi (k, z) increasing concavely in k and decreasing concavely in z. With linear taxes τK and
τL , the budget constraint of individual i is:

                    dki (t)
                            = r̄ki (t) + (1 − τL ) · zi (t) + rτK k m (t) + τL z m (t) − ci (t).
                      dt

The choice (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)) for individual i at any time t > 0 is such that:


                      −viz (ki (t), zi (t)) = 1 − τL ,             vik (ki (t), zi (t)) = δi − r̄,


                     and ci (t) = r̄ki (t) + (1 − τL ) · zi (t) + rτK k m (t) + τL z m (t).

The dynamic model is again equivalent to the static specification:


                               Ui (ci , ki , zi ) = ci + vi (ki , zi ) + δi (kiinit − ki ).

                          1−τK        m
                                     dz
Denote by eL,(1−τK ) ≡     zm
                                 · d(1−τ K)
                                            the cross-elasticity of average labor income to the net-of-tax
                                 1−τL        d(rkm )
return and by eK,(1−τL ) ≡        rkm
                                        ·   d(1−τL )
                                                       the cross-elasticity of average capital income to the
net-of-tax labor tax rate.

Proposition 6. Optimal labor and capital taxes with joint preferences. With joint
preferences, the optimal linear capital tax (respectively, labor tax) taking the labor tax (respec-
tively, the capital tax) as given is:

                                   z    m                                                     m
                     1 − ḡK − τL rk m eL,(1−τK )                      1 − ḡL − τK rk  e
                                                                                     z m K,(1−τL )
                τK =                                      and     τL =                             .        (19)
                           1 − ḡK + eK                                       1 − ḡL + eL

       The formula for each tax applies even if the other tax is not optimally set. The effects of
jointness in preferences on the optimal labor and capital taxes depend on the complementarity
or substitutability of preferences for capital and labor. If having more capital decreases the cost
of work, then eL,(1−τK ) > 0 and, at any given τL , the capital tax should optimally be set lower.
It is possible to combine the optimal formulas for τL , τK in (19) to solve for the jointly optimal
τK , τL .22
  22
   As is the case with optimal tax formulas in general, the elasticities and distributional factors ḡK , ḡL are
implicit functions of τL , τK . Therefore this would still be an implicit formula for optimal tax rates.




                                                           22
3.3.2      Heterogeneous Returns to Capital

In practice, individuals may have very different returns on their wealth. Financially savvy
people may be able to hold optimized portfolios with higher returns for instance. Higher wealth
individuals empirically seem to reap a higher return, potentially because of smarter investments
or economies of scale in financial management (Piketty, 2014). Entrepreneurs investing their
capital in a business may have different abilities for running their business and generating
returns.
       With heterogeneous returns to capital, the full dynamic model with utility as in (1) subject to
the budget constraint in (2), where r is replaced by a heterogeneous return ri is again equivalent
to the same static model as above, with the following budget constraint: ci = ri (1 − τK )ki +
                R
(1 − τL )zi + τK i ri ki (r̄i ) + τL z m (1 − τL ).
       At the optimal τK , we have dSW F/dτK = 0, so that:
                                              R                                         R
                1 − ḡrK                           g · ri ki
                                                  iR i                    (1 − τK ) d i ri ki
        τK =                   with ḡrK =                     and erK   = R       ·            > 0.
             1 − ḡrK + erK                          rk
                                                    i i i
                                                                              rk
                                                                             i i i
                                                                                     d(1 − τK )

       Heterogeneous returns do not affect the formula in terms of sufficient statistics, ḡrK and
erK . However, they may affect our ethical judgments on taxes, especially if there is a systematic
correlation (as discussed in Piketty (2014)) between wealth and the return on wealth.
       Different returns on capital could be perceived as unfair: for a given amount of sacrificed
consumption, some individuals reap higher returns, much like for a given amount of sacrificed
leisure, some individuals reap a higher labor income in the standard labor tax model. Re-
distribution across individuals with different returns may then be perceived as desirable, even
conditional on total capital income.23


3.3.3      Different Types of Capital Assets

Another issue which would be very difficult to handle in standard dynamic capital tax models
is that, in practice, there is not just one single type of capital, but rather different assets, with
different liquidity and payoff patterns. Moreover, individuals may have heterogeneous tastes
for different assets. Our model is flexible enough to incorporate different types of capital assets
  23
    Put differently, someone with a high ri (a “luck” shock) should be deemed less deserving than someone with
a high kj (a higher consumption sacrifice) conditional on ri ki = rj kj .



                                                         23
and heterogeneous preferences for them. Thanks to the direct utility component for wealth
here, we can rationalize why people would hold assets with different returns above and beyond
the standard risk-return trade-off considerations. For instance, a home can yield direct utility
benefits. Government bonds or shares in one’s own company may also have an individual-
specific value, if people care about the national or company-specific contribution that their
capital makes.
    Consider J assets with different returns denoted generically by rj , taxes τKj , and net-of-tax
return r̄j . Iindividualndividual i holds a level kij of asset j, with initial level kiinit,j . For simplicity,
assume exogenous and uniform labor income z. The static utility equivalent for individual i can
feature joint preferences in the assets:

                                                                                     J
                                                                                     X
                                   Ui = ci + ai (ki1 , .., kiJ ) + δi ·                     (kiinit,j − kij ),
                                                                                     j=1


with the budget constraint:

                                                       J
                                                       X                           J
                                                                                   X
                                                ci =         r̄j kij   +z+               τKj rj k m,j .
                                                       j=1                         j=1


It is straightforward to derive the tax rates on each asset, analogous to the formula for capital
and labor taxes with joint preferences in Section 3.3.1:

Proposition 7. Different types of capital with heterogeneous, joint preferences. The
optimal tax on capital asset j, given all other tax rates τKs for s 6= j (not necessarily optimally
set) is given by:

                                                            j                    s km,s
                                                                       P
                                                      1 − ḡK −            s6=j τK km,j eK s ,(1−τK
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                    )
                                          τKj   =                              j     j                                                   (20)
                                                                       1   − ḡK + eK



                               gi · kij
                       R
               j                                        r̄j dk m,j                                                        r̄j dk m,s
      with   ḡK   =       i
                               R j ,            ejK   = m,j ·      > 0,                     and      e            j
                                                                                                         K s ,(1−τK )   = m,s ·      .   (21)
                                 k
                                i i
                                                       k      dr̄j                                                       k      dr̄j

    The tax on each type of capital asset is first determined by the two standard considera-
tions of equity and efficiency. Indeed with no cross-elasticities (which arises with separability


                                                                              24
                       PJ
ai (ki1 , ...kiJ ) =    j=1   aji (kij )) the formulas are simply:

                                                                   j
                                                             1 − ḡK
                                                 τKj =          j       .
                                                          1 − ḡK + ejK

Assets with higher elastiticities (ejK ) should be taxed less. Those with a higher redistributive
                                                                                           j
impact, i.e., for which holdings are concentrated among high welfare weight individuals (ḡK
                                                                                      j
high) should be taxed less, all else equal. Conversely, assets equally distributed (ḡK ≈ 1) should
not be taxed much for redistributive purposes. Society may have very different value judgements
                                                                 j
regarding different assets, embodied in very different weights ḡK , leading to different optimal
tax rates.
     Second, the efficiency cost of taxing asset j depends on its cross-elasticities with other assets
and hence its fiscal spillovers to the other assets’ tax bases. If the asset is complementary
to many other assets the efficiency cost of taxing it may be much larger than the own-price
elasticity.
     In addition, if the government cannot freely optimize the tax rate on some asset s, then,
when asset j and asset s are complements (eK s ,(1−τ j ) > 0), the higher existing tax on asset s
                                                                       K

would push towards a lower optimal tax on asset j.


3.4       Economic Growth and the Aggregate Capital Stock
3.4.1      Economic Growth

How would economic growth affect the optimal capital tax rate? Suppose that there is techno-
logical progress at an exogenous rate g > 0, leading to economic growth, so that all per capita
variables grow at rate g > 0. We can perform the normalization and denote normalized variables
with a tilda: z̃(t) = z(t)e−gt , k̃(t) = k(t)e−gt , c̃(t) = c(t)e−gt . To sustain a balanced growth path
with quasi-linear utility, the sub-utility functions need to take the form hti (z(t)) = egt · hi (z̃(t))
and ati (k(t)) = egt · ai (k̃(t)). We also assume that Tt (z(t), rk(t)) = egt · T (z̃(t), rk̃(t)).
     The discounted normalized utility should now be written as:
                                                          Z   ∞
               Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t≥0 ) = δi ·       [ci (t) + ati (ki (t)) − hti (zi (t))]e−δi t dt
                                                        0
                                                    Z ∞
                                             = δi ·     [c̃i (t) + ai (k̃i (t)) − hi (z̃i (t))]e−(δi −g)t dt.
                                                      0


                                                                  25
The budget constraint of individual i is:


k̇i (t) = rki (t)+zi (t)−T (zi (t), rki (t))−ci (t)        i.e.    k̃˙ i (t) = (r−g)k̃i (t)+z̃i (t)−T (z̃i (t), rk̃i (t))−c̃i (t).


Hence, this problem is mathematically equivalent to our earlier problem. Similar derivations
show that the normalized solution (c̃i , k̃i , z̃i ) for individual i at any time t > 0 is such that:


h0i (z̃i ) = 1−TL0 (z̃i , rk̃i ) and a0i (k̃i ) = δi −r(1−TK0 (z̃i , rk̃i )) and c̃i = (r−g)k̃i +z̃i −T (z̃i , rk̃i ).


The actual levels of (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)) are then simply equal to: (c̃i · egt , k̃i · egt , z̃i · egt ).
    Again, (k̃i , z̃i ) immediately jumps to its steady-state value through an instantaneous Dirac
quantum jump in consumption and wealth at date 0. We have:

                                             δi   h
                                                                                               init
                                                                                                          i
            Vi ({c̃i , k̃i , z̃i }t≥0 ) =        · c̃i + ai (k̃i ) − hi (z̃i ) + (δi − g) · (ki − k̃i )
                                          δi − g
                  δi         h                                                        i
            =             · (r − g)k̃i + z̃i − T (z̃i , rk̃i ) + ai (k̃i ) − hi (z̃i ) + δi · (kiinit − k̃i )
               δi − g

Therefore, with growth, maintaining normalized wealth k̃i requires saving g · k̃i in perpetuity,
hereby lowering consumption by g · k̃i .
    Intuitively, with economic growth, maintaining a given level of normalized wealth requires
higher savings and hence reduced consumption. Suppose the economy moves from g = 0 to
g > 0 at time t0 . At time t0 , there is no jump in wealth as normalized wealth is not affected
by g. The equation for Vi above shows that wealth lovers (who choose a high k̃i ) gain relatively
less than non wealth lovers (who choose for example k̃i = 0). Economic growth benefits those
with no capital more than wealth lovers owning capital.
    Let us consider linear taxes on capital for simplicity, with again r̄ = r(1 − τK ). If r̄ < g,
then wealth lovers would hold more wealth, but have lower consumption than those with less
wealth. Conversely, if r̄ > g, then wealth lovers would hold more wealth and also have higher
consumption. In a world in which society disregards wealth per se and cares mostly about
consumption (i.e., social welfare weights are based on consumption c only), τ̄K = 1 − g/r may
be a natural upper bound on the capital tax. This discussion connects with the famous r vs. g
discussion at the heart of Piketty (2014).



                                                             26
3.4.2      The aggregate capital stock and an endogenous return to capital

An often discussed policy issue is that, in practice, the return to capital may not be exogenously
given by r and may instead endogenously depend on an aggregate production function F (K, L)
            R                                 R
where K = i ki di is aggregate capital and L = i li di is aggregate labor, with li the effective
labor supplied by individual i. Earnings are equal to zi = w · li with w = FL the wage per unit
of effective labor. r = FK is the marginal return to capital.
      A direct application of the Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) theory implies that the optimal
tax formulas for capital and labor would be unchanged with an aggregate production function.
In other words, optimal tax rates depend solely on the supply side elasticities and general
equilibrium price effects are irrelevant. The intuition is simple. Consider for instance increasing
τK . This reduces the capital stock through supply side responses, which in turns increases the
pre-tax rate of return r and reduces the pre-tax wage rate w through general equilibrium price
effects. This effectively shifts part of the capital tax increase from capital to labor. Relative to
the exogenous factor price case, it is as if the government had increased the tax rate on capital
by less and increased at the same time the tax rate on labor by some amount. However, this tax
incidence shifting can be offset by increasing the capital tax rate by more in the first place and
correspondingly reduce the tax rate on labor income. If there are no profits (for example with
constant returns to scale in the production function), this tax offset has zero fiscal cost hence
the general equilibrium price effects can be freely offset by the tax system and hence ignored in
optimal tax analysis.24
      Thanks to the Diamond-Mirrlees theory, the question of how to tax capital holdings of
different individuals can be treated separately from the question about the optimal aggregate
capital stock. It has been made repeatedly in the optimal capital tax literature, for example
by Atkinson and Sandmo (1980); King (1980) in the OLG life-cycle model of savings, and more
recently by Piketty and Saez (2013b) in a model of bequests.



4       Numerical Application to U.S. Taxation
In this section, we give empirical content to the optimal tax rates derived in Section 2. One
of the advantages of our method is that the estimable sufficient statistics that appear in the
 24
      With pure profits, this result also carries through if the government can tax pure profits 100%.


                                                        27
optimal tax formula provide a clear link to the data. We use IRS tax data for 2007 on labor and
capital income distributions.25 We follow the conventions of Piketty and Saez (2003) to define
income and percentile groups. The individual unit is the tax unit defined as a single person
with dependents if any or a married couple with dependents if any. Capital income is defined
as all capital income components reported on individual tax returns, and includes dividends,
realized capital gains, taxable interest income, estate and trust income, rents and royalties, net
profits from businesses (including S-corporations, partnerships, farms, and sole proprietorships).
Labor income is defined as market income reported on tax returns minus capital income defined
above. It includes wages and salaries, private pension distributions, and other income.26 We
recognize that the tax based income components we use to classify capital and labor incomes
do not perfectly correspond to economic capital and labor incomes.27 Yet, any tax system that
taxes capital and labor separately has to use the existing tax based income components. For
simplicity, any negative income is set at zero. In aggregate, capital income represents 26% of
total income and labor income represents 74% of total income (see Figure 2). As our theory
boils down to a static model, it is directly suited for thinking through optimal taxation of annual
labor and capital income, as actual income tax systems operate.


4.1       Empirical Facts on Capital and Labor Income
We present here three key facts about the distributions of labor and capital income and highlight
their implications for optimal taxation.

i. Capital income is more unequally distributed than labor income.
       The distributions of both labor and capital income (and thus of total income) exhibit great
inequalities but capital income is much more concentrated than labor income as shown in the
Lorenz curves in Figure 1. The top 1% people as ranked by capital income earn 63% of all
capital income, while the bottom 80% earn essentially zero capital income.
       This fact implies, first, that the Pareto parameter of the capital income distribution will be
much smaller than that of the labor income distribution. Second, the top capital tax on top
  25
     We choose 2007 as this is the most recent year of publicly available micro-level US tax data available before
the Great Recession. By September 2016, the most recent year available was 2010.
  26
     Our definition of capital income is broad (and correspondingly, our definition of labor income is narrow), as
business profits are actually a mix of labor and capital income.
  27
     See Piketty et al. (2016) for an attempt to reconstruct the economic capital and labor incomes starting from
tax data.

                                                       28
capital earners will be the one that applies to the bulk of capital income and that, hence, the
asymptotic capital tax rate we derived in (12) plays an important role.

ii. At the top, total income is mostly capital income.
   At the top of the income distribution total income comes mostly from capital income. Figure
2 shows capital and labor income as a fraction of total income for the full population (P0-P100)
and for several subgroups as ranked by total income. At the top of the income distribution,
capital makes up close to 80% of total income.
   This fact implies, first, that the Pareto tail parameter of the capital income distribution will
be roughly equal to that of the total income distribution. Second, the social welfare weights on
top income individuals should be set based on considerations of fairness and deservingness of
capital income.

iii. Two-dimensional heterogeneity in both labor and capital income.
   There is an important two-dimensional heterogeneity in labor and capital income. Condi-
tional on labor income, capital income continues to exhibit a lot of inequality. Figure 3 plots
the Lorenz curves for capital income (the cumulative share of capital income owned by those
below each percentile of the capital income distribution), but conditional on being in four groups
according to labor income: all individuals, the bottom 50% by labor income, the top 10% by
labor income and the top 1% by labor income. Even conditional on labor income, there is still
a very large concentration of capital income.
   This two-dimensional heterogeneity means that, even if we were to perfectly redistribute
labor income, there would still be a lot of capital income inequality and hence substantial total
income inequality as well. The differences in capital income conditional on the same labor
income could arise from any of the heterogeneities in preferences (discount rate δi or value
for wealth ai (k)) or bequests described above. They would all violate the assumptions of the
Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem and typically justify the need for a capital or wealth tax in addition
to an optimal nonlinear labor income tax.




                                                29
4.2       Optimal Separable Tax Schedules
4.2.1      Methodology

We first start by considering the optimal separable tax schedules for capital and labor income
of the form TL (zi ) and TK (rki ), making use our sufficient statistics non-linear formulas derived
in Section 2.2.2.
       We assume constant elasticities for labor and capital income, denoted by, respectively, eL
and eK .28 We will consider a range of plausible elasticity parameters as there is a paucity of
empirical estimates on the capital elasticity.
       Starting from the micro-level IRS tax data, we invert individuals’ choices of labor and
capital income, given the current U.S. tax system to obtain the implicit latent types which are
consistent with these observed choices and these constant elasticities. The distribution of types
is hence such that, given the constant behavioral elasticities and the actual U.S. tax schedule,
the capital and labor income distributions match the empirical ones (Saez (2001) developed this
methodology in the case of optimal labor income taxation). We then fit non-parametrically the
distribution of latent types. We repeat the same procedure for total income.
       At the top, the distributions of labor, capital, and total income exhibit constant hazard
rates and approximate a Pareto distribution with tail parameters denoted by, respectively, aL ,
aK , and aY . The empirical Pareto parameters are plotted in Figure 4 for labor, capital, and
total income. For labor income the Pareto parameter is around aL = 1.6, for capital income it
is aK = 1.38, and for total income it is aY = 1.4 (given that the tail of total income is mostly
capital income).
       To capture social preferences for redistribution, we assign exogenous weights gi which decline
in observed disposable income at the current tax system such that the weight for individual i in
the data is equal to gi = 1/((zi +rki )(1−τ U S )+RU S ) where τ U S = 25% and RU S mimic the U.S.
average tax rate on total income and demogrant. Such weights decline to zero as income goes
to infinity, implying that optimal top rates are given by the asymptotic revenue maximizing tax
  28
    For labor income, as is well known, this requires a disutility of work of the form hi (z) = zi0 ·(z/zi0 )1+1/eL /(1+
1/eL ) where zi0 is exogenous potential earnings equal to actual earnings when the marginal labor income tax
rate is zero. Similarly, for capital income, this requires a utility of wealth of the form ai (k) = δi · k − r · ki0 ·
(k/ki0 )1+1/eK /(1 + 1/eK ) where ki0 is exogenous potential wealth equal to actual steady state wealth when the
marginal capital income tax rate is zero. This disutility of wealth function has to depend on the discount rate
δi and the rate of return r. It is first increasing and then decreasing in wealth k. However, in equilibrium, the
individual always chooses ki in the increasing portion of the ai (k) function.


                                                          30
rates derived earlier.


4.2.2      Results

Panels (a) and (b) in Figure 5 show, respectively, the optimal marginal labor income tax as a
function of labor income and the optimal marginal capital income tax as a function of capital
income, each for three different values of the elasticity parameters, namely 0.25, 0.5, and 1. We
use a range of possible elasticities given the uncertainty coming out of the empirical literature
(see Saez et al. (2012) for a recent survey).
       The optimal labor and capital income tax rates both follow closely the shape of the empirical
Pareto parameter from Figure 4. The optimal labor income tax rate hence takes the familiar
shape as in Saez (2001) and is lower when the elasticity of labor income to the net of tax rate
is higher.
       The capital income tax schedule is new. The asymptotic nonlinear tax rate, which approx-
imates the linear top tax rate, as explained in Section 2.2.2 covers the vast majority of the
capital income tax base because capital income is so concentrated. Above the top 1%, the
optimal marginal tax rate on capital income is essentially constant, so that the nonlinear tax
schedule at the top is very well approximated by a linear tax rate.29 Naturally, the level of that
optimal linear top tax rate depends inversely on the elasticity of capital income to the net of
tax return.
       Because capital income is more concentrated than labor income, the Pareto parameter for
capital income is lower than for labor income, leading to a higher top tax rate for capital income
than for labor income when the elasticities eL and eK are the same. Therefore eK would need
to be significantly higher than eL to justify imposing the same top tax rate on capital and labor
incomes.


4.3       Optimal Comprehensive Tax Schedule
We then turn to exploiting the optimal tax on comprehensive income, TY (y), with y = z + rk,
making use of the nonlinear formulas derived in Section 3.2.1 in terms of sufficient statistics.
We repeat the same procedure outlined above for labor and capital income, assuming that the
  29
    The constant tax rate is driven by the constant elasticity and the social welfare weights which become small
and do not vary much above the top 1%.


                                                      31
elasticity of total income eY is constant. We again consider three possible values. Panel (c) in
Figure 5 plots the optimal marginal tax rate TY0 (y) as a function of total income y.
       The optimal marginal tax rate on total income has a shape similar to that on labor income.
Often in numerical applications of the Mirrlees (1971) labor income tax model, total income
is used for the calculations. We can here rigorously compare the resulting two schedules. The
asymptotic top tax rate on total income is closest to the asymptotic top tax rate on capital
income from panel (b) as capital income dominates labor income among top incomes.



5        General Model with Concave Utility of Consumption
In this section, we generalize the results from the previous simple model to the case with an
arbitrary concave utility for consumption. After introducing the generalized model, we discuss
three possible ways to do optimal tax analysis: (1) considering unanticipated tax reforms, (2)
considering anticipated tax reforms, (3) focusing on the long-run steady-state. We will show
that in all three cases, the formulas from Sections 2 and 3 still apply in this generalized model,
as long as the elasticity of the tax base is appropriately defined.30 The type of reform considered
(anticipated, unanticipated, or steady state) is itself a policy choice and embodies an implicit
normative judgement. In the simple model of Section 2, all three approaches are equivalent so
that determining the correct normative framework is straightforward. This is a key strength of
the simple framework, in addition to its tractability. With concave utilities the three approaches
deliver different elasticities and hence quantitatively different optimal tax rates. We point out
the advantages and drawbacks of each of the three approaches, and argue that none is perfect.


Individual maximization. In the generalized model with concave utility for consumption
and wealth in the utility, the instantaneous utility of individual i is ui (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)), which
is increasing and concave in consumption c and wealth k, and decreasing and convex in labor
earnings z with arbitrary heterogeneity across individuals. We assume a uniform discount factor
δ across individuals to simplify the presentation (we show how to extend the formulas with
heterogeneous discount rates δi in the online appendix). With a general tax system Tt (z, rk),
  30
    We will also compare our results to those of earlier models, showing that the unifying tax formulas we obtain
are widely applicable.




                                                       32
individual i chooses (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))t≥0 to maximize
           Z   ∞
                                                              dki (t)
  Vi = δ           ui (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))e−δt dt s.t.            = rki (t) + zi (t) − Tt (zi (t), rki (t)) − ci (t).
           t=0                                                  dt

Routine calculations show that, with basic regularity assumptions and assuming that the tax
system converges to T (z, rk), this individual maximization converges to a steady state (ci , ki , zi )
characterized by:


   uik /uic = δ − r(1 − TK0 ),              uic · (1 − TL0 ) = −uiz ,       and ci = rki + zi − T (zi , rki ),        (22)


where uic , uik , uiz denote the partial derivatives of ui (c, k, z) and TK0 , TL0 the marginal tax rates
on capital income and labor income all evaluated at the steady state (ci , ki , zi ).
   Conditional on labor income, wealth is heterogenous across individuals due to differences
in the taste for wealth (embodied in the utility function ui ). The steady state wealth ki and
earnings zi for individual i naturally depend upon the tax system with standard income and
substitution effects. Relative to the simpler model in Section 2, individuals care about consump-
tion smoothing. Hence the convergence to the steady state is no longer instantaneous and there
are transitional dynamics. We denote by k m and z m average (and also aggregate as population
is normalized to one) wealth and labor earnings in steady state.


Simplifying assumptions. We make three simplifying assumptions for pedagogical purposes.
   First, we assume that the government always chooses a period by period neutral budget
constraint so that for all t:                  Z
                                                     Tt (zi (t), rki (t))di = 0.
                                                 i

   Second, we consider the case of linear taxation with time invariant tax rates on capital
and labor income τK , τL with a budget balancing lump-sum rebate G(t). Hence, Tt (z, rk) =
τL z + τK rk − G(t). The first assumption on per period budget balancing implies that G(t) =
τL z m (t) + τK rk m (t) where k m (t) and z m (t) are average wealth and earnings at time t.
   Third, we assume that at time 0, the economy is already in steady state with its initial tax
system T (rk, z) = τL z + τK rk − G. As a result, G is also time invariant. This also implies
that ci (t), zi (t), ki (t), k m (t), z m (t) are all time invariant and equal to their steady state values
ci , zi , ki , k m , z m . Starting from this steady state, we will consider small budget neutral tax

                                                               33
reforms. At the optimum, such tax reforms should have zero first order effect on welfare. These
first order conditions give us optimal tax formulas for τL and τK .
       The results largely carry over without making these three assumptions but notation becomes
more cumbersome. We discuss some of these extensions, in particular nonlinear taxation (in
Online Appendix A.3), starting away from the steady state (in Online Appendix A.1), and time
varying tax rates (in Section 5.4).

Steady-state elasticities. In the steady state defined above, aggregating across individuals,
                     R                               R
average capital k m = i ki and average earnings z m = i zi will be functions of 1 − τK and 1 − τL
(as the lump-sum rebate G is also a function of τK , τL through budget balance). In particular,
k m has a finite elasticity with respect to the net-of-tax return r̄ = r(1 − τK ) which we denote
again by eK as in Section 2.

                                                                          r̄ dk m
                                Steady state elasticity: eK =                                                 (23)
                                                                         k m dr̄

Note that this steady state elasticity takes into account the fact that a change in r̄ through a
change in τK also affects the steady state lump-sum grant G, creating further effects on wealth
accumulation (and labor supply) decisions. Hence, eK is a policy elasticity (Hendren, 2016)
that mixes substitution and income effects. Importantly, utility for wealth remains the key
ingredient making the elasticity eK finite. With no utility for wealth, the steady state is such
that δ = r(1 − τK ) so that if δ < r(1 − τK ), individuals are patient and accumulate an ever
growing capital stock (and, conversely, accumulate growing debt if δ > r(1 − τK )), and capital
supply is infinitely elastic in steady state.31 Transitional dynamics are irrelevant for the steady-
state elasticity. There is also a finite cross-elasticity of k m with respect to 1 − τL denoted by
eK,1−τL = ((1 − τL )/k m ) · dk m /d(1 − τL ).
       Aggregate labor earnings z m also has finite elasticities with respect to both 1 − τL and r̄. In
particular, the cross-elasticity eL,1−τK = (zm /r̄)(dz m /dr̄) captures how labor earnings respond
to changes in r̄. In the generalized model, cross-elasticities arise not only because of potential
jointness of (k, z) in utility as in Section 3.3.1 but also through income effects since the marginal
utility of consumption uic affects labor supply decisions as seen in (22).
  31
    Besides wealth in the utility, other ways to make the steady-state elasticity finite is to introduce stochastic
earnings as in Aiyagari (1995) or endogenous discount factors that depend on the consumption levels as in Judd
(1985). We relate our results to these models below and in Online Appendix A.2.

                                                        34
5.1        Optimal Taxes with Unanticipated Tax Reforms
Optimal tax framework. We start with a pre-existing time invariant linear tax system and
an economy that has converged to steady state as of time 0. The government can change tax
policy at time 0 once and for all without individuals anticipating the tax policy change. The
pre-existing tax system is optimal if a small budget neutral reform of the initial tax system has
zero first order effect on welfare. Formally, the government chooses the new time invariant and
period-by-period budget balanced tax system (τK , τL ) to maximize
                                          Z
                               SW F =          ωi Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t≥0 )di,                           (24)
                                           i

                                                                   Z   ∞
                 where Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t≥0 ) = δ ·             ui (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))e−δt dt,
                                                                    t=0

and ωi ≥ 0 are exogenous Pareto weights. We define the social marginal welfare weight on
person i as gi = ωi uic (ci (0), ki (0), zi (0)). We assume without loss of generality (by normalizing
                                                      R
the Pareto weights ωi ) that they sum to one: i gi di = 1.


Unanticipated elasticities. Starting from a steady state (τK , τL ), we consider a small reform
dτK that takes place at time 0 and is unanticipated. To meet period-by-period budget balance,
the lump-sum grant G(t) = τK rk m (t) + τL z m (t) adjusts automatically by dG(t) = rk m (t)dτK +
τK rdk m (t) + τL dz m (t). We will derive conditions such that the small reform has zero first order
effect on welfare, which effectively implies that the initial tax rate τK is optimal.32
       Let euK (t) be the elasticity of aggregate capital in period t, k m (t), with respect to the net of
tax rate r̄, i.e.: euK (t) = (r̄/k m (t)) · (dk m (t)/dr̄). The superscript u signifies that the reform was
unanticipated (as of time 0). Again, euK (t) is a policy elasticity that incorporates the income
effects of dG(t) on k m (t). euK (t) varies with time because of transitional dynamics due to con-
sumption smoothing concerns. Over time, it converges to the steady state elasticity eK defined
in (23). In contrast to Section 2, the convergence is not immediate because individuals smooth
consumption and, hence, adjust their wealth slowly. Therefore, under regularity assumptions,
  32
     It is also possible to start from an arbitrary tax system (τK0 , τL0 ) and away from the steady state, and
then derive the optimal unanticipated new tax system (τK , τL ) implemented at time 0 that maximizes social
welfare. We do this in Online Appendix A.1. The formulas are similar, but require keeping track across time of
all variables that converge slowly to the new steady-state, demanding more cumbersome notations to define the
time discounted average of all variables.


                                                           35
euK (t) starts at zero at t = 0, builds up with time t, and converges to eK > 0 for t large. We
define the unanticipated elasticity of capital with respect to r̄ as the time discounted average of
the elasticities euK (t) in each period as follows:
                                                                                          Z   ∞
         Unanticipated elasticity for reform at time 0:                        euK   =δ           euK (t)e−δt dt.   (25)
                                                                                          t=0


Typically the unanticipated elasticity euK is smaller than the steady-state elasticity eK as the
unanticipated response euK (t) grows overtime toward the steady-state elasticity eK . Economi-
cally, adjusting one’s wealth requires changing consumption levels temporarily. As individuals
value consumption smoothing with concave utility, they do not want abrupt changes in consump-
tion and hence they adjust their wealth slowly. Unanticipated labor earnings elasticities and
cross elasticities can be defined in the same way. We denote by euL,1−τK (t) the time t elasticity
of earnings z m (t) with respect to r̄ and by euL,1−τK the time discounted average of euL,1−τK (t).


Optimal tax solution. Using the envelope theorem (i.e., that behavioral responses dki (t)
can be ignored when computing the change in individual welfare dVi ) and the fact that uic (t)
and ki (t) are time invariant when starting from a steady state, we can compute the welfare
                                                                    R∞
impact of the small tax change on individual i utility as dVi = δuic t=0 [dG(t) − rki dτK ]e−δt dt.
Therefore, using the expression for dG(t) from above, we have:
                                 Z   ∞
               dVi = uic · δ             [rk m dτK + τK rdk m (t) + τL dz m (t) − rki dτK ]e−δt dt.
                                  t=0


From this expression, we can introduce the elasticities euK (t) and euL,1−τK (t), aggregate across
individuals using Pareto weights ωi , and obtain the following expression for the change in total
social welfare (24):

                                              ∞
                                                                τK k m u      τL z m /r u
                         Z                Z                                                   
        dSW F = rdτK            gi · δ                 m
                                                      k − ki −        e (t) −          e    (t) e−δt dt
                            i              t=0                 1 − τK K       1 − τK L,1−τK

                                                               τL z m u
                                             Z                                 
                        m                       ki    τK u
                    = rk dτK             1 − gi m −       e −           e         .
                                             i k    1 − τK K 1 − τK rk m L,1−τK
The optimal tax rate is such that dSW F = 0 which yields the following optimal linear capital
tax rate formula.


                                                               36
Proposition 8. Optimal linear taxes with unanticipated responses.

                                     zm u                       Z ∞
                       1 − ḡK − τL rk m eL,1−τK
                 τK =                                     u
                                                    with eK = δ      euK (t) · e−δt dt,                          (26)
                             1 − ḡK + euK                       t=0
                                Z ∞                                    Z
                    u                               −δt
                   eL,1−τK = δ       eL,1−τK (t) · e dt, and ḡK = gi · ki /k m .
                                      u
                                    t=0                                           i


       A symmetric formula holds for the optimal labor income tax rate τL as in Proposition 6
(derivation omitted). The formula is qualitatively exactly the same as in Section 2 by simply
replacing the steady state elasticities by the unanticipated elasticities. As typically euK < eK
due to slowly building responses, we expect the optimal tax rate to be higher than in the steady
state approach. Intuitively and very simply, the government can tax capital more because it
can tax existing capital that cannot respond.33
       It is also possible to consider the optimal nonlinear tax system. A particularly simple and
relevant case is to consider a linear tax rate on labor income and a nonlinear capital income
tax with a constant tax rate τK for capital income above rk top . We consider this case in Online
Appendix A.3.34


Discussion. If the responses of capital to tax changes are very fast, then euK is very close to the
steady state elasticity eK . In this case, even the quantitative implications of this approach will
be similar to those of the simpler model of Section 2. Empirically, policy makers in general worry
about capital adjustments happening very quickly following tax changes by, for instance, capital
flights abroad (Johannesen, 2014).35 Saez et al. (2012), surveying the literature on taxable
income elasticities, argue that the long-term responses, although particularly important in the
case of a dynamic decision such as capital are understudied. Saez (2017) shows strong short
term retiming response of capital income (particularly of realized capital gains and dividends)
  33
      With heterogeneous discount ratesR δi , the
                                                R∞same optimal tax formulas apply but the discounted elasticities
need to be redefined such that euK = i δi · gi t=0 euK (t) · e−δi t dt (see the proof in appendix).
   34
      Note that we can also generalize the other results from Section 3. The optimal tax on total income yi =
rki + zi takes the same form as in Proposition 3 with the long-run elasticity eY replacedR∞     by the total elasticity
of the income tax base, taking into account the transitional adjustments, ēY = δ 0 eY (t) · e−δt dt. Similarly it
is straightforward to generalize the results in subsections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3. Regarding the latter, with transitional
dynamics, the government will be more tempted to tax more heavily assets which are slower to adjust (holding
fixed the long-run elasticity ejK and the distributional factor ḡK  j
                                                                       ).
   35
      Johannesen (2014) shows that the introduction of a withholding tax for EU individuals with Swiss bank
accounts led immediately, within two quarters of the reform, to a drop of 30-40% in deposits. Empirical evidence
on the short-run versus long-run responses of capital to taxes is very difficult to come by.


                                                          37
following the 2013 US federal income top tax rate increase but much smaller medium term
responses. Companies can modify their dividend payouts quickly to changes in dividend taxation
for the sake of their shareholders (Chetty and Saez, 2005; Alstadsaeter and Fjaerli, 2009).36
       If responses are slow on the other hand, then euK < eK . In the short-run, the equity-
efficiency trade-off for capital taxation looks more favorable if individuals are not able to adjust
their capital quickly. As a result, and considering formula (26), the government can tax more
by taking advantage of these slow responses in the short-run.
       However, exploiting such slow responses does not seem very appealing from a normative
perspective. A well-designed policy cannot or should not endlessly exploit short-run adjustment
costs. If nothing else, this will create a commitment problem for the government as it will
always look appealing to unexpectedly increase taxes on existing capital temporarily.37
       Normatively, one would like to not set the optimal capital tax based on transitional dynamics,
as this tends to lead to a (potentially much) higher tax rate given that capital is sluggish to
adjust. Our simpler model precisely abstracts from transitional dynamics – which is its key
normative appeal. One can also short-circuit transitional dynamics in an approximate way by
using our utility based steady state approach.


5.2       Optimal Taxes with Anticipated Tax Reforms
Traditionally, the literature has tried to resolve the problem of taxing existing capital by con-
sidering anticipated tax reforms. Such reforms are supposed to give existing capital the chance
to adjust before the new tax policy takes effect. We consider again an economy with time
invariant (τL , τK ) in steady state as of time 0. The government maximizes again discounted
utilities exactly as in (24). We now assume that the government pre-announces a small budget
balanced tax change that takes place T > 0 years from now. As the optimum, such a reform
should have no first order effect on welfare.38
  36
     These authors find that the introduction of the Norwegian shareholder income tax led to immediate effects
on payouts, emphasizing that capital income can react very quickly and flexibly to tax changes.
  37
     A large literature has analyzed the problem of commitment for capital taxation (see the early work by
Kydland and Prescott (1977), Fischer (1980), and, more recently, Farhi et al. (2012)).
  38
     When T becomes large, this approach is equivalent to finding the optimal long-run tax rates as in Chamley
(1986) and Judd (1985) (see our discussion below).




                                                     38
Anticipated elasticities. Consider a small reform dτK that takes place at time T > 0 and
is pre-announced at time zero. All individuals anticipate that the tax rate will go up starting
at time T . Intuitively, individuals want a lower wealth stock after time T but do not like
abrupt consumption changes due to consumption smoothing considerations. Hence they start
responding immediately as of time 0 by reducing their wealth stock slowly. We denote by
eaK (t) = (r̄/k m (t)) · (dk m (t)/dr̄) the elasticity of aggregate capital in period t. The superscript
a denotes that the tax change is anticipated to take place at T (eaK (t) formally depends on
T as well). eaK (t) converges again to the steady state elasticity eK as t → ∞. We define the
anticipated elasticity of capital with respect to r̄ as the time discounted average of the eaK (t).
                                                                          Z   ∞
      Anticipated elasticity for reform at time T :            eaK   =δ           eaK (t)e−δ(t−T ) dt.   (27)
                                                                          t=0


We discount elasticities from time T as the reform starts in time T , but responses start at
time t = 0 because the reform is anticipated. Anticipated labor earnings elasticities and cross
elasticities can be defined in the same way.
   The anticipated elasticity eaK is typically larger than the unanticipated euK because individuals
start responding in advance of the reform. The two elasticities coincide when T = 0 and it is
expected that eaK grows with T as individuals have more and more time to respond in advance
of the reform.
   In a wide range of models, eaK grows to infinity as T grows to infinity. Piketty and Saez
(2013b) showed that this is the case in the standard model with no utility of wealth as in
Chamley-Judd (as well as in the endogenous discount rate model of Judd (1985)). This is also
the case in our model with utility of wealth as we shall see (and as shown formally in Online
Appendix A.1). The intuition for this result is simple. If T is large, then individuals have an
opportunity to respond a very long time in advance. As time is discounted at rate δ > 0, early
responses loom large relative to the discounted capital tax bases for t ≥ T , which are directly
affected by the reform. Increasing the tax rate in the distant future makes the government incur
a lot of revenue losses before the tax change happens in exchange for mechanical gains from the
tax increases that are far into the future and hence heavily discounted.


Optimal tax solution. The derivation of the optimal tax formula closely parallels the deriva-
tion in the case of unanticipated tax changes and hence delivers the exact same tax formulas

                                                  39
by simply replacing the unanticipated elasticities with the anticipated elasticities.

Proposition 9. Optimal linear taxes with anticipated responses.

                                   zm a                          Z ∞
                     1 − ḡK − τL rk m eL,1−τK
               τK =                                         a
                                                   with eK = δ        eaK (t) · e−δ(t−T ) dt,                       (28)
                           1 − ḡK + eaK                          t=0
                              Z ∞                                            Z
                  a                 a             −δ(t−T )
                 eL,1−τK = δ       eL,1−τK (t) · e         dt, and ḡK = gi · ki /k m .
                                   t=0                                                 i


If T → ∞, then eaK → ∞ so that τK → 0.

    Note that the value of the optimal tax rate will be different for each possible reform date
T . With heterogeneous discount rates, the same formula applies, replacing ḡK = i gi e−δi T ·
                                                                                                      R
                                         R∞                                                        R∞
ki /(k m i e−δi T ), eaK = i δi gi e−δi T 0 eaK (t) · e−δi (t−T ) dt, and eaL,1−τK = i δi gi e−δi T 0 eaL,1−τK (t) ·
        R                 R                                                         R

e−δi (t−T ) dt, which all depend on the reform time T (see the Online Appendix).


Discussion. Hence, in this case, the optimal formula takes again the same shape, with the
extra implication that the relevant elasticity becomes infinite when the tax reform is antici-
pated infinitely in the advance. While this leads to a zero optimal capital tax rate, it occurs in
a particularly unrealistic policy setting, namely if the reform is announced infinitely in advance
with perfect certainty. It is also a particularly fragile result since adding uncertainty about
future earnings makes the elasticity finite as shown in Piketty and Saez (2013b) and discussed
below. To our knowledge, there is also no empirical evidence that pre-announcing changes in
capital income tax rates leads to changes in consumption immediately because of consumption
smoothing responses. There is evidence of avoidance responses in anticipation of tax changes
(see e.g., Saez et al. (2012); Saez (2017)) but they clearly take place through the tax avoidance
mechanisms of our simple model from Section 2 rather than consumption smoothing. Further-
more, with heterogeneous discount rates, as shown above, ḡK = i gi e−δi T ki /(k m i e−δi T ), so
                                                               R                   R

that the anticipated approach would effectively load all welfare weights on the most patient
individuals and put zero welfare weight on all others (Piketty and Saez (2013b) discuss this
issue in detail). This is obviously not an attractive normative property.39 Therefore, our view is
  39
     An anticipated reform with a finite T < ∞ either does not resolve the problem of taxing existing capital
(i.e., it will still exploit sluggish responses) or runs into the same unrealistic predictions of very large elasticities,
as well as normative difficulties on how to weight agents with heterogeneous discount rates.




                                                           40
that the anticipated reform approach is not an appealing way to resolve the problem of taxing
existing capital.


5.3        Optimal Taxes in the Utility Based Steady State Approach
The unanticipated and anticipated approaches both have problems. The unanticipated approach
makes optimal tax rates too high because it exploits sluggish responses and hence effectively
taxes existing capital. The anticipated approach solution lacks realism and generates anticipated
responses that do not seem relevant empirically yet get infinitely large in the model.40 Therefore,
in this section, we propose an alternative, new, and non-standard solution to the optimal capital
tax problem. Our goal is to neutralize the ability of the government to exploit sluggish responses.
However, instead of using anticipation (which leads to the aforementioned undesirable features),
we want the government to explicitly recognize the long-run steady state behavioral responses
as the normatively relevant ones. We also want the government to respect individual savings
choices. This is why we call our approach “utility based steady state approach.” We are
going to see that this goal leads to an obvious solution, namely to use the standard optimal tax
formulas with the steady-state elasticities. The challenge is that the goal cannot be formalized
in a standard way as a fully consistent maximization problem, which is why this solution is
non-standard and new.


Optimal tax problem. Let us assume again that we start from a steady state with tax
system (τL , τK ) and we consider a small reform dτK at time 0. As we have seen in section 5.1,
the actual response to this tax change is sluggish. The simplest way to formalize the idea that the
government is not allowed to exploit such sluggish responses is to assume that the government
considers that steady state responses start immediately in terms of revenue implications. To be
specific, the real change in taxes collected at time t is dG(t) = rk m dτK +τK rdk m (t)+τL dz m (t) yet
the government considers that the budgetary effect at time t is dG = rk m dτK +τK rdk m +τL dz m .
In other words, the government absorbs the difference between dG(t) and dG. For example, in
the case of a tax increase dτK > 0, because of transitional dynamics, responses are smaller at
first so that the real dG(t) is actually bigger than the steady-state dG but we just assume that
  40
       It is also normatively unappealing as it puts very low weight on impatient agents.




                                                         41
the government “burns” the surplus.41 Hence, normatively, the government ignores the gains
it can make by exploiting slow responses. Formally the government problem can be written as
finding the tax system (τK , τL ) that maximize SW F as in (24) but assuming that the lump-sum
grant G(t) is equal to the steady-state lump-sum grant: G = rτK k m +τL z m instead of the actual
lump-sum grant rτK k m (t) + τL z m (t).


Optimal tax solution. This problem can be solved exactly paralleling the derivations from
sections 5.1 and 5.2 by simply replacing the unanticipated or anticipated elasticities with the
steady state elasticities defined above.

Proposition 10. Optimal linear capital tax in the utility based steady state approach

                                        z  m
                          1 − ḡK − τL rk m eL,1−τK
                                                                          Z
                     τK =                                  with   ḡK =       gi · ki /k m .              (29)
                                1 − ḡK + eK                              i


       A symmetric equation holds for the optimal labor income tax rate τL as in Proposition 6.
Hence, the same tax formulas hold by simply using the steady state elasticities. One advantage
of this approach is that it is fully robust to introducing heterogeneity in discount rates across
individuals as heterogeneity in discount rates is normatively irrelevant in the steady state.
       Importantly, all of the applications from the simple model in Sections 2 and 3 carry over with
the steady-state approach with relatively slight modifications. These modifications relate to the
concave utility function, which introduces income effects and cross-elasticities (but in either
case, there are no transitional dynamics). In fact, with exogenous labor income, all capital tax
formulas from Sections 2 and 3 carry over one for one. With endogenous labor income, we would
simply have to augment the capital tax formulas with the cross-elasticity of labor income with
respect to the net of tax rate r̄.42


Link with steady state welfare maximization. The optimal tax from Proposition 10 is
related but not identical to choosing the budget balanced tax system (τL , τK ) that maximizes
  41
      Conversely, for a dτK < 0, we assume that the government can “make up” the deficit due to the fact that
revenue increasing behavioral responses build up only slowly toward the full steady state response.
   42
      The optimal labor tax formulas in turn have to be augmented with the cross elasticity of capital income
with respect to the labor tax. The policy elasticities eK , eL , eK,1−τL and eL,1−τK captured only substitution
effects in Sections 2 and 3, while they mix substitution and income effects here. This does not matter for our
sufficient statistics formulas expressed in terms of policy elasticities.



                                                      42
                                     R
steady state welfare SW F =           i
                                          ωi · ui (ci , ki , zi )di. In the steady-state maximization case, the
lump-sum grant is always given by G = rτK k m + τL z m . Solving this problem is straightfor-
ward but does not generate the same formula as in Proposition 10 because the steady-state
maximization objective is paternalistic.
       To see this, suppose we consider a small tax reform dτK that triggers a wealth response dki
for individual i in steady state. Using the first order conditions (22), the infinitesimal change in
wealth dki has an effect on individual i steady state instantaneous utility ui = ui (r(1 − τK )ki +
(1 − τL )zi + G, ki , zi ) equal to dui = (uic r(1 − τK ) + uik )dki = uic δdki where the last equality
comes from the steady state condition uik /uic = δ − r(1 − τK ) from (22). Hence, the behavioral
change in dki does have a first order impact on the individual utility. Intuitively, increasing
wealth looks good because the steady state “forgets” that accumulating wealth required to
sacrifice consumption in the past. This artificially creates a positive welfare effect of wealth
accumulation that will tend to lower the optimal capital income tax. This “internality,” i.e.,
the omission of the cost to the individual of past sacrificed consumption, is not normatively
appealing in this case where our principle is that the government should respect individuals’
savings decisions.43
       The simplest way to fix this issue of paternalism is to deliberately ignore the effect of dki
on individual welfare by stating that any behavioral response triggered by a tax reform should
have zero first order effect on individual welfare through the envelope theorem. Intuitively, this
means that the government respects individual savings’ decisions. With this “forced” envelope
theorem assumption, the optimal tax derivation can be done entirely in the steady-state without
worrying about dynamic considerations and the optimal steady-state tax formula is given exactly
as in Proposition 10.
       To see this, consider tax change dτK (say starting at time 0). The economy converges to
a new steady state. Using the forced envelope theorem assumption, the direct welfare effect
of dτK on individual i utility (keeping the lump-sum rebate G constant) is −uic rki dτK . The
higher capital tax hurts each person to the extent of her capital income, independently of how
strongly she responds to the tax change. In the new steady state, the change in the aggregate
  43
    Piketty and Saez (2013b) use such a steady-state objective in their benchmark analysis of inheritance taxa-
tion. The steady-state objective is easier to justify in the inheritance tax context as each time period represents a
new generation of distinct individuals. As a result, leaving a larger bequest does generate a positive “externality”
on the next generation of individuals.



                                                         43
k m and z m are governed by the steady-state elasticities, and they in turn affect the lump-sum
rebate G by dG further affecting individual i utility by uic dG. The total effect on individual i
utility is therefore dui = uic [−rki dτK +dG]. Aggregating the money metric effects −rki dτK +dG
across individuals using marginal social welfare weights gi immediately leads to the conventional
optimal tax formula as in Proposition 10.
   There are thus two ways to obtain the optimal tax formula from Proposition 10. First,
maximize dynamic social welfare SW F as in (24) but assuming that the lump-sum grant G(t)
                                                                                      R
is equal to the steady-state lump-sum grant, or, second, maximize steady state welfare i ωi ·
ui (ci , ki , zi )di using the forced envelope theorem.


Discussion. The solution proposed in this section is normatively appealing but is unfor-
tunately not conceptually consistent with a fully spelled out dynamic model. The scenario
proposed above of assuming that the lump-sum grant responds immediately as in steady state
is a well closed problem. The direct steady-state derivation with the “forced envelope” theorem
is simple and intuitive but cannot–to the best of our attempts–be presented as a well defined
formal maximization problem.
   Another way to defend this non-standard steady-state solution is consider the analogy with
labor income taxation. The Mirrlees (1971) model of optimal labor income taxation can be
narrowly interpreted as a labor supply model with the elasticity of hours of work to taxes.
It can also be interpreted more broadly as a model of earnings supply incorporating long-run
responses of human capital accumulation or occupational choice. For labor too there is a short-
run elasticity in which hours are adjusted, and a long-run, potentially larger, elasticity based
on skill choice or occupational choice. The same formulas – which we routinely use– carry over
simply substituting the short-run labor supply elasticity by the long-run elasticity of earnings
eL in the standard optimal (linear) tax rate formula τL = (1 − ḡL )/(1 − ḡL + eL ).
   If one wanted to rigorously micro-found the long-run dynamic of labor supply responses,
one would face exactly the same difficulties we are discussing here. Indeed, following Jones
et al. (1993), there is a literature on optimal dynamic labor taxation that parallels the optimal
dynamic capital taxation of Chamley and Judd. It also finds that long-run optimal tax rates on
labor incomes should be zero because anticipated elasticities for human capital accumulation
are also infinite in the limit (see our discussion on anticipation elasticities). Yet, this literature


                                                    44
has not had much traction in altering views about long-run optimal labor income taxation
nor in actual policy debates. Hence, to the extent the reader believes the conventional static
Mirrlees (1971) model is helpful to understand optimal long-run labor taxation, the reader also
has to keep an open mind to the approach proposed in this section for optimal long-run capital
taxation.


5.4        Connection with Earlier Models
We now discuss the connection with earlier models. Our formulas can be applied using each
model’s specific elasticity values. The latter are determined both by the model’s primitives (e.g.,
wealth-in-the-utility or standard concave utility, uncertainty in labor earnings, etc.) and by the
type of reform considered (anticipated, with different anticipation horizons T , unanticipated,
etc.). Conditional on the elasticities, the primitives of the model are largely irrelevant. Table 1
provides a systematic comparison and summary of all the cases.


The Chamley-Judd model. In the Chamley-Judd model (Chamley, 1986; Judd, 1985), indi-
viduals have a standard utility u(cit , zit ) and there is no uncertainty. Chamley and Judd assume
that the government chooses and announces the optimal time variant tax system (τLt , τKt ) at
time zero. Hence, effectively, individuals anticipate the tax rate at time t exactly t years in
advance. Initially, the taxes are unanticipated and hence tax rates on capital are large. How-
ever, as t grows large, the tax rates are anticipated long in the distance, and the tax rate τKt
converges to zero. In our formula (28), in the long distance future, T goes to infinity so that
the anticipated elasticity becomes infinite and the optimal long run tax rate is correspondingly
zero, which is another form of restating the famous zero tax result of Chamley and Judd.
       Without utility of wealth, as we have noted, the steady state is degenerate unless δ = r̄,
which means that in the steady state, any change in the capital income tax rate leads to an
infinite response. Hence, eK = ∞ and the optimal capital tax in the steady state approach of
Section 5.3 is also zero.44
  44
       This optimal zero steady state result in the Chamley-Judd model was pointed out by Piketty (2000), p. 444.




                                                        45
The Judd endogenous discount factor model. In Judd (1985), the discount rate δi =
δi (ci ) depends smoothly and negatively on consumption. Utility is:
                                                          Z    ∞                               Rt
                           Vi ({ci (t), zi (t)}t≥0 ) =             ui (ci (t), zi (t))e−       0    δi (ci (s))ds
                                                                                                                    dt.
                                                           0


In this model, the steady state elasticity is finite. Indeed, the key point Judd (1985) wanted to
make with this model is to show that the zero capital tax rate was not the consequence of an
infinite steady state elasticity of capital supply. However, the anticipated elasticity also grows
to infinity as T → ∞ (as shown in Piketty and Saez (2013b)) and hence the zero capital tax
result with anticipated tax reforms is ultimately again the consequence of an infinite elasticity.
   In Online Appendix A.2.1, we derive the optimal linear tax formula starting from a steady
state and considering an unanticipated reform, which is the same as in (28), except that ḡK
is redefined to take into account that the welfare impact of taxes now also goes through the
discount factor δi (ci ) which depends negatively on consumption:
                                                    
                                       δi0 (ci )
                  ωi δi (c1 i )
                              uic +    δi (ci ) i
                                                 u                           Z                 Z    ∞
          gi = R                                        and      euK   =       gi δi (ci )            e−δi (ci )t eK (t)dt.
                                        δi0 (ci )
                  ω 1
                 i i δi (ci )
                                uic +   δi (ci ) i
                                                  u                          i                  t=0



Again, the faster capital adjusts, the closer euK is to the long-run elasticity eK . As with wealth-
in-the-utility, the steady state of this model is non-degenerate, with δi (ci (t)) = r̄ and generates
a finite long-term elasticity eK and hence a positive optimal tax rate using the steady state
approach with the same formula as in equation (29) of Proposition 10.


The Aiyagari model with uncertainty. In the Aiyagari (1995) model, time is discrete and
earnings are stochastic. The economy converges to an ergodic steady state that depends on the
long-run tax system but is independent of the distribution of initial wealth. In this model, all
elasticities including the steady state elasticity and the anticipated elasticity with T → ∞ are
finite as shown in Piketty and Saez (2013b). As a result, optimal capital tax rates are positive
with all three approaches, although the quantitative elasticities and optimal tax rates will be
different. Importantly, adding uncertainty in earnings does not affect the formulas expressed
in terms of elasticities. Adding utility for wealth in the Aiyagari model would not change the
qualitative elasticities either.


                                                                   46
       Therefore, adding uncertainty can be seen as a way to obtain finite elasticities and derive
formulas expressed in sufficient statistics. Our approach in this paper has been instead to use
wealth in the utility which also generates finite steady state elasticities and a simpler way to
derive optimal tax rates.45
       In our view, the fact that the formulas expressed in terms of distributional terms and elas-
ticities remain the same across such different models is a good illustration of the value of the
sufficient statistics approach to optimal policy.



6        Conclusion
In this paper we propose a tractable new model for capital taxation, which creates a link to the
policy debate and empirical analysis. We first presented a simple model with linear utility for
consumption and concave utility for wealth which generates immediate adjustments of capital
in response to taxes, a non-degenerate, smooth response of capital to taxes, and allows for
arbitrary heterogeneity in preferences for capital, work, and discount rates.
       We derive formulas for optimal linear and nonlinear capital income taxation which are ex-
pressed in terms of the elasticity of capital with respect to the net-of-tax rate of return, the
shape of the capital income distribution, and the social welfare weights at each capital income
level. We put the simplicity of this model to use by considering a range of policy issues such
as the cases with joint-preferences and cross-elasticities between capital and labor, economic
growth, heterogeneous returns to capital across individuals, different types of capital assets and
heterogeneous tastes for each of them, or optimal taxes on comprehensive income.
       We make use of our sufficient statistics formulas to numerically simulate optimal taxes based
on U.S. tax data. Given how concentrated the distribution of capital is, the asymptotic tax rate
for capital applies for the majority of capital income in the economy and should be higher than
the top tax rate on labor income if the supply elasticities of labor and capital with respect to
tax rates are the same. The theoretical framework we provide points to the key elasticities that
need to be estimated in future work. These include the cross-elasticities between capital and
labor and the elasticities and cross-elasticities of different types of capital assets, which it may
be optimal to tax differently.
  45
     In particular, deriving nonlinear optimal tax formulas is not tractable in the model with uncertainty while
it is relatively simple in our model with certainty.

                                                      47
   Our approach is very amenable to incorporating alternative justice and fairness principles for
capital taxation in an operational way. We discuss a range of ethical considerations regarding
capital taxation that are salient in the policy debate. As long as, conditional on labor income,
social marginal welfare weights depend directly on wealth (which is the case if wealth is perceived
as unfairly distributed for many possible reasons) or are correlated with wealth (as in the case
of the use of wealth as a tag), there is scope for capital taxation from an equity perspective.
In future work, it would be very valuable to better understand society’s equity considerations
when it comes to capital taxation.
   We show how our results extend to a model with a general, concave utility function as long as
the elasticities of the capital tax base are appropriately adjusted to take into account transitional
dynamics and potentially slow adjustments. The qualitative lessons from the simpler model
carry over. However, the relevant quantitative elasticities depend on the normative framework
chosen and we have tried to explain as clearly as possible the advantages and the drawbacks of
each approach. The faster the adjustment of capital to taxes, the closer the quantitative results
are across the three approaches and to those of the simpler model. The unanticipated reform
approach has realism appeal but is normatively unattractive because it allows the government
to heavily tax the existing capital stock and exploit sluggish responses. The anticipated reform
approach, especially for very long-run tax rates, lacks realism both in terms of policy process
and in terms of the infinite elasticities in generates in models without uncertainty. The utility
based steady state approach has normative and simplicity appeal but we have not been able
to make it fully consistent with a standard dynamic model. Our conjecture is that this is not
possible. The issue of how to tax the existing capital stock and which of the three types of policy
approaches to consider is irrelevant in the simpler model with linear utility from consumption,
which is one of its key strengths in addition to its tractability. Our view is that concave utility
of consumption and the consumption smoothing effects it creates introduce dilemmas which
obscure the optimal capital tax problem and, yet, are probably second order for the normative
and practical problem of taxing capital income that is mostly concentrated at the top.




                                                 48
References
Aiyagari, R. (1994). Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate savings. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 109, 659–684.
Aiyagari, R. (1995). Optimal capital income taxation with incomplete markets, borrowing
  constraints, and constant discounting. Journal of Political Economy 103 (6), 1158–1175.
Alstadsaeter, A. and E. Fjaerli (2009). Neutral taxation of shareholder income? corporate
  responses to an announced dividend tax. International Tax and Public Finance 16 (4), 571–
  604.
Atkinson, A. and A. Sandmo (1980). Welfare implications of the taxation of savings. Economic
  Journal 90, 529–549.
Atkinson, A. B. and J. E. Stiglitz (1976). The design of tax structure: direct versus indirect
  taxation. Journal of Public Economics 6 (1), 55–75.
Auerbach, A. (2009). The choice between income and consumption taxes: A primer. In A. Auer-
 bach and D. Shaviro (Eds.), Institutional Foundations of Public Finance: Economic and Legal
 Perspectives. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Auerbach, A. J. and L. J. Kotlikoff (1987). Dynamic fiscal policy, Volume 11. Cambridge
 University Press Cambridge.
Benhabib, J. and A. Bisin (2016). Skewed wealth distributions: Theory and empirics. NYU
  Working Paper .
Blanchard, O. (1985). Debt, Deficits, and Infinite Horizons. Journal of Political Economy 93,
  223–247.
Cagetti, M. and M. De Nardi (2007). Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth. Journal of
  Political Economy 114, 835–870.
Carroll, C. D. (1997). Buffer-stock saving and the life cycle/permanent income hypothesis.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1–56.
Carroll, C. D. (2000). Why do the rich save so much? In J. B. Slemrod (Ed.), Does Atlas
  Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich. Harvard University Press.
Chamley, C. (1986). Optimal taxation of capital income in general equilibrium with infinite
 lives. Econometrica 80 (3), 607–622.
Chetty, R. and E. Saez (2005). Dividend taxes and corporate behavior: Evidence from the 2003
 dividend tax cut. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3), 791–833.
De Nardi, M. (2004). Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links. Review of Economic
  Studies 71, 743–768.
Diamond, P. and E. Saez (2011). The case for a progressive tax: from basic research to policy
  recommendations. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (4), 165–190.
Diamond, P. A. and J. A. Mirrlees (1971). Optimal taxation and public production i: Production
  efficiency. The American Economic Review 61 (1), 8–27.
Farhi, E., C. Sleet, I. Werning, and S. Yeltekin (2012). Nonlinear capital taxation without
  commitment. Review of Economic Studies 79 (4), 1469–1493.
Fischer, S. (1980). Dynamic Inconsistency, Cooperation, and the Benevolent Dissembling Gov-
  ernment. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 2, 93–107.
Golosov, M., A. Tsyvinski, and N. Kocherlakota (2003). Optimal indirect and capital taxation.
 Review of Economic Studies 70 (3), 569–588.
Golosov, M., A. Tsyvinski, and I. Werning (2006). New dynamic public finance: a user’s guide.
 In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, Volume 21, pp. 317–388. MIT Press.
Gordon, R. and W. Kopczuk (2014). The Choice of Personal Income Tax Base. Journal of
 Public Economics 118, 97-110.
Hamilton, B. H. (2000). Does entrepreneurship pay? an empirical analysis of the returns to
  self?employment. Journal of Political Economy 108 (3), 604–631.
Hendren, N. (2016). The policy elasticity. Tax Policy and the Economy 30 (1), 51–89.
Hurst, E. and B. W. Pugsley (2010). Non pecuniary benefits of small business ownership.
 Chicago Booth Working Paper .
Johannesen, N. (2014). Tax evasion and swiss bank deposits. Journal of Public Economics 111,
  46–62.
Jones, L. E., R. E. Manuelli, and P. E. Rossi (1993). Optimal taxation in models of endogenous
  growth. Journal of Political economy 101 (3), 485–517.
Judd, K. L. (1985). Redistributive taxation in a simple perfect foresight model. Journal of
  public Economics 28 (1), 59–83.
Kaplow, L. (1994). Taxation and risk taking: A general equilibrium perspective. National Tax
 Association 47 (4), 789–798.
Keynes, J. M. (1931). Essays in Persuasion. London: Macmillan.
King, M. A. (1980). Savings and taxation. In G. Hughes and G. Heal (Eds.), Public Policy and
  the Tax System, pp. 1–36. London: George Allen Unwin.
Kiyotaki, N., A. Michaelides, and K. Nikolov (2011). Winners and losers in housing markets.
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 43 (2-3), 255–296.
Kydland, F. and E. C. Prescott (1977). Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
 Optimal Plans. Journal of Political Economy 85, 473–491.
Mirrlees, J. (1971). An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation. The review of
 economic studies 38, 175–208.
Novokmet, F., T. Piketty, and G. Zucman (2017). From soviets to oligarchs: Inequality and
  property in russia, 1905-2016. Working Paper 23712, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Piazzesi, M., M. Schneider, and S. Tuzel (2007). Housing, consumption and asset pricing.
  ?Journal of Financial Economics 83, 531–569.

                                             50
Piketty, T. (2000). Theories of persistent inequality and intergenerational mobility. Handbook
  of income distribution 1, 429–476.
Piketty, T. (2011). On the long-run evolution of inheritance: France 1820-2050. Quarterly
  journal of economics 61 (3), 1071–1131.
Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the Twenty-first Century. Harvard University Press.
Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003). Income inequality in the united states, 1913–1998. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 118 (1), 1–41.
Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2013a). Optimal labor income taxation. In M. F. Alan J. Auer-
  bach, Raj Chetty and E. Saez (Eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 5, pp. 391–474.
  Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2013b). A theory of optimal inheritance taxation. Econometrica 82 (4),
  1241–1272.
Piketty, T., E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2014). Optimal taxation of top labor incomes: A tale
  of three elasticities. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (1), 230–71.
Piketty, T., E. Saez, and G. Zucman (2016). Distributional national accounts: Methods and
  estimates for the united states. NBER Working Paper 22945, NBER.
Poterba, J. and J. Rotemberg (1987). Money in the utility function: An empirical implementa-
  tion. In W. Barnett and K. Singleton (Eds.), New Approaches to Monetary Economics., pp.
  219–240. Cambridge University Press.
Quadrini, V. (1999). The Importance of Entrepreneurship for Wealth Concentration and Mo-
 bility. Review of Income and Wealth 45 (1), 1–19.
Quadrini, V. (2000). Entrepreneurship, Savings and Social Mobility. Review of Economic
 Dynamics 3, 1–40.
Saez, E. (2001). Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates. Review of Economic
  Studies 68 (1), 205–229.
Saez, E. (2017). Taxing the rich more: Preliminary evidence from the 2013 tax increase. Tax
  Policy and the Economy 31 (1), 71–120.
Saez, E., J. Slemrod, and S. Giertz (2012). The elasticity of taxable income with respect to
  marginal tax rates: A critical review. Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1), 3–50.
Saez, E. and S. Stantcheva (2016). Generalized social marginal welfare weights for optimal tax
  theory. American Economic Review 106 (1), 24–45.
Saez, E. and G. Zucman (2016). Wealth inequality in the united states since 1913: Evidence
  from capitalized income tax data. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (2), 519–578.
Smith, A. (1759). The Theory of Moral Sentiments.
Stokey, N. (2009). Moving costs, nondurable consumption and portfolio choice. ?Journal of
  Economic Theory 144, 2419?2439.


                                              51
Warren, A. C. (1980). Would a consumption tax be fairer than an income tax? The Yale Law
 Journal Volume 89 (Number 6).
Weber, M. (1958). The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Charles Scribner and
 Sons, New York.
Weisbach, D. A. and J. Bankman (2006). The Superiority of an Ideal Consumption Tax over
 an Ideal Income Tax. 58 Stanford Law Review 1413 .
Yaari, M. (1965). Uncertain lifetime, life insurance, and the theory of the consumer. Review of
  Economic Studies 32, 137–150.




                                              52
  Figure 1: Lorenz Curves for capital, labor, and total income




Notes: Computations based on IRS tax return data for year 2007. The figure represents the Lorenz curves for
labor income, capital income, and total income (capital + labor income). The Lorenz curve is the cumulative
share of income owned by those below each income percentile (x-axis). The distributions of both labor and capital
income (and, thus, of total income) exhibit great inequalities, but capital income is much more concentrated
than labor income.

Figure 2: Capital and labor incomes as a share of total income




Notes: Computations based on IRS tax return data for year 2007. The figure shows the composition of total
income within several groups, ranked by total income, and marked on the horizontal axis. The first observation
represents the overall population P0-P100. P0-P20 denotes the bottom 20% tax units, etc. At the top of the
income distribution, most of total income comes from capital income.


                                                       53
Figure 3: Two-dimensional heterogeneity:
Lorenz curves for capital, conditional in labor income




Notes: Computations based on IRS tax return data for year 2007. The figure depicts the Lorenz curves for
capital income (the Lorenz curve is the cumulative share of capital income owned by those below each percentile
of the capital income distribution), for four groups defined by labor income: all individuals, the bottom 50% by
labor income, the top 10% by labor income and the top 1% by labor income. Even conditional on labor income,
there are large inequalities in capital income. Put differently, there is a lot of two-dimensional heterogeneity in
both labor and capital income.




                                                        54
                                                                Figure 4: Empirical Pareto parameters
                                                (a) Labor Income                                                                                                                                    (b) Capital Income
                                3                                                                                                                                       3
                                                              zm /(zm − z ∗ ) with zm = E(z|z > z ∗ )                                                                                                            rkm /(rkm − rk ∗ ) with rkm = E(rk|rk > rk ∗ )
                                                              αL = z ∗ hL (z ∗ )/(1 − HL (z ∗ ))                                                                                                                 αK = rk ∗ hK (rk ∗ )/(1 − HK (rk ∗ ))

                               2.5                                                                                                                                     2.5
Empirical Pareto coefficient




                                                                                                                                        Empirical Pareto coefficient
                                2                                                                                                                                       2



                               1.5                                                                                                                                     1.5



                                1                                                                                                                                       1



                               0.5                                                                                                                                     0.5



                                0                                                                                                                                       0
                                     $200,000    $400,000    $600,000                                      $800,000       $1,000,000                                                   $200,000         $400,000            $600,000       $800,000        $1,000,000
                                                     Labor Income                                                                                                                                            Capital Income




                                                                                                                                  (c) Total Income
                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                  ym /(ym − y ∗ ) with ym = E(y|y > y ∗ )
                                                                                                                                                                                  αY = y ∗ hY (y ∗ )/(1 − HY (y ∗ ))

                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                      Empirical Pareto coefficient




                                                                                                      2



                                                                                                     1.5



                                                                                                      1



                                                                                                     0.5



                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                      $200,000         $400,000                                   $600,000          $800,000         $1,000,000
                                                                                                                                                                        Total Income



                                      Notes: Computations based on IRS tax return data for year 2007. The figure depicts the empirical Pareto
                                      parameters for the labor income distribution (panel (a)), the capital income distribution (panel (b)) and the total
                                      income distribution (panel (c)). For labor income, we compute the top bracket Pareto parameter zm /(zm − z ∗ )
                                      relevant for the optimal linear tax rate above z ∗ and the local Pareto parameter α(z ∗ ) = z ∗ hL (z ∗ )/(1 − HL (z ∗ ))
                                      where hL (z) is the density and HL (z) the cumulated distribution, which is relevant for the optimal nonlinear
                                      TL0 (z ∗ ). The x-axis depicts z ∗ . The vertical lines depict the 90th and 99th percentiles of each distribution. We
                                      repeat the same for capital income rk and total income y = rk + z. At the top, all three distributions are very
                                      well approximated by Pareto distributions with constant tail parameters of around aL = 1.6 for labor, aK = 1.38
                                      for capital, and aY = 1.4 for total income.
                                                                                                                                                                             55
                                                               Figure 5: Optimal Marginal Tax Rates
                          (a) Optimal labor income tax rate TL0 (z)                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                        (b) Optimal capital income tax rate TK (rk)
                     1                                                                                                                        1

                    0.9                                                                                                                      0.9

                    0.8                                                                                                                      0.8                                e K = 0.25

                                       e L = 0.25
                    0.7                                                                                                                      0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                e K = 0.5
Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                                                                         Marginal Tax Rate
                    0.6                                                                                                                      0.6
                                       e L = 0.5

                    0.5                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                eK = 1

                    0.4                eL = 1                                                                                                0.4

                    0.3                                                                                                                      0.3

                    0.2                                                                                                                      0.2

                    0.1                                                                                                                      0.1

                     0                                                                                                                        0
                            $200,000      $400,000          $600,000                         $800,000       $1,000,000                                        $200,000     $400,000            $600,000   $800,000   $1,000,000
                                                    Labor Income                                                                                                                Capital Income




                                                                                       (c) Optimal comprehensive income tax rate TY0 (rk + z)
                                                                                        1

                                                                                       0.9

                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                               e Y = 0.25

                                                                                       0.7
                                                                   Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                                       0.6                                                     e Y = 0.5


                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                               eY = 1
                                                                                       0.4

                                                                                       0.3

                                                                                       0.2

                                                                                       0.1

                                                                                        0
                                                                                                        $200,000         $400,000                           $600,000     $800,000           $1,000,000
                                                                                                                                              Total Income



                             Notes: Computations based on IRS tax return data for year 2007. Optimal marginal tax rates based on the
                             formulas in Section 2.2.2. Panel (a) plots the optimal marginal tax rate on labor income. Panel (b) plots the
                             optimal marginal tax rate on capital income. Panel (c) plots the optimal marginal tax rate on total income. In
                             each panel, optimal marginal tax rates are plotted for three different elasticity values: 0.25, .5, and 1. In each
                             panel, the three vertical lines represent, respectively, the median, the top 10% and the top 1% thresholds of the
                             2007 the labor, capital, and total income distributions in the U.S. (the median capital income is zero).



                                                                                                                                                   56
            Table 1: Comparison of Elasticities and Taxes in Capital Taxation Models

              Utility         Transitional    Uncertainty     Reform anticipated          Model              eaK         euK     eK     Optimal τK
                               Dynamics?     or Certainty?     or unanticipated?

               (1)                 (2)             (3)                (4)                  (5)               (6)         (7)     (8)        (9)

      Wealth in the Utility        No          Certainty             Either         Sections 2 and 3        = eK        = eK    <∞          >0



                                   Yes         Certainty       Anticipated at T        Section 5.2      ∞ if T → ∞              <∞      0 if T → ∞

                                                                 Unanticipated         Section 5.1                      < eK    <∞          >0

            Standard               Yes        Uncertainty      Anticipated at T      Aiyagari (1995)        <∞                  <∞          >0

                                                                 Unanticipated         Section 5.1                      < eK    <∞          >0
57




                                   Yes         Certainty       Anticipated at T      Chamley-Judd       ∞ if T → ∞               ∞      0 if T → ∞

                                                                 Unanticipated         Section 5.1                      < eK     ∞          >0

        Endogenous δ(ci )          Yes         Certainty       Anticipated at T        Judd (1985)      ∞ if T → ∞              <∞      0 if T → ∞

                                                                 Unanticipated         Section 5.1                      < eK    <∞          >0


     Notes: This table presents a comparison of supply elasticities of capital with respect to the net-of-tax rate of return and optimal capital income
     tax rates across various models. Column (1) indicates the type of utility function. Column (2) indicates whether there are transitional dynamics
     (which is equivalent to whether the utility is linear vs. concave in consumption). Column (3) indicates whether there is uncertainty in future
     labor incomes and preferences. Column (4) indicates whether the tax reform determining the optimal tax rate is anticipated (at time T ) or
     unanticipated (at time 0). Column (5) indicates the Section in the paper covering the model or whether an existing paper in the literature covers
     it. Columns (6)-(8) describe the magnitude of the three elasticities: eK the long-run steady state elasticity from (23), euK the unanticipated
     elasticity defined in (25), and eaK the anticipated elasticity defined in (27). Column (9) describes the sign and magnitude of the optimal linear
     tax rate τK on capital income. It is assumed that ḡK < 1 so that taxing capital income is desirable (absent any behavioral response). Adding
     wealth in the utility to the Aiyagari model does not change the predictions.
                                            Appendix

Proofs of Propositions
Proof of Proposition 1. Presented in main text.

Proof of Proposition 2. We derive the optimal capital tax. The optimal labor tax is derived
exactly in the same way. Consider a small reform δTK (rk) in which the marginal tax rate is
increased by δτK in a small band from capital income rk to rk + d(rk), but left unchanged
anywhere else. This reform has a mechanical revenue effect, a behavioral effect, and a welfare
effect.
    The mechanical revenue effect above capital income rk is

                                      d(rk)δτK [1 − HK (rk)].

The behavioral effect comes only from taxpayers with capital income in the range [rk, rk+d(rk)].
Thanks to the linear utility (i.e., no income effects), taxpayers above rk do not respond to the
tax rates since they do not face a change in their marginal tax rate. Taxpayers in the small
band have a behavioral response to the higher marginal tax rate. They each reduce their capital
income by δ(rk) = −eK δτK /(1 − TK0 (rk)) where eK is the elasticity of capital income rk with
respect to the net-of-tax return r(1 − TK0 (rk)). As there are hK (rk)d(rk) taxpayers affected by
the change in marginal tax rates, the resulting loss in tax revenue is equal to:

                                                            TK0 (rk)
                          −d(rk)δτK · hK (rk)eK (rk)rk                  ,
                                                         (1 − TK0 (rk))

with eK (rk), as defined in the text, the average elasticity of capital income in the small band.
   The change in tax revenue is rebated lump-sum to all taxpayers. The value of this lump-sum
                       R
transfer to society is i gi = 1 due to the absence of income effects (the lump-sum rebate also
does not change any behavior with linear utility).
   By definition of the average social marginal welfare weight above rk, ḠK (rk), in (10), the
welfare effect on the tax payers above rk who pay more tax δτK · d(rk) is:
                               Z
                  −δτK · d(rk)          gi = −δτK · d(rk)(1 − HK (rk))ḠK (rk).
                                i:rki ≥rk

   At the optimum, the sum of the mechanical revenue effect, the behavioral effect, and the




                                                58
welfare effect needs to be zero, which requires that:

                                                      TK0 (rk)
                                                                              
  d(rk)δτK · 1 − HK (rk) − hK (rk) · eK (rk) · rk ·
                                                    1 − TK0 (rk)
                                                                   − d(rk)δτK · (1 − HK (rk)) · ḠK (rk) = 0.

   We can divide everything by d(rk)δτK and re-arrange to obtain:

                            TK0 (rk)       1     1 − HK (rk)
                                 0
                                      =        ·             · (1 − ḠK (rk)).
                          1 − TK (rk)   eK (rk) rk · hK (rk)

   Using the definition of the local Pareto parameter αK (rk) = rkhK (rk)/(1 − HK (rk)), we
obtain the capital tax formula in the proposition. The optimal marginal labor tax formula is
derived in the same way, replacing capital income rk with labor income z.

Proof of Proposition 3. The derivation of the optimal tax on comprehensive income follows
exactly the proof of Proposition 2, replacing capital income rk with total income y.

                                                                                               m   m      m
Proof of Proposition 4. xi depends only on τL − τK . We have that: dx  dτL
                                                                           = − dx
                                                                               dτK
                                                                                   = d(τdx
                                                                                        L −τK )
                                                                                                .
Let ∆τ ≡ τL − τK . The first order conditions with respect to τL and τK can be rewritten as:
             R                            dxm                               R                     dxm
z m − xm −        ω (z − xi )
                 i i i                 d(τL −τK )             rk m + xm − i ωi (rki + xi )     d(τL −τK )
           dz m
                                − ∆τ      dz m
                                                    = τL ,                 dkm
                                                                                           + ∆τ dkm = τK
         d(1−τL )                       d(1−τL )
                                                                       r d(1−τ K)
                                                                                               r d(1−τK )

Let us simplify notation a bit and denote:

                                   dz m                       dk m                dxm
                          z0 ≡                      k0 ≡                x0 ≡               .
                                 d(1 − τL )                d(1 − τK )          d(τL − τK )

Taking the difference of those two equations, we can express ∆τ as
                                                R                         R
                                   z m − xm − i ωi (zi − xi ) rk m + xm − i ωi (rki + xi )
                           
               0   1     1
     ∆τ 1 + x         +          =                           −                             , (A1)
                   z 0 rk 0                    z0                        rk 0

    Since 1 + x0 z10 + rk1 0
                             
                                > 0, the sign of ∆τ is that of the right-hand side of the above
expression. Define the distributional factor of shifted income, by analogy to the distributional
factors ḡK and ḡL for capital and labor income.
                                                  R
                                                    ω i xi
                                            ḡX = i m .
                                                    z




                                                             59
Using (A1), we obtain:
                                       xm                          xm                 zm
                                  1−   zm
                                            − ḡL + ḡX       1+   rkm
                                                                         − ḡK − ḡX rk m
                      ∆τ > 0 ⇔               eL           >                eK               .
                                            1−τL                          1−τK

Suppose that ḡX is small enough – otherwise, encouraging “shifting” may be good for distribu-
tional reasons. Formally, for xm > 0,

                              xm          zm                    xm
                                   − ḡX      > 0 and              − ḡX > 0.
                              rk m       rk m                   zm
Conversely, for xm < 0, we have ḡX < 0, and we assume that ḡX is small relative to xm in
absolute value.
                          xm         zm            xm
                              − ḡX      < 0 and       − ḡX < 0.
                         rk m       rk m           zm
Thus:
                                                 (1 − ḡK )
                               ∆τ S 0 ⇔ eK S eL             .
                                                 (1 − ḡL )
We can now rewrite the FOCs as:
      xm                                  τL                     xm             zm                      τK
z (1 − m − ḡL + ḡX ) − ∆τ x0 = z m eL
 m
                                               ,          rk (1 + m − ḡK − ḡX m ) + ∆τ x0 = rk m eK
                                                            m
      z                                 1 − τL                   rk            rk                     1 − τK

We distinguish three cases:
                                                                 m
     • If eK > eL (1−ḡ  K)
                    (1−ḡL )
                             , then ∆τ > 0, eL 1−ττL
                                                     L
                                                                                                 τK
                                                       < 1 − xzm − ḡL + ḡX < 1 − ḡL , and eK 1−τ K
                                                                                                      >
            x m                z m
       (1 + rkm − ḡK − ḡX rkm ) > 1 − ḡK , so that the optimal tax rates with shifting are bracketed
       by their revenue maximizing rates.

     • If there is no shifting, x ≡ 0 then revenue maximizing rates apply.

     • If x0 is very large (very sensitive shifting to any tax differential), then from equation (A1),
       we have that ∆τ ≈ 0 and hence τL ≈ τK . Summing the FOCs and using this equality
       yields τL = τK = τY where τY is the optimal linear tax rate on comprehensive income
       derived in Proposition 3.

Proof of Proposition 5. Let us compare the following two regimes considered in the text:
Regime 1 – Consumption tax regime: (r̄, TL , τC ), with an initial lump-sum transfer τC ·kiinit /(1−
τC ) to wealth holders with initial wealth kiinit .
Regime 2 – No consumption tax regime: (r̄, T̂L , τC = 0) with (z − T̂L (z)) = (z − TL (z)) · (1 − τC ).
Let k̃i denote the steady state wealth choice under this regime.

   We will show that these regimes are equivalent in the steady state, in the consumer’s dynamic
optimization problem, and in the government’s revenue raised, as claimed in the text.

                                                    60
Steady-state equivalence:
    The budget constraint in regime 1 is: k̇ = [r̄k + z − TL (z)] − c/(1 − τC ) + G, where G =
τL z + τK rk m + tC cm is the lump-sum transfer rebate of tax revenue. The budget constraint
    m

can be rewritten in terms of real wealth as: k̇ r = r̄k r + (z − TL (z)) · (1 − τC ) + G · (1 − τC ) − c.
    Utility is:
                                   ui = ci + ai (kir ) − hi (zi ).
   The first-order conditions of the individual are:

                          (1 − TL0 (zi )) · (1 − τC ) = h0i (zi ), a0i (kir ) = δi − r̄.

Given that (1− T̂L0 (zi )) = (1−TL0 (zi ))·(1−τC ) for all zi , the steady-state choices of labor income
and real capital of the individual are unaffected. Using the steady state budget constraint, real
consumption ci is also not affected as long as the real lump-sum transfer G · (1 − τC ) is not
affected, which we prove right below. The link between the two capital levels is: k̃i = (1−τC )·ki
(since real steady state wealth is unaffected).

Equivalence of the dynamic consumer optimization problem.
    The law of motion in real-wealth equivalent, k̇ r = r̄k r + (z − TL (z)) · (1 − τC ) + G · (1 − τC ) − c,
is the same in regime 1 and regime 2 as long as the real lump-sum transfer (1 − τC ) · G is the
                                                                                              i
same, which we show below. The initial wealth after the lump-sum transfer τC · kinit              /(1 − τC )
                                    init      init             init
from the government becomes ki + τC · ki /(1 − τC ) = ki /(1 − τC ), so that real wealth after
the transfer is kiinit , the same it was in the tax regime without a consumption tax.

Equivalence of government revenue.
    Because there is perfect equivalence for the dynamic consumer optimization problem and
because there is a single uniform rate of return r on wealth, this also implies that there will be
equivalence of government revenue in present discounted terms (discounted at the rate of return
r). This can also be checked directly through routine calculations.

Proof of Proposition 6. Let G be government revenue which is rebated lump-sum. The
change in revenue from a change in the capital income tax dτK is:

                                                                   zm
                                                                     
                          m         τK             τL
                  dG = rk 1 −            · eK −         eL,(1−τK ) m · dτK .
                                  1 − τK         1 − τK           rk

Hence the change in social welfare is:
                                                                Z     R                
                                                                               g rki
                              Z
                  dSW F                            dG                        iR i      dG
                        =          gi       −rki +           =       gi · −          +        .
                   dτK         i                   dτK             i           i
                                                                                 gi    dτ K




                                                             61
                                                                     R
                                                                         gk
Setting this to zero and using the definition of ḡK =               Ri i i ,    yields:
                                                                             m
                                                                      i gi k


                                                                        z        m
                                               1 − ḡK − τL eL,(1−τK ) rk m
                                          τK =                              ,
                                                     1 − ḡK + eK

which is the optimal capital tax formula with joint preferences and cross-elasticities. The optimal
labor tax formula with cross elasticities can be derived exactly symmetrically.

Proof of Proposition 7. The proof follows the standard commodity tax derivation.

Proof of Proposition 8. The steady state is characterized by: uik /uic = δi − r(1 − TK0 ),
uic · (1 − TL0 ) = −uiz and ci = rki + zi − T (zi , rki ). With linear taxes, this simplifies to:
uik /uic = δi − r̄, uic · (1 − τL ) = −uiz and ci = r̄ki + (1 − τL )zi + τK rk m + τL z m .
    Let us assume that the economy has converged to the steady state. Consider a small reform
dτK that takes place at time 0 and is unanticipated. Let us denote by euK (t) the elasticity of
aggregate k m (t) with respect to the net of tax rate r(1 − τK ). Using the envelope theorem
(i.e., behavioral responses dkti can be ignored when computing dVi ), the effect on the welfare of
individual i is:
                 Z ∞                                                   Z ∞
                                                               −δi t
  dVi = dτK · δi                                        m
                         uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))rk (t) · e      −        uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))rki (t) · e−δi t
                     0                                                   0
                                                            Z ∞
                                                       τK
                                                   −              uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))rk m (t)euK (t) · e−δi t dt
                                                     1 − τK 0
                                                           Z ∞                                                             
                                                      τL                                      u            m      −δi t
                                                 −              uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))eL,1−τK (t)z (t)e dt .
                                                   1 − τK 0

   In the steady state, k m (t), z m (t), ci (t), zi (t), ki (t), and hence uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)) are time-
constant, so that the change in individual i’s utility is:
                                               Z ∞                                       Z ∞
                                                                                    zm
                                                                                                                     
              m            ki        τK                u        −δi t     τL                      u             −δi t
dVi = dτK · rk · uic 1 − m −               δi        eK (t) · e dt −            δi              e        (t) · e dt .
                          k       1 − τK        0                       1 − τK rk m 0 L,1−τK

and the change in social welfare is:
                                                         Z             Z 
                                                                                 ki   m
                                        dSW F = ωi dVi = dτK · rk ωi uic 1 − m
                                                 i         i                     k
                          Z ∞                            m Z ∞
                                                                                   
                  τK           u        −δi t   τL     z         u         −δi t
              −        δi     eK (t) · e dt −       δi         e   (t) · e dt .
                1 − τK     0                  1 − τK rk m 0 L,1−τK




                                                             62
                                                                                  R
Using the normalization of social welfare weights:                                     i
                                                                                           ωi uic = 1 and gi = ωi uic .
                                                                ∞                                                                  ∞
                                                                                                τL z m
                 Z                          Z               Z                                                      Z           Z
                      gi ki     τK
dSW F ∝ 1 −             m
                            −                       δi gi           euK (t)e−δi t dt        −                          δi gi           euL,1−τK (t)e−δi t dt,
                  i   k       1 − τK            i           0                                 1 − τK rk m          i           0

which yields:
                                    z       m
                                         u
                      1 − ḡK − τL rk m eL,(1−τ )
                                                                                                               ∞
                                                                                               Z           Z
             τK =                              K
                                                                        with  euK (t) · e−δi t dt
                                                                                 euK       =       gi δi
                                 1 − ḡK + euK                        i   t=0
                                  Z      Z ∞                                    Z
                                                                −δi t
              euL,(1−τK )       = gi δi       eL,(1−τK ) (t) · e dt and ḡK = gi · ki /k m .
                                               u
                                     i       t=0                                                                   i

With homogeneous discount rate δi = δ, we obtain the formula in the text.
     Note that the steady state condition can be rewritten as: (δi − r̄)uci (r̄ki + zi , ki , zi ) =
uki (r̄ki + zi , ki , zi ) which is a smooth function of ki and zi , as long as the function ui (ci , ki , zi )
is smooth and concave in consumption and capital. Hence, the responses of consumption and
capital to the net-of-tax return r̄ are smooth and non-degenerate. The steady state elasticities
are thus finite.

Proof of Proposition 9. Consider an anticipated reform to the capital income tax dτK at
time T > 0. Capital and labor already start adjusting in anticipation of the reform before time
T . The change in the utility of individual i is:

                 Z       ∞                                                                    Z    ∞
                                                                               −δi t
dVi = dτK · δi                uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))rk (t) · em
                                                                                       dt −             uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))rki (t) · e−δi t dt
                      T                                                             T
                                                                         Z ∞
                                                                     τL
                                                                −            uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))eaL,1−τK (t)z m (t)e−δi t dt
                                                                  1 − τK 0
                                                                        Z ∞                                                        
                                                                    τK                                      m     a        −δi t
                                                                −            uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))rk (t)eK (t) · e dt .
                                                                  1 − τK 0

   In the steady state, k m (t), z m (t), ci (t), ki (t), zi (t), and hence uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)) are time-
constant, hence we have:
                                                                    Z ∞
                          m −δi T                ki        τK
             dVi = dτK rk e       uic · 1 − m −                   δi     eaK (t) · e−δi (t−T ) dt
                                                k        1 − τK       0
                                                         m Z ∞
                                                                                               
                                             τL        z            a             −δi (t−T )
                                       −            δi            e       (t) · e            dt .
                                          1 − τK rk m 0 L,1−τK
                                                                R       R
   With homogeneous discount rates, and using that i gi = i uci ωi = 1, we can write dSW F =




                                                                          63
R
 i
     ωi dVi :

                                                                                 τL z m
                   Z                        Z                                                      Z
               ki    τK                                        −δ(t−T )
dSW F ∝ 1 − gi m −        δ                         eaK (t)   ·e          dt −             δ              eaL,1−τK (t) · e−δ(t−T ) dt,
            i k    1 − τK                     t>0                              1 − τK rk m          t>0

which yields the formula in the text.

Proof of Proposition 10. With the utility based steady state approach, the government
maximizes social welfare
                               Z
                         SW F = ωi Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t≥0 )di
                                                i
                                                                        Z   ∞
                  where Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t≥0 ) = δ ·                 ui (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))e−δt dt,
                                                                          t=0

subject to the steady state budget constraint, so that the lump-sum grant G every period is
equal to its steady state value. Thus, individuals’ consumption each period satisfies: dkdti (t) =
rki (t)(1 − τK ) + (1 − τL )zi (t) − ci (t) + rτK k m + τL z m .
     Consider a small reform dτK that takes place at time 0. It does not matter whether the
reform is anticipated or not, as the only relevant behavioral responses for revenues are the
steady state responses which affect the steady state lump sum grant G (and, as always, by the
envelope theorem, behavioral responses dki can be ignored when computing dVi ). Using the
envelope theorem, the effect on the welfare of individual i is:
                               Z ∞                                                 Z ∞
                                                                            −δi t
            dVi = dτK · δi                                             m
                                         uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))rk · e       −       uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))rki (t) · e−δi t
                                   0
           Z ∞                                                                Z ∞ 0                                                    
     τK                                          m         −δi t        τ L                                                m −δi t
−               uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))rk eK · e dt −                          uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))eL,1−τK z e dt .
  1 − τK 0                                                            1 − τK 0

   In the steady state, ci (t), zi (t), ki (t), and hence uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)) are time-constant, so
that the change in individual i’s utility is:

                                                                   τL z m
                                                                                       
                              m             ki      τK
              dVi = dτK · rk uic 1 − m −                 eK −                  eL,1−τK ,
                                           k      1 − τK       1 − τK rk m

and the change in social welfare is:

                                                               τL z m
                      Z              Z
                                        gi ki     τK
            dSW F = ωi dVi ∝ 1 −          m
                                              −        e K −             eL,1−τK ,
                        i             i k       1 − τK       1 − τK rk m

which yields the formula in the text.




                                                                   64
    Online Appendix for “A Simpler Theory of Optimal
                   Capital Taxation”
        by Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva

A.1       Anticipated Reforms – Additional Results
Optimal tax with anticipated reform and heterogeneous discount rates

With heterogeneous discount rates, the change in social welfare is:
           Z                                                                                                       Z ∞
                       −δi T                                              ki         τK
dSW F ∝         ωi e           · uic (ci , ki , zi ) − uic (ci , ki , zi ) m −               δi uic (ci , ki , zi )     eaK (t) · e−δi (t−T ) dt
            i                                                             k      1 − τK                               0
                                                                                                          Z ∞
                                                                                                    zm
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                       τL                                           a             −δi (t−T )
                                                                 −           δi uic (ci , ki , zi ) m             eL,1−τK (t) · e            dt
                                                                    1 − τK                         rk       0

                                                                                             −δ T
Define the normalized social welfare weight gi (T ) ≡ Rωωi ui uciciee−δi i T which depends on the time of
                                                             i
the reform and rewrite:
                         Z                        Z              Z ∞
                                   ki      τK
            dSW F ∝ 1 − gi (T ) m −                   δi gi (T )        eaK (t) · e−δi (t−T ) dt
                           i       k     1 − τK     i
                                                         Z ∞ 0
                                 τL z m
                                           Z                                                    
                                                                 a                −δi (t−T )
                             −               δi gi (T )        eL,1−τK (t) · e               dt
                               1 − τK rk m i              0


which yields the same optimal tax formula as in the text, but with
                                Z                                        Z           Z   ∞
                   ḡK =                            m
                                      gi (T ) · ki /k ,    eaK       =
                                                                   δi gi (T )       eaK (t) · e−δi (t−T ) dt
                                  i                              i
                                                           Z           Z ∞ 0
                                       and eaL,1−τK       = δi gi (T )        eaL,1−τK (t) · e−δi (t−T ) dt
                                                                 i               0


Relative to the case with homogeneous discount rates, the social welfare weights gi (T ) now
depend on the time of the reform T , and on each person’s discount rate δi . Agents who are
more impatient (larger δi ) get discounted more heavily in the anticipated social welfare objective.
This effect is starker the longer in advance the reform is announced (the larger T ). In the limit,
only the most patient agents with the lowest δi will be counted in the social welfare objective.

Finite and infinite anticipation elasticities

We now show that anticipation elasticities are infinite under full certainty with wealth in the
utility and certainty. We also show that they are finite with uncertainty (with or without wealth

                                                                             1
in the utility).
    First, the anticipation elasticity to a reform dτK for t ≥ T is infinite when there is full
certainty, even with wealth in the utility. The proof is as in Piketty and Saez (2013) for the
Chamley-Judd model (without wealth in the utility).
    To see this, note that under full certainty the first-order condition of the agent with respect
to capital always holds:

                            uci,t = (1 + r̄)/(1 + δi )uci,t+1 + 1/(1 + δi )uki,t+1

   Suppose we start from a situation in a well-defined steady state: (δi − r̄)uci = uki where we
have perfect consumption smoothing.
   The intertemporal budget constraint is:

                       X  1 t                  X  1 t
                                 cti + lim kti =           zti + k0i
                       t≥0
                           1 + r       t→∞
                                                 t≥0
                                                     1 + r

   Consumption smoothing implies:

                                              uci (r̄ki + zi , ki ) = λ

for the multiplier λ on the budget constraint. Hence, ki∞ = limt→∞ kti > 0. Given that there is
perfect consumption smoothing, using the budget constraint to solve for consumption yields:


                                             X        t                 !
                                     1               1
                       c=        1−                         zti + k0i − ki∞                               (A1)
                                    1+r        t≥0
                                                   1 + r

Consider what happens if the capital tax rate increases by dτK > 0 for t ≥ T . The present
discounted value of all resources, denoted by Yi for agent i is:

                                        T        t       X  1 t
                                       X      1
                            Yi = ki0 +               zti +            zti
                                       t=1
                                            1 + r          t≥T
                                                               1 + r̄

The change in resources evaluated at τK = 0 is:
                                    T X                 t−T +1                            T
                              1                     1                                   1
               dYi =                     t                           zti dτK ∝                      dτK
                           (1 + r)     t≥T
                                                 (1 + r)                             (1 + r)




                                                         2
                                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                                1
Hence, consumption pre-reform will shift down by a factor proportional to                                     (1+r)
                                                                                                                           dτK . From
the aggregated budget constraint we have that:

  ktm = (1 + r)t k0m − cm                       2
                        0 (1 + (1 + r) + (1 + r) + ... + (1 + r)
                                                                t−1       m
                                                                    ) + (zt−1 + .. + (1 + r)t−1 z0m )

Therefore, the change in the aggregate capital stock is:

                                                                 (1 + r)t−1 − 1
                                                                                 
                                           dktm   =   −dcm
                                                         0
                                                                       r
                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                        1
Recall that the change in consumption (from (A1)) is proportional to                                  (1+r)
                                                                                                                   dτK . Hence:

                                    T 
                                           (1 + r)t−1 − 1                                       (1 + r)t−1 − 1
                                                                                                                   
                             1                                                        −T
          dktm   ∝−                                              dτK = −(1 + r)                                            dτK
                          (1 + r)                r                                                    r

and:
                                                                     (1 + r)t−1 − 1
                                                                                     
                                                         −T
                                    eKt ∝    ktm (1   + r)                                dτK
                                                                           r
The anticipation elasticity eante
                             K    is defined as:
                           t−T                       t−T
                                                                          (1 + r)t−1 − 1
                                                                                      
             δ X       1                δ X       1                  −T
 eante
  K      =                      eKt ∝                       m
                                                           kt (1 + r)                      dτK
           1 + δ t<T 1 + δ            1 + δ t<T 1 + δ                           r

                                      1+δ T
                                          
   Since we have δ > r, limT →∞ 1+r          = ∞, which makes the sum above (to which the
anticipation elasticity is proportional) converge to infinity when T goes to infinity.

Optimal tax formula starting away from the steady state:

If the economy is not in steady state, the spirit of the formula still holds, but it is no longer
possible to treat marginal utilities and aggregate variables as constant. In that case, not just the
elasticities, but also the weighting factors multiplying them and the distributional characteristic
take into account the full transition path. For conciseness, let uci (t) ≡ uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)). The




                                                                 3
change in social welfare is (with each term of the formula marked in underbraces):
                                                                        Z               Z   ∞
                                                                                            uic (t)
                                             dSW F ∝ 1 −                       ωi δi               R         R∞
                                                                                                    m (t) · e−δi t dt
                                                                                                                      rki (t) · e−δi t dt
                                                         i       T     i
                                                                         ω  i δi   T
                                                                                        u ic (t)rk
                                                      |                                         {z                                      }
                                                                                                ḡK
                                                                                                          R∞
                                                                                                             uic (t)z m (t) · e−δi t dt
                  Z ∞                                   m
                                                                                               R
                                                                                                  ω   δ
        Z
    τL                                                z    (t)                    −δi t             i   i
−          ωi δ i     uic (t)eaL,1−τK (t) R      R∞                             e       dt  · Ri         R∞T
  1 − τK i         0                         ωδ
                                            i i i T
                                                    uic (t)z m (t) · e−δi t dt                   ωi δi T uic (t)rk m (t) · e−δi t dt
        |                                     {z                                         } |i                     {z                    }
                                                 ea
                                                  L,(1−τ                                                                                    z m /(rkm )
                                                          K)
                                                           Z               Z    ∞
                                                 τK                                                           uic (t)
                                           −                       ωi δi            R              R∞                                  rk m (t)eaK (t) · e−δi t dt
                                               1 − τK          i            0          i
                                                                                           ωi δi       T
                                                                                                           uic (t)rk m (t) · e−δi t dt
                                                           |                                                          {z                                         }
                                                                                                                        ea
                                                                                                                         K



For an unanticipated reform starting from an arbitrary tax system and away from the steady
state, set T = 0 in the above expression for dSW F and replace the anticipated elasticities by
their unanticipated counterparts euL,(1−τK ) and euK .


A.2         Comparison to Other Models
This section formally compares our model to earlier model described in Section 5.


A.2.1        Judd (1985) Model
In the Judd (1985) model, individual utility is:
                                                           Z       ∞                                             Rt
                    Vi ({ci (t), zi (t), ki (t)}t≥0 ) =                ui (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))e−              0   δi (ci (s))ds
                                                                                                                                      dt.
                                                               0

    The effect on Vi from a small change in the capital tax dτK is now:
               Z   ∞                                                                 Z ∞                               
                                                      − 0t δi (ci (s))ds                            − 0s δi (ci (m))dm
                                                       R                                             R
                                                                            0
 dVi = dτK              uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))e                    + δi (ci (t))      ui (s)e                    ds
                   t=0                                                                  t
                                                                                                                     
                                                                      m                     τK       m
                                                          × rk (t) − rki (t) −                    rk (t)eK (t) dt .
                                                                                          1 − τK




                                                                       4
In the steady state, we can hence write dVi as:
        Z   ∞                                             Z ∞                                                                                  
                       −δi (ci )t    0           −δi (ci )t        −δi (ci )(s−t)             m                         τK         m
dτK r             uic e           + δi (ci )ui e                 e                 ds      k (t) − ki (t) −                       k (t)eK (t) dt
         0                                                   t                                                       1 − τK
                                                  Z ∞                                           Z ∞                         
                                                                   −δi (ci )t         0                 −δi (ci )t 1
                                     = dτK r uic                  e            dt + δi (ci )ui         e                         × [k m (t) − ki (t)]
                                                             0                                                     δ i (c i )
                                             Z ∞                                                  Z0 ∞                                               
                                                             −δi (ci )t       0         −δi (ci )t       −δi (ci )t              τK      m
                                          −            uic e            + δi (ci )ui e                  e           ds                k (t)eK (t)
                                               0                                                     0                        1 − τK
                                                                                                                             Z ∞
                                                                       δi0 (ci )
                                                                                                                                                   
                                              m 1                                             ki         τK                          −δi (ci )t
                                  = dτK rk                   uic +               ui 1 − m −                       δi (ci )         e            eK (t) .
                                                 δi (ci )              δi (ci )               k        1 − τK                  0


    We can hence see that the formulas from our model apply but with gi and eK as redefined
in the text.


A.2.2        Aiyagari (1995) Model
Note that all proofs below would be exactly the same as the proofs for wealth-in-the-utility if
we reformulated it in discrete time, replacing the standard utility without wealth in the utility,
uti (cti ), by uti (cti , kti ). This is done by letting u0ti denote ∂uti∂c
                                                                         (cti ,kti )
                                                                            ti
                                                                                     instead of ∂u∂c
                                                                                                  ti (cti )
                                                                                                     ti
                                                                                                            .
     We apply the envelope theorem, which states that the changes in the capital tax rate dτK
only has a direct impact on utility through the direct reduction in consumption that it causes.
Using this, and taking the derivative of the social welfare SW F with respect to dτK yields:

        X  1 t Z                                    X  1 t Z
                                  0
dSW F =                                         m
                             ωi uti · (τK rdkt ) +                         ωi u0ti · (rdτK (ktm − kti ) + τK rdktm )
        t<T
              1 +  δ       i                          t≥T
                                                              1 +  δ     i
                          "                                                                                 #
                                           t          Z            X  1 t                     Z
                   τK        X           1
      = −dτK                                    rktm eKt ωi u0ti +                       rktm eKt ωi u0ti
                1 − τK t<T 1 + δ                           i          t≥T
                                                                              1  +  δ                i
                     t Z                          
        X       1
      +                      ωi u0ti · r(ktm − kti )
        t≥T
              1 + δ       i
                           "                                        #                                               !
                    τK        X  1 t                    Z             X  1 t Z
                                                    m            0                                 0       m
      = −dτK                                     rkt eKt ωi uti −                              ωi uti · r(kt − kti ) .
                 1 − τK t≥0 1 + δ                           i           t≥T
                                                                                 1+δ         i




If variables have already converged to their ergodic paths when the anticipation responses start:
then all terms in eKt are zero before the steady state has been reached and hence, we can divide
through by i ωi u0ti ktm = i gi ktm which is constant across t. Thus:
             R            R




                                                                       5
                                        t−T                      t−T                                   !         R
           τK              δ X       1                δ X       1                                                      gi kti
dSW F ∝                                       eKt +                      eKt                                   − 1 + Ri m .
        (1 − τK )        1 + δ t<T 1 + δ            1 + δ t≥T 1 + δ                                                    gk
                                                                                                                      i i t

                                                 R
                                                    g kti
Let the distributional factor ḡK =              Ri i m   .   The optimal capital tax in the Aiyagari (1995) model
                                                  i gi kt
is given by:

                                                                 1 − ḡK
                                                   τK =                    .
                                                              1 − ḡK + eK

           δ
              P      1
                       t−T
with eK = 1+δ  t>0 1+δ      eKt . For an unanticipated reform, the formula applies with T = 0
when the economy is already in the steady state as of time 0.

If variables have not converged to their ergodic paths when the anticipation responses start: we
have to take into account the transition of the marginal utilities and the capital stock across
time.
                            "                               #                                          !
                      τK      X  1 t              Z          X  1 t Z
dSW F = −dτK                                rktm eKt ωi u0ti −                  ωi u0ti · r(ktm − kti ) .
                   (1 − τK ) t<T 1 + δ               i         t≥T
                                                                    1 + δ     i

                           t
                        1
                                        ωi u0ti · ktm yields:
              P                 R
Dividing by      t≥T   1+δ          i

                               "                                                       #
                                 X  1 t                            0
                                                            R
                         τK                                     ω  u
                                                              i i ti
              dSW F ∝                       ktm eKt P           t R
                      (1 − τK ) t<T 1 + δ                   1
                                                                       ω u0 · ktm
                                                      t≥T 1+δ       i i ti
                                       X  1 t               ω u0 · kti
                                                           R
                                                            i i ti
                                  −1 +                           t R                   .
                                           1+δ                1                0      m
                                                    P
                                       t≥T             t≥T 1+δ         i
                                                                         ω i u ti · kt


   Now we have to redefine the average welfare weight as:

                                      X  1 t                             u0ti · kti
                                                                         R
                                                                          i
                                ḡK ≡                                         t R 0          ,
                                          1+δ                              1                m
                                               P
                                      t≥T        t≥T                      1+δ
                                                                                    u
                                                                                   i ti
                                                                                        · kt


and the total elasticity as:

                                X  1 t                                                u0ti
                                                                                R
                           eK =           ktm eKt P                                 i
                                                                                        t R           .
                                    1 + δ                                       1
                                                                                            u0 · ktm
                                t≥0                t≥T                         1+δ         i ti


With these redefined variables, the same formula holds.


                                                                   6
A.3            Optimal Nonlinear Taxes in the Generalized Model
Let etop
     K (t) be the average elasticity of total capital income of those individuals with capital
income above threshold rk top . It is measured at time t following a small reform of the top
bracket tax rate dτK taking place at time 0. The elasticity is weighted by capital income.
Let eL,1−τK (t) be the elasticity of labor income of those individuals with capital income above
threshold rk top .

Proposition A1. Optimal top capital tax rate in the steady state.
   Suppose there is a linear tax on labor income τL . The optimal top capital tax rate above
capital income level rk top takes the form:
                                                        top                    zm
                                                  1 − ḡK   − τL ·       r(km,top −ktop )
                                                                                          · ēL,(1−τK )
                                      τKtop   =                         top                             ,
                                                                 1−   ḡK   + atop
                                                                                K · ēK
                                                                                        top


                                                                                              gi ·(ki −ktop )
                                                                             R
                               R∞                                                i:ki ≥ktop
       ētop                        etop (t)       −δi t           top
                   R
with     K     ≡     gδ
                    i i i        t=0 K
                                               ·e          dt.   ḡK     =       R
                                                                                                         top )   is the average capital income
                                                                                     i:ki ≥ktop (ki −k
                                                                                                                   m,top
weighted welfare weight in the top capital tax bracket, and atop         k
                                                                    = km,top         is the Pareto param-
                                                              R ∞K           −ktop
eter of the capital income distribution. ēL,(1−τK ) ≡ i gi δi t=0 eL,(1−τK ) (t) · e−δi t dt.
                                                      R


     Proof of Proposition A1: We consider the top tax rate τK on capital above threshold k top .
As r is uniform, this is equivalent to a top tax rate applying above capital income threshold
rk top . Let N denote the fraction of individuals above k top . We again use the notation k m,top to
denote the average wealth above the top threshold, i.e.:
                                              R
                                                i:ki (t)≥ktop
                                                              rki
                                    k m,top =                     ,
                                                        N

Suppose we change the top tax rate on capital by dτK . As defined in the text, let etop   K (t) be
the elasticity of capital holding of top capital earners (the wealth elasticity of total wealth to
the tax rate of those with capital income above rk top ). For all individuals above the cutoff, the
change in utility is:
                   Z      ∞                                                                           Z   ∞
                                                                                           −δi t
dVi = dτK δi                   uic (ci (t), ki (t))N r(k     m,top
                                                                     (t) − k     top
                                                                                      )e           −      uic (ci (t), ki (t))r(ki (t) − k top )e−δi t
                       0                                                                              0
                                                                                     Z ∞                                                          
                                                                        τK                                              m,top     top       −δi t
                                                                  −                          uic (ci (t), ki (t))N rk         (t)eK (t) · e dt .
                                                                      1 − τK           0




                                                                             7
Starting from the steady state, capital levels are constant so that:
                                                                                                                         ∞
                                                            (ki − k top )
                                                                                                                Z                                    
                                                                              τK
 dVi = uic r(k     m,top
                           −k    top
                                       )N dτK         1 − m,top           −       atop                                       δi etop
                                                                                                                                 K (t)   ·e −δi t
                                                                                                                                                    dt ,
                                                         (k          top
                                                                − k )N      1 − τK K                                 0

                         m,top
where atop    k
       K = (km,top −ktop ) .
  For individuals below the cutoff, the change in utility is:
                                                                                       Z       ∞                                      
                                                                          τK
              dVi = uic r(k       m,top
                                          −k      top
                                                        )N dτK       1−       atop                  δi etop
                                                                                                        K (t)            ·e  −δi t
                                                                                                                                     dt .
                                                                        1 − τK K            0


      The change in social welfare is such that:
                                                                                                                       ∞
                                    (ki − k top )
                             Z                                                                  Z                Z
                                                      τK
        dSW F ∝ 1 −            gi m,top           −       atop                                          g i δi             etop
                                                                                                                            K (t) · e
                                                                                                                                      −δi t
                                                                                                                                            dt.
                    i:ki ≥ktop   (k          top
                                        − k )N      1 − τK K                                        i              0


Let
                                                                                                               ∞
                                     (ki − k top )
                     Z                                                                  Z               Z
             top
           ḡK     ≡            gi m,top                              and    etop
                                                                              K     ≡       gi δi                  etop
                                                                                                                    K (t) · e
                                                                                                                              −δi t
                                                                                                                                    dt.
                     i:ki ≥ktop   (k     − k top )N                                     i                  0


Then, we obtain the optimal tax rate τK such that dSW F = 0:
                                                                       top
                                                                 1 − ḡK
                                                      τK =       top        top .
                                                           1 − ḡK   + atop
                                                                         K eK

      With endogenous labor, let

                                                         dz m (t) (1 − τK )   dz m (t) r̄
                             eL,(1−τK ) (t) =                               =                 .
                                                        d(1 − τK ) z m (t)      dr̄ N z m (t)

be the elasticity of aggregate (average) labor income z m with respect to the top capital tax rate,
normalized by N , in the two bracket tax system.
   For all individuals with capital income above the cutoff:
                                        Z    ∞
                   dVi = dτK · δi                  uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))N r(k m,top (t) − k top ) · e−δi t
                                              0
                                              Z   ∞
                                 τL
                             −                  uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))z m (t)N eL,(1−τK ) (t) · e−δi t
                               1 − τK       0
                                                Z ∞
                                              −        uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))r(ki (t) − k top ) · e−δi t
                                                  0
                                        Z ∞                                                               
                               τK                                               m,top     top      −δi t
                         −                  uic (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))N rk          (t)eK (t) · e dt .
                             1 − τK       0


                                                                         8
    Starting from the steady state, capital and labor income are constant over time:

                                                                                      (ki − k top )
                                                                                                        
                                                                         m,top         top
                                                  dVi = uic N r(k                 −k
                                                                    )dτK · 1 − m,top
                                                                                  (k      − k top )N
                                  ∞                                           ∞
                   zm
                               Z                                            Z                       
       τL                                                −δi t   τK     top         top      −δi t
   −                                δi eL,(1−τK ) (t) · e dt −        a         δi eK (t) · e dt .
     1 − τK r(k m,top − k top ) 0                              1 − τK K 0

    The change in social welfare is:

                                                                                                                                 (ki − k top )
                                                                          Z                         Z
                                                         dSW F =                ωi dVi ∝ 1 −                             gi
                                                                            i                       i:rki ≥rktop              (k m,top − k top )N
                   m           Z        Z   ∞                                                               Z        Z   ∞
    τL          z                                                                      τK
−                                  gi           δi eL,(1−τK ) (t) · e   −δi t
                                                                                dt −       atop                 gi           δi etop
                                                                                                                                 K (t) · e
                                                                                                                                           −δi t
                                                                                                                                                 dt.
  1 − τK r(k m,top − k top )   i        0                                            1 − τK K               i        0


   Define etop                      top
             K , eL,(1−τK ) , and ḡK as in the text. The optimal formula in the text is then obtained
by rearranging the previous condition.
   It is straightforward to generalize this to the case of an anticipated reform by discounting
the elasticities using e−δ(t−T ) and using the anticipated elasticities rather than the unanticipated
ones.


A.4        Optimal Taxation with Horizontal Equity Concerns.
In this section, we formally consider optimal capital and labor taxation under horizontal equity
concerns.
                                                                                           1
    As derived in Section 3.2.1, the optimal revenue-maximizing rates are: τLR = 1+e         L
                                                                                               and
         1
τKR = 1+eK . Without loss of generality, we suppose that capital is more elastic so that τKR < τLR .
The optimal linear comprehensive tax on income is, as derived in (16):
                                                                                         R
                                           1 − ḡY                                            g · yi
                                                                                             iR i
                                   τY =                           with ḡY =
                                        1 − ḡY + eY                                            y
                                                                                               i i

    Suppose that the distribution of capital and labor income is dense enough, so that at every
total income level y = rk + z, there are agents with y = rk (capital income only) and y = z
(labor income only).
    Generalized social welfare weights that capture horizontal equity concerns are such that:
    (i) If τL = τK , then the social welfare weights gi are standard. For instance, we can set
gi = uci for all agents. Any reform that changes taxes should put zero weight on those who after
the reform are such that τL zi +τK rki < maxj {τL zj +τK rkj |zj +rkj = zi +rki }, i.e., on those who


                                                                  9
pay less taxes at a given total income y = rki + zi , or, equivalently, have the highest disposable
income and consumption at any income. This means that if labor taxes are increased, gi = 0 for
those with any positive capital income at each total income level. Conversely, increasing capital
taxes will yield gi = 0 for those individuals with some labor income at each total income level.
    (ii) If τL > τK , then all the social welfare weights are concentrated on those with τL zi +
τK rki > maxj {τL zj + τK rkj |zj + rkj = zi + rki }, i.e., on those agents with only labor income.
Conversely, if τL < τK , all the social welfare weights are on agents with only capital income.
    Suppose that, starting from a situation with τL = τK we introduce a small tax break on
capital income, dτK < 0. Capital income earners now get an unfair advantage and all the weight
is concentrated on those with no capital income (equivalently, everyone with ki > 0 receives a
weight gi = 0). As a result, a small tax break on capital can only be optimal if it raises tax
revenue and, hence, allows to lower the tax rate on labor income as well. This can only occur
if τY > τKR , i.e., the optimal comprehensive tax rate is above the revenue-maximizing rate on
capital income.

Proposition A2. Optimal labor and capital taxation with horizontal equity con-
cerns.
    (i) If τY ≤ τKR , taxing labor and capital income at the same comprehensive rate τL = τK = τY
is the unique optimum.
    (ii) If τY > τKR , a differential tax system with the capital tax rate set to the revenue maxi-
mizing rate τK = τKR < τL (with both τK and τL smaller than τY ) is the unique optimum.

Proof. Let us consider the two cases in turn.

    (i) If τY ≤ τKR .
    To see why τL = τK = τ ∗ is an equilibrium, suppose that we tried to lower the tax rate on
capital income. Then, all the weight will concentrate on people with only labor income, which
will then in turn make it optimal to increase the tax on capital again.
    This equilibrium is unique. There is no other equilibrium with equal taxes on capital and
labor that can raise more revenue with a lower tax rate, by definition of τY as the optimal rate
on comprehensive income. There is also no equilibrium with non-equal tax rates on capital and
labor. Suppose that we tried to set (without loss of generality) τK < τL . Then to raise enough
revenue we would require that τK < τY < τL . Since capital owners are now advantaged, all
the social welfare weight concentrates on people with only labor income. Since then a fortiori
τK < τKR , increasing τK would mean that more revenue would be raised, which would allow us
to lower τL , which is good since all weight is on people with only labor income.

   (ii) If τY > τKR .

                                                10
   In this case, the equilibrium has τK = τKR < τY and τY > τL > τKR . Clearly this is an
equilibrium since we cannot decrease τL without losing revenue and we cannot raise more revenue
through τK (since it is already set at the revenue-maximizing rate for the capital tax base). In
addition, we cannot decrease τK further without increasing τL , which is not desirable since it
would benefit people capital income earners, who already receive a weight of zero.
   This equilibrium is also unique. If we set τL = τK equal, we should set them equal to τY
which is the optimal tax rate on comprehensive income. But then, since τK is now above its
revenue maximizing rate, we could lower both τK and τL without losing revenues, so this would
not be an equilibrium. On the other hand, as long as we set τK < τL , capital income earners
get zero weight and the only possibility is to go all the way to τK = τKR since only people with
only labor income have a non-zero weight.


     As a result, horizontal equity concerns will be a force pushing towards the comprehensive
income tax system derived in Section 3.2.1. In the text, we provided an efficiency argument
in favor of a tax on comprehensive income (based on income shifting opportunities) while the
argument here is based on equity considerations. With horizontal equity preferences, deviations
from a comprehensive income tax system can only be justified if they raise more revenue and
generate a Pareto-improvement, which drastically reduces the scope for them. In Saez and
Stantcheva (2016) we argue that this is akin to a generalized Rawlsian principle whereby dis-
crimination against some groups (e.g., capital owners versus labor providers) is only permissible
if it makes the group discriminated against better off, i.e., if it generates a Pareto improvement.


A.4.1     Horizontal Equity with Nonlinear Taxation
The same reasoning as for linear taxation with horizontal equity also applies to nonlinear taxes.
Starting from a comprehensive tax system TY (z + rk) as derived in Section 3.2.1, lowering the
tax rate on capital income, conditional on a given total income level, will generate a horizontal
inequity and concentrate all social weight on those with no capital income conditional on that
total income level. Such a preferential tax break for capital income earners will only be accept-
able if it generates more revenue and allows to lower the tax rate on labor income as well. We
show this below.
    Formally, suppose that we start from the optimal tax on comprehensive income, TY (rk +
z), as derived in Section 3.2.1 which does not discriminate between capital and labor income
conditional on total income. We say that a tax system unambigously favors capital at income
level y = rk + z, if for any (rk, z) such that y = rk + z, and any ε ∈]0, z], TY (rk, z) >
T (rk + ε, z − ε) (having more capital income, conditional on a given total income leads to lower

                                                11
taxes). (Note that it may be the case that a tax system favors capital only at some y levels or
only at some rk, z ranges.)
    Denote a change in the tax by δT (rk, z).
    A deviation δT (rk, z) is said to introduce horizontal inequity, if, starting from a comprehen-
sive tax system TY (rk + z), the resulting tax system TY (z + rk) + δT (rk, z) cannot be expressed
as T̃Y (rk + z) for some function T̃Y .
    With nonlinear taxes, we can again define the generalized social welfare weights as follows.
    i) If there is a comprehensive tax TY (z + rk), then everybody has standard weights, such
as, for instance, gi = uci . For any deviation δT (rk, z) that introduces horizontal inequity, the
weights concentrate on the agents who pay the highest tax at a given total income level, i.e.,
on those with TY (zi + rki ) + δT (rki , zi ) = maxj {TY (zj + rkj ) + δT (rkj , zj )|zj + rkj = rki + zi }
(which is equivalent to putting all the weight on the agent(s) with lowest disposable income at
any total income level).
    Hence, the weights also need to depend on δT (z, rk), the direction of the tax reform.
    ii) If the tax is such that T (rk, z) cannot be expressed as T̃Y (rk + z) for some function T̃Y ,
then the weights concentrate on those with
T (zi , rki ) = maxj {T (zj , rkj )|zj + rkj = rki + zi }, i.e., on the agents which pay the highest tax
(equivalently, have the lowest disposable income) conditional on total income.

Equilibria:
    Suppose that, at the comprehensive tax rate, no small reform δT (rk, z) that introduces
horizontal equity and favors capital (according to our definitions above) can increase total
tax revenues, i.e., for all δT (rk, z) that favor capital and introduce horizontal inequity, the
alternative tax system T̃Y (rk, z) = TY (rk + z) + δT (rk, z) is such that:
                        Z                                    Z
                             TY (rki (TY ) + zi (TY ))di >       T̃Y (rki (T̃Y ), zi (T̃Y ))di
                         i                                   i

where naturally, the choices zi (T ) and ki (T ) depend on the tax system T . Then the unique
equilibrium has the comprehensive tax system in place, as derived in 3.2.1. No horizontal
inequity can be an equilibrium unless it introduces a Pareto improvement.
    Suppose on the other hand that if the revenue maximizing tax rate on capital, TKR (rk)
were implemented, and a labor income tax TL (z) was used to complement it, more revenue
could be raised than with the tax on comprehensive income TY (rk + z) and the tax burden
on all agents would be lower than under the comprehensive income tax. Then, the optimum
is to set differential taxes on capital and labor income, with the capital tax at its optimal
revenue-maximizing schedule. Horizontal inequity is an equilibrium because it generates a
Pareto improvement.

                                                      12
A.5       Progressive Consumption Taxes
The progressive consumption tax is defined on an exclusive basis as tC (.) such that

                                      k̇ = r̄k + z − [c + tc (c)]

Equivalently, we can again define the inclusive consumption tax TC (y) on pre-tax resources y
devoted to consumption such that c+tc (c) = y is equivalent to c = y −TC (y), i.e., y → y −TC (y)
is the inverse function of c → c + tc (c) and hence 1 + t0C = 1/(1 − TC0 ).
    The case of a progressive consumption tax is most easily explained with inelastic labor income
(possibly heterogenous across individuals). Real wealth k r in the presence of the progressive
consumption tax is:
                                                TC (r̄k + z) − TC (z)
                                  k r (k) = k −
                                                          r̄
Recall that real wealth is defined as nominal wealth adjusted for the price of consumption.
There are two ways to see that the above is the right expression. First, wealth k provides
an income stream r̄k which translates into extra permanent consumption equal to the income
minus the tax paid on the extra consumption r̄k − [TC (r̄k + z) − TC (z)] which can be capitalized
into wealth k r by dividing by r̄. If labor income is heterogeneous across agents, then k r (k, z)
should also be indexed by z. Another way to see this is to ask what the capital k r would be
that would yield the same disposable income as the nominal capital under the consumption
tax. Disposable income in terms of real capital k r is r̄k r − TC (z). Disposable income expressed
in terms of nominal capital is: r̄k − TC (r̄k + z). These two must be equal, which yields the
expression for k r above. k r has three natural properties: with no consumption tax, real and
nominal wealth are equal, dk r /dk = 1 − TC0 , i.e., and extra dollar of nominal wealth is worth
1 − TC0 in real terms, and k r (0) = 0.
    In that case, we have in steady-state

                           c = r̄k + z − TC (r̄k + z) = r̄k r + z − TC (z)

and the first order condition for utility maximization is a0i (k r ) = δ − r̄. Hence, real capital is
chosen to satisfy the same condition as nominal capital when there is no consumption tax. Put
differently, any consumption tax will be undone by agents in terms of their savings and will
have no effect on the real value of their wealth held (and, hence, by definition of the real wealth,
on their purchasing power). Hence, the consumption tax is equivalent to a tax on labor income
only.
    The equivalence is not exact with elastic labor supply, as in that case, the marginal con-


                                                  13
sumption tax depends on the labor choice and the first-order condition for labor income is
h0i (z) = 1 − TC0 (r̄k + z) + a0i (k r )[TC0 (r̄k + z) − TC0 (z)]/r̄.


References
Aiyagari, R. (1995). Optimal capital income taxation with incomplete markets, borrowing
  constraints, and constant discounting. Journal of Political Economy 103 (6), 1158–1175.
Judd, K. L. (1985). Redistributive taxation in a simple perfect foresight model. Journal of
  public Economics 28 (1), 59–83.
Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2013). A theory of optimal inheritance taxation. Econometrica 82 (4),
  1241–1272.
Saez, E. and S. Stantcheva (2016). Generalized social marginal welfare weights for optimal tax
  theory. American Economic Review 106 (1), 24–45.
