                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ACCOUNTING FOR BUSINESS CYCLES

                                         Pedro Brinca
                                          V. V. Chari
                                       Patrick J. Kehoe
                                       Ellen McGrattan

                                      Working Paper 22663
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22663


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




We thank Peter Klenow for useful comments and Francesca Loria for excellent research
assistance. Chari and Kehoe thank the National Science Foundation for financial support. Pedro
Brinca is grateful for financial support from the Portuguese Science and Technology Foundation,
grants number SFRH/BPD/99758/2014, UID/ECO/00124/2013, and UID/ECO/00145/2013. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Pedro Brinca, V. V. Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Accounting for Business Cycles
Pedro Brinca, V. V. Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan
NBER Working Paper No. 22663
September 2016
JEL No. E00,E12,E13,E22,E24,E44

                                          ABSTRACT

We elaborate on the business cycle accounting method proposed by Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan
(2007), clear up some misconceptions about the method, and then apply it to compare the Great
Recession across OECD countries as well as to the recessions of the 1980s in these countries. We
have four main findings. First, with the notable exception of the United States, Spain, Ireland, and
Iceland, the Great Recession was driven primarily by the efficiency wedge. Second, in the Great
Recession, the labor wedge plays a dominant role only in the United States, and the investment
wedge plays a dominant role in Spain, Ireland, and Iceland. Third, in the recessions of the 1980s,
the labor wedge played a dominant role only in France, the United Kingdom, Belgium, and New
Zealand. Finally, overall in the Great Recession the efficiency wedge played a more important
role and the investment wedge played a less important role than they did in the recessions of the
1980s.

Pedro Brinca                                                Patrick J. Kehoe
Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies                  Department of Economics
San Domenico di Fiesole                                     Stanford University
Italy                                                       579 Serra Mall
pedro.ms.brinca@gmail.com                                   Stanford, CA 94305
                                                            and NBER
V. V. Chari                                                 patrickjameskehoe@gmail.com
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota                                     Ellen McGrattan
1035 Heller Hall                                            Department of Economics
271 - 19th Avenue South                                     University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455                                       4-101 Hanson Hall
and NBER                                                    1925 4th St S
varadarajanvchari@gmail.com                                 Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                            and NBER
                                                            erm@umn.edu
In this paper we elaborate on the business cycle accounting method proposed by Chari,
Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007), henceforth CKM, clear up some misconceptions about the
method, and then apply it to compare the Great Recession across OECD countries as well
as to the recessions of the 1980s in these countries. The goal of the method is to help guide
researchers’choices about where to introduce frictions into their detailed quantitative models
in order to allow the models to generate business cycle ‡uctuations similar to those in the
data.
        The method has two components: an equivalence result and an accounting procedure.
The equivalence result is that a large class of models, including models with various types of
frictions, is equivalent to a prototype model with various types of time-varying wedges that
distort the equilibrium decisions of agents operating in otherwise competitive markets. At
face value, these wedges look like time-varying productivity, labor income taxes, investment
taxes, and government consumption. We labeled these wedges e¢ ciency wedges, labor wedges,
investment wedges, and government consumption wedges.
        The accounting procedure also has two components. It begins by measuring the wedges,
using data together with the equilibrium conditions of a prototype model. The measured
wedge values are then fed back into the prototype model, one at a time and in combinations,
in order to assess how much of the observed movements of output, labor, and investment can
be attributed to each wedge, separately and in combinations.
        Here we use this method to study the Great Recession in OECD countries. We also
compare this recession with the recessions of the early 1980s. While the exact timing of
the recessions of the early 1980s di¤ers across countries in our OECD sample, most of the
countries had a recession between 1980 and 1984. Throughout we refer to the recessions of
the early 1980s as the 1982 recession. We have four main …ndings. First, with the notable
exception of the United States, Spain, Ireland, and Iceland, the Great Recession was driven
primarily by the e¢ ciency wedge. Second, in the Great Recession, the labor wedge plays a
dominant role only in the United States, and the investment wedge plays a dominant role in
Spain, Ireland, and Iceland. Third, in the recessions of the 1980s, the labor wedge played
a dominant role only in France, the United Kingdom, Belgium, and New Zealand. Finally,
overall in the Great Recession the e¢ ciency wedge played a more important role and the
investment wedge played a less important role than they did in the recessions of the 1980s.
       We now turn to elaborating on the equivalence results in CKM that link the four
wedges to detailed models. We begin by showing that a detailed economy with ‡uctuations
in investment-speci…c technological change similar to that in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and
Krusell (1997) maps into a prototype economy with investment wedges. This result makes
clear that investment wedges are by no means synonymous with …nancial frictions, a point
stressed by CKM.
       We then consider an economy that blends elements of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)
with that of Gertler and Kiyotaki (2009). The economy has a representative household
and heterogeneous banks that face collateral constraints. We show that such an economy
is equivalent to a prototype economy with investment wedges. This result makes clear that
some ways of modeling …nancial frictions do indeed show up as investment wedges.
       Finally, we turn to an economy studied by Buera and Moll (2015) consisting of workers
and entrepreneurs. The entrepreneurs have access to heterogeneous production technologies
that are subject to shocks to collateral constraints. We follow Buera and Moll (2015) in
showing that this detailed economy is equivalent to a prototype model with a labor wedge,
an investment wedge, and an e¢ ciency wedge. This equivalence makes the same point as does
the input-…nancing friction economy in CKM, namely, that other ways of modeling …nancial
frictions can show up as e¢ ciency wedges and labor wedges.
       The point of the three examples just discussed is to help clarify how the pattern of
wedges in the data can help researchers narrow down the class of models they are considering.
If, for example, most of the ‡uctuations are driven by the e¢ ciency and labor wedges in the
data, then of the three models just considered, the third one is more promising than the …rst
two.
       We then turn to models with search frictions. We use these models to make an
important point. Researchers should choose the baseline prototype economy that provides
the most insights for the research program of interest. In particular, when the detailed
economies of interest are su¢ ciently di¤erent from the one-sector growth model, it is often
more instructive to adjust the prototype model so that the version of it without wedges
corresponds to the planning problem for the class of models at hand. For example, when we


                                             2
map the model with e¢ cient search into the one-sector model, that model does have e¢ ciency
and labor wedges, but if we map it into a new prototype model with two capital-like variables,
physical capital and the stock of employed workers, the new prototype model has no wedges.
       We then consider a search model with an ine¢ cient equilibrium. When we map this
model into the new prototype model with two capital-like variables, then the prototype model
has only labor wedges. But if we map it into the original prototype model, it has e¢ ciency
wedges and (complicated) labor wedges. These …ndings reinforce the point that it is often
more instructive to adjust the prototype model so that the version of it without wedges
corresponds to the planning problem for the class of models at hand.
       Taken together, these equivalence results help clear up some common misconceptions.
The …rst misconception is that e¢ ciency wedges in a prototype model can only come from
technology shocks in a detailed model. In our judgment, by far the least interesting inter-
pretation of e¢ ciency wedges is as narrowly interpreted shocks to the blueprints governing
individual …rm production functions. More interesting interpretations rest on frictions that
deliver such high-frequency movements in this wedge. For example, the input-…nancing fric-
tion model in CKM shows how …nancial frictions in a detailed model can manifest themselves
as e¢ ciency wedges. Indeed, we think that exploring detailed models in which the sudden
drops in e¢ ciency wedges experienced in recessions come from frictions such as input-…nancing
frictions is more promising than blaming these drops on abrupt negative shocks to blueprints
for technologies. The second misconception is that labor wedges in a prototype model arise
solely from frictions in labor markets in detailed economies. The Buera-Moll economy makes
clear that this view is incorrect. The third misconception is that investment wedges arise
solely due to …nancial frictions. Clearly, the detailed model with investment-speci…c techni-
cal change shows that this view is also incorrect.
       We turn now to describing our procedure. This procedure is designed to answer
questions of the following kind: How much would output ‡uctuate if the only wedge that
‡uctuated is the e¢ ciency wedge and the probability distribution of the e¢ ciency wedge is
the same as in the prototype economy? If the wedges were independent at all leads and
lags, the procedure can be implemented in a straightforward manner by letting only, say, the
e¢ ciency wedge ‡uctuate and setting all other wedges to constants. In the data, the wedges


                                              3
are correlated with each other, so the straightforward implementation does not answer our
question.
      Our implementation views the wedges as being functions of underlying abstract events.
In practice, we assume that the dimension of the underlying events is the same as the di-
mension of the wedges, namely four, and identify each event with one of the wedges. We
then use the data to estimate the stochastic process for the underlying events. Given this
estimated stochastic process, we can then answer our question by letting the wedge of interest
vary with the underlying events in the same way as it did in the data but assuming that all
other wedges are constant functions of the underlying events. The procedure ensures that
the probability distribution over the wedge of interest is the same in the prototype economy
with all wedges and in the experiment.
      We then brie‡y discuss what at …rst seems to be an intuitive way to proceed: the
wedges are identi…ed with the underlying event not only in the estimation but also in the
thought experiment. The problem with this procedure is that it does not make clear the
conceptual distinction between underlying events and wedges. This distinction is apparent
when the wedges are correlated. Indeed, in this case, this procedure makes it impossible to
hold all but one wedge constant without changing the probability distribution over the wedge
of interest. We note that not keeping clear the conceptual distinction between underlying
events and wedges has been the source of some confusion in the literature (see, for example,
Christiano and Davis (2006)).
      Our business cycle accounting method is intended to shed light on promising classes
of mechanisms through which primitive shocks lead to economic ‡uctuations. It is not in-
tended to identify the primitive sources of shocks. Many economists think, for example, that
shocks to the …nancial sector drove the Great Recession in developed economies, but these
economists disagree about the details of the driving mechanism. Our analysis suggests that
the transmission mechanism from shocks to the …nancial sector to broader economic activity
must be di¤erent in the United States, Spain, Ireland, and Iceland than in the rest of the
countries in the OECD. More precisely, our analysis shows that these shocks must manifest
themselves as labor wedges in the United States, as investment wedges in Spain, Ireland, and
Iceland, and as e¢ ciency wedges in the rest of the OECD.


                                              4
       As CKM argue, the equivalence results provide the logical foundation for the way
our accounting procedure uses the measured wedges. At a mechanical level, the wedges
represent deviations in the prototype model’s …rst-order conditions, in its relationship between
inputs and outputs, and in a variable in the resource constraint. One interpretation of these
deviations, of course, is that they are simply errors, so that their size indicates the goodness-
of-…t of the model. Under that interpretation, however, feeding the measured wedges back
into the model makes no sense. Our equivalence result leads to a more economically useful
interpretation of the deviations by linking them directly to classes of models; that link provides
the rationale for feeding the measured wedges back into the model.
       Also in terms of method, the accounting procedure goes beyond simply plotting the
wedges. Such plots, by themselves, are not useful in evaluating the quantitative importance
of competing mechanisms of business cycles because they tell us little about the equilib-
rium responses to the wedges. Feeding the measured wedges back into the prototype model
and measuring the model’s resulting equilibrium responses is what allows us to discriminate
between competing mechanisms.
       Related Literature.
       The paper most closely related to ours is Ohanian and Ra¤o (2012), who use a method-
ology similar to ours to study the Great Recession in 14 OECD countries and compare the
peak-to-trough declines in output and hours across countries and recessions. In part, our
…ndings are the same in spirit: we both …nd that in the Great Recession, the labor wedge
plays a dominant role in the United States.
       In part our …ndings are in contrast: they …nd that in Korea the labor wedge plays a
large role in the Great Recession. We instead …nd that in Korea the e¢ ciency wedge does.
We note that both Ohanian and Ra¤o (2012) and Rodriguez-Lopez and Garcia (2016) …nd
that the labor wedge rather than the investment wedge plays a dominant role in the Great
Recession in Spain. Our …ndings di¤er from both studies in part because of di¤erences in the
treatment of the data, including, for example, how we treat consumer durables and how we
de‡ate nominal variables to make them real. We also di¤er from Ohanian and Ra¤o (2012)
in terms of methodology: we …t stochastic processes for the wedges, whereas they focus on
perfect foresight models. For some related studies, see Mulligan (2009) and Ohanian (2010).


                                                5
         The business cycle accounting methodology has been used for many countries and time
periods. For example, it has been used for Portugal by Cavalcanti (2007); for the economies of
Brazil, Russia, India, and China by Chakraborty and Otsu (2013); for India by Chakraborty
(2006); for the East Asian economies by Cho and Doblas-Madrid (2013); for the United
Kingdom by Kersting (2008); for Japan by Kobayashi and Inaba (2006); for Asian economies
by Otsu (2010); and for monetary economies by Sustek (2011) and Brinca (2013); and for a
variety of countries by Brinca (2014).

1. Demonstrating the Equivalence Result
         Here we show how various detailed models with underlying distortions are equivalent
to a prototype growth model with one or more wedges.

A. The Benchmark Prototype Economy
         The benchmark prototype economy that we use later in our accounting procedure is
a stochastic growth model. In each period t; the economy experiences one of …nitely many
events st ; which index the shocks. We denote by st = (s0 ; :::; st ) the history of events up
through and including period t and often refer to st as the state. The probability, as of period
0, of any particular history st is                     t (s
                                                              t
                                                                  ). The initial realization s0 is given. The economy
has four exogenous stochastic variables, all of which are functions of the underlying random
variable st : the e¢ ciency wedge At (st ); the labor wedge 1                                              t
                                                                                                      lt (s );   the investment wedge
               t
1=[1 +    xt (s )],       and the government consumption wedge gt (st ).
         In the model, consumers maximize expected utility over per capita consumption ct
and per capita labor lt ,

      X
      1 X
                      t        t
                           t (s )U   (ct (st ); lt (st ))Nt ;
      t=0    st


subject to the budget constraint

                               t       t                          t
      ct + [1 +           xt (s )]xt (s )   = [1        lt (s         )]wt (st )lt (st ) + rt (st )kt (st 1 ) + Tt (st )




                                                                             6
and the capital accumulation law

                            t
(1)   (1 +     n )kt+1 (s       ) = (1           )kt (st 1 ) + xt (st );


where kt (st 1 ) denotes the per capita capital stock, xt (st ) per capita investment, wt (st ) the
wage rate, rt (st ) the rental rate on capital,                      the discount factor,                  the depreciation rate of
capital, Nt the population with growth rate equal to 1 +                                     n,   and Tt (st ) per capita lump-sum
transfers.
        The production function is A(st )F (kt (st 1 ); (1 + )t lt (st )), where 1 +                                      is the rate of
labor-augmenting technical progress, which is assumed to be a constant. Firms maximize
pro…ts given by At (st )F (kt (st 1 ); (1 + )t lt (st )) rt (st )kt (st 1 )                           wt (st )lt (st ).
        The equilibrium of this benchmark prototype economy is summarized by the resource
constraint,


(2)   ct (st ) + xt (st ) + gt (st ) = yt (st );


where yt (st ) denotes per capita output, together with


(3)   yt (st ) = At (st )F (kt (st 1 ); (1 + )t lt (st ));

          Ult (st )                       t
(4)                 = [1          lt (s       )]At (st )(1 + )t Flt ; and
          Uct (st )
(5)   Uct (st )[1 +         t
                       xt (s )]

             X
                        t+1 t
      =             t (s   js )Uct+1 (st+1 )fAt+1 (st+1 )Fkt+1 (st+1 )                      + (1       )[1 +     xt+1 (s
                                                                                                                        t+1
                                                                                                                            )]g;
             st+1

where, here and throughout, notations such as Uct , Ult , Flt , and Fkt denote the derivatives
of the utility function and the production function with respect to their arguments and
     t+1 t                                                                        t+1
 t (s   js )   denotes the conditional probability                         t (s         )= t (st ). We assume that gt (st ) ‡uctu-
ates around a trend of (1 + )t :
        Notice that in this benchmark prototype economy, the e¢ ciency wedge resembles a
blueprint technology parameter, and the labor and investment wedges resemble tax rates on



                                                                    7
labor income and investment. Other more elaborate models could be considered, such as
models with other kinds of frictions that look like taxes on consumption or capital income.
Consumption taxes induce a wedge between the consumption-leisure marginal rate of substi-
tution and the marginal product of labor in the same way as do labor income taxes. Such
taxes, if time-varying, also distort the intertemporal margins in (5). Capital income taxes
induce a wedge between the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution and the marginal
product of capital, which is only slightly di¤erent from the distortion induced by a tax on
investment. We experimented with intertemporal distortions that resemble capital income
taxes rather than investment taxes and found that our substantive conclusions are una¤ected.
(For details, see the Appendix.)
        We emphasize that each of the wedges represents the overall distortion to the rele-
vant equilibrium condition of the model. For example, distortions to labor supply a¤ecting
consumers and to labor demand a¤ecting …rms both distort the static …rst-order condition
(4). Our labor wedge represents the sum of these distortions. Thus, our method identi…es
the overall wedge induced by both distortions and does not identify each separately. Like-
wise, liquidity constraints on consumers distort the consumer’s intertemporal Euler equation,
whereas investment …nancing frictions on …rms distort the …rm’s intertemporal Euler equa-
tion. Our method combines the Euler equations for the consumer and the …rm and therefore
identi…es only the overall wedge in the combined Euler equation given by (5). We focus on
the overall wedges because what matters in determining business cycle ‡uctuations is the
overall wedges, not each distortion separately.
        For the equivalence results that follow, it is notationally convenient to work with the
prototype model just described. For our quantitative results, we add investment adjustment
costs by replacing the capital accumulation law (1) with

                          t                                      xt (st )
(6)   (1 +   n )kt+1 (s       ) = (1   )kt (st 1 ) + xt (st )                ;
                                                                kt (st 1 )

where    represents the per unit cost of adjusting the capital stock. We follow the macroeco-




                                                          8
nomic literature in assuming that the adjustment costs are parameterized by the function

         x   a x              2
           =              b       ;
         k   2 k

where b = +      +   n   is the steady-state value of the investment-capital ratio.

B. The Mapping— From Frictions to Wedges
       Now we illustrate the mapping between detailed economies and prototype economies
for several types of wedges. We show that investment-speci…c technical change in a detailed
economy maps into investment wedges in our prototype economy. Likewise, bank collateral
constraints also map into investment wedges in our prototype economy. We then consider an
economy with heterogeneous productivity and collateral constraints and show that it maps
into a prototype economy with e¢ ciency, labor, and investment wedges. Finally, we consider
a search model with e¢ cient allocations and show that it maps into a prototype economy
with a labor wedge and an e¢ ciency wedge but no investment wedge. The four economies
we use to illustrate this mapping are closed economies for which the associated government
consumption wedge in the prototype economy is identically zero. Hence, we focus on the
other three wedges and make no mention of the government consumption wedge.
       We choose simple models in order to illustrate how the detailed models map into the
prototypes. Since many models map into the same con…guration of wedges, identifying one
particular con…guration does not uniquely identify a model; rather, it identi…es a whole class of
models that are consistent with that con…guration. This point is seen clearly when comparing
the prototype model associated with the economy with investment-speci…c technical change
to that for the economy with bank collateral constraints. In this sense, our method does not
uniquely determine the model most promising to analyze business cycle ‡uctuations. It does,
however, guide researchers to focus on the key margins that need to be distorted in order to
capture the nature of the ‡uctuations.

An Equivalence Result for a Model with Investment-Speci…c Technical Change
       We begin with a two-sector model with investment-speci…c technical change and show
how it maps into a prototype economy with only investment wedges.


                                                 9
A Detailed Economy with Investment Speci…c Technical Change
         The detailed economy has consumption ct (st ) and investment xt (st ) produced accord-
ing to


(7)    ct (st ) = At (st )F (kct (st ); lct (st )) and xt (st ) = Axt (st )At (st )F (kxt (st ); lxt (st );


where kct (st ) and lct (st ) denote capital and labor used to produce consumption goods, kxt (st )
and lxt (st ) denote capital and labor used to produce investment goods, At (st ) is neutral tech-
nical change, Axt (st ) denotes investment-speci…c technical change, and F satis…es constant
returns to scale. The timing is that the (total) capital stock in use at period t is chosen at
the end of period t            1 given the shock history st 1 ; whereas at the beginning of each period,
after the current shock st is realized, labor and capital are allocated between sectors. This
timing gives rise to a capital accumulation rule


(8)    kt+1 (st ) = (1          )kt (st 1 ) + xt (st )0


constraints for sectoral capital allocation,


(9)    kct (st ) + kxt (st )      kt (st 1 );


and sectoral labor allocation,


(10) lct (st ) + lxt (st )       lt (st ):


The planning problem is to choose allocations to solve



             X
                    t
       max              (st )U (ct (st ); lt (st ))
               st


subject to (7)–(10). Using that the production function F has constant returns to scale, the




                                                            10
…rst-order conditions imply that

      kct (st )   kxt (st )   kt (st 1 )
                =           =            ;
      lct (st )   lxt (st )    lt (st )

and hence


      Fkc (kct (st ); lct (st )) = Fkx (kxt (st ); lxt (st )) and Flc (kct (st ); lct (st )) = Flx (kxt (st ); lxt (st ));


and we can write these marginal products as Fk (k(st 1 ); l(st )) and Fl (k(st 1 ); l(st )). The
Euler equation is

      Uct (st ) X                                                                                   Uct (st+1 )
               =             (st+1 jst ) Uct+1 (st+1 )At+1 (st+1 )Fk (st+1 ) + (1              )                 ;
      Axt (st ) s                                                                                  Axt+1 (st+1 )
                     t+1



and the static …rst-order condition for labor is given by

        Ult (st )
                  = At (st )Fl (st ):
        Uct (st )

If we express output in current consumption units, we can write


      At (st )F (kct (st ); lct (st )) + qt (st )Axt (st )At (st )F (kxt (st ); lxt (st ) = At (st )F (k(st 1 ; l(st ))


since the relative price of investment to consumption goods is qt (st ) = 1=Axt (st ).
The Associated Prototype Economy with Investment Wedges
       Now consider a prototype economy with just investment wedges. This prototype
economy has a productivity shock At (st ) equal to that in the consumption goods sector in
the detailed economy, an investment wedge equal to the reciprocal of the level of investment-
speci…c technical change, and no other wedges.
       Proposition 1: The aggregate allocations in the detailed economy with investment-
speci…c technical change coincide with those of the prototype economy if the e¢ ciency wedge
in the prototype economy equals the productivity shock in the consumption goods sector, the




                                                            11
investment wedge is given by

                 t          1
      1     xt (s )   =             ;
                          Axt (st )

and the labor wedge is zero.
       Note that if we measure output in the detailed economy at base period prices rather
than at current prices, the map between the detailed economy and the prototype economy is
more complicated.

 An Equivalence Result for an Economy with Bank Collateral Constraints
       Here we show the equivalence between an economy with bank collateral constraints
and a prototype economy with only investment wedges.

A Detailed Economy with Bank Collateral Constraints
       Consider an in…nite horizon economy that blends elements of Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997) with that of Gertler and Kiyotaki (2009) and is composed of a household that works
and operates …nancial intermediaries, referred to as banks, together with …rms and a govern-
ment. Households elastically supply labor and save by holding deposits in banks and gov-
ernment bonds and receive dividends. Banks raise deposits from households and use these
deposits plus retained earnings to invest in capital as well as to pay dividends to consumers.
Firms rent capital and labor and produce output. The government …nances an exogenous
stream of government spending by taxing labor income and the capital stock and by selling
government bonds.
       Let the state of the economy be st 2 S distributed according to     (st jst 1 ) : Let st =
(s0 ; :::; st ). The resource constraint is given by


(11) Ct (st ) + Kt+1 st = At (st )F (Kt st     1
                                                   ; Lt st );


where Ct is aggregate consumption, Kt+1 is the capital stock, Lt is aggregate labor, and F is
a constant returns to scale production function that includes the undepreciated capital stock.
Throughout we use the convention that uppercase letters denote aggregates and lowercase
letters denote the decisions of individual households or banks.

                                                   12
        We follow Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler, Kiyotaki, and Queralto (2012) in
the formulation of households. The decision making in each household can be thought of as
being made by di¤erent entities: a measure 1 of workers and a measure 1 of bankers. The
workers supply labor and return their wages to the household while each banker manages a
bank that transfers nonnegative dividends to the household. The household as a whole has
preferences

       X
       1 X
                  t
(12)                     st js0 U (ct st ; lt st );
       t=0   st


where ct and lt are an individual household’s consumption and labor supply. Given initial
asset holdings bH0 and d0 , the stand-in household in the economy maximizes this utility by
choosing fct ; lt ; dt+1 g subject to the budget constraint

                  X                                                                   1
       ct s t +          qt+1 st+1 dt+1 st+1            wt st lt st + dt st + Xt st       n
                  st+1


and the restrictions that


(13) dt+1 st+1            d;


where d is a large negative number. Here dt+1 is the amount of deposits made by households
in banks and qt+1 is the corresponding price. Also, wt is the real wage, Xt are dividends paid
by banks, and n is the amount of initial equity given to each newly formed bank of which a
measure (1        )= is formed each period.
        The …rst-order conditions for the household’s problem can be summarized by

        ULt (st )
(14)              = w t st
        UCt (st )

                               (st+1 jst ) UCt+1 (st+1 )
(15) qt+1 st+1 =                                         :
                                     UCt (st )
        A representative …rm rents capital at rate Rt from banks and hires Lt units of labor




                                                             13
to maximize pro…ts


(16) max AF (Kt ; Lt ) + (1        )Kt   Rt Kt   wt Lt :
      Kt ;Lt



The …rst-order conditions to this problem imply


(17) AFK (st ) + 1      = Rt (st ) and AFL (st ) = wt (st ).


       Next consider the banks. At the beginning of each period, an idiosyncratic random
variable is realized at each existing bank. With probability            ; the bank will continue in
operation until the next period. With probability 1               ; the bank ceases to exist and, by
assumption, pays out all of its accumulated net worth as dividends to the household. Also at
the beginning of each period, a measure (1        )= of new banks is born, each of which is given
an exogenously speci…ed amount of initial equity n from households. Since only a fraction
of these newborn banks survive until the end of the period, the measure of surviving banks
is always constant at 1. This device of having banks die is a simple way to ensure that they
do not build up enough equity to make the …nancial constraints that we will next introduce
irrelevant.
       Turning to the budget constraint of an individual bank, note …rst that for any non-
newborn bank the budget constraint at t is

                            X
(18) xt st + kt+1 st               qt+1 st+1 dt+1 st+1         Rt st kt st   1
                                                                                 dt st ;
                            st+1


where Rt is the rental rate for capital. We will let nt (st ) = Rt (st )kt (st 1 )     dt (st ) denote
the right side of (18) and will refer to it as the net worth of the bank. For a bank that is
newly born at t; the left side of the budget constraint is the same and the right side of (18)
is replaced by initial net worth n. Banks face a collateral constraint for each st+1 ;


(19) dt+1 st+1        Rt+1 st+1 kt+1 st ;




                                                 14
where 0 <                < 1; as well as non-negativity constraints on dividends and bond holdings,


(20) xt (st )             0:


        For notational simplicity only, consider the problem of a bank born in period 0. The
bank chooses fkt+1 (st ); dt (st ); xt (st )g to solve

            X
            1 X
(21) max                           Q st        t
                                                    xt st + (1             )nt st
                    t     st


subject to (18)–(20) where nt (st ) = Rt (st ) kt (st 1 )                                  dt (st ), n0 (s0 ) = n, and Q (st ) is the
price of a good at date t in units of a good at date 0 after history st . We assume that
a bank that ceases to operate pays out its accumulated net worth as dividends. Since the
bank is owned by the household, it values dividends at the marginal rates of substitution of
consumers, so that

                               t
(22) Q st =                          st UC st =UC0 s0 :


From the household’s …rst-order condition, it follows that the discount factor used by the
bank is consistent with the rate of return on deposits in that Q(st ) = q0 (s0 )                                                qt (st ).
        The …rst-order conditions to the bank’s problem can be written as


       Q(st )           t+1
                              +           t
                                     xt (s )   =        t
                                                    t (s )


                          X
            t
        t (s )      =                Q(st+1 )      t+1
                                                         (1    )Rt+1 (st+1 ) + Rt+1 (st+1 )             t+1 (s
                                                                                                                    t+1
                                                                                                                          )+   t+1 (s
                                                                                                                                     t+1
                                                                                                                                         )
                          st+1

(23)     Q(st+1 )              t+1
                                     (1        )+         t
                                                      t (s )qt+1 (s
                                                                   t+1
                                                                       )   =       t+1 (s
                                                                                         t+1
                                                                                             )   +   t+1 (s
                                                                                                              t+1
                                                                                                                    );

                t             t                     t
where    t (s       ),    t (s ),     and      xt (s )    are the multipliers on the bank budget constraint, the collat-
eral constraint, and the nonnegative dividend constraint. We can manipulate these constraints
to obtain

            X                                                                            t+1 (s
                                                                                               t+1
                                                                                                   )
(24) 1 =                  Rt+1 (st+1 )qt+1 (st+1 ) 1               (1          )       t            t+1 )
                                                                                                                :
                                                                                   t (s )qDt+1 (s
            st+1


                                                                           15
A competitive equilibrium is de…ned in the standard fashion.
The Associated Prototype Economy with Investment Wedges
       Consider a version of the benchmark prototype economy that will have the same aggre-
gate allocations as the banking economy just detailed. This prototype economy is identical to
our benchmark prototype except that the new prototype economy has an investment wedge
that resembles a tax on capital income rather than a tax on investment. Here the government
consumption wedge is set equal to zero.
       In the prototype economy, the consumer’s budget constraint is


(25) Ct (st ) + Kt+1 (st ) = (1               t       t
                                         Kt (s ))Rt (s )Kt (s
                                                              t 1
                                                                  )   + (1        t       t      t
                                                                             Lt (s ))wt (s )Lt (s )   + Tt (st ):


The …rst-order condition for the investment wedge in this economy is given by

                   X
(26) UCt (st ) =          (st+1 jst )UCt+1 (st+1 )[AFKt+1 (st+1 ) + 1          ](1     Kt+1 (s
                                                                                              t+1
                                                                                                  ):
                   st+1


       Comparing the …rst-order conditions in the detailed economy with bank collateral
constraints to those of the associated prototype economy leads us to set

                                          t+1
            t                       t+1 (s    )
(27)   Kt (s )   = (1     )       t            t+1 )
                                                     :
                              t (s )qDt+1 (s


We then have the following proposition.

       Proposition 2: The aggregate allocations in the detailed economy with bank collateral
constraints coincide with those of the prototype economy if the e¢ ciency wedge in the prototype
economy At (st ) = A, the labor wedge is zero, and the investment wedge is given by (27).
       Clearly, the e¢ ciency wedge here is just the constant level of technology A in the
detailed economy. To see why there is no labor wedge, note that combining (14) and (17)
gives that

        UL (st )
                 = AFL (st ).
        UC (st )

To derive the expression for the investment wedge, substitute for Rt+1 (st+1 ) from the …rm’s

                                                         16
…rst-order condition (17) and for qt+1 (st+1 ) from the consumer’s …rst-order condition (15) to
obtain

            X                          UCt+1 (st+1                                             t+1 (s
                                                                                                     t+1
                                                                                                         )
                            t+1    t
     1=                (s         js )         t
                                                   )[AFKt+1 (st+1 ) + 1   ] 1   (1   )       t            t+1 )
                                        UCt (s )                                         t (s )qDt+1 (s
            st+1


and compare (26) to this equation.

An Equivalence Result for an Economy with Heterogeneous Productivity and Col-
lateral Constraints
         We use an example from Buera and Moll (2015) to illustrate how a model with ‡uctu-
ations in …nancial frictions, modeled as shocks to a collateral constraint on entrepreneurs, is
equivalent to a prototype model with a labor wedge, an investment wedge, and an e¢ ciency
wedge. We think of this example as making a point identical to that in Proposition 1 of Chari,
Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007) but in a di¤erent context. That proposition showed how a
detailed model with …nancial frictions modeled as input-…nancing frictions is equivalent to a
prototype economy with a labor wedge, an investment wedge, and an e¢ ciency wedge.
A Detailed Economy with Heterogeneous Productivity and Collateral Constraints
         We consider an economy with only idiosyncratic shocks and exogenous incomplete
markets against these shocks. A unit mass of identical workers, who can neither borrow nor
lend, supply labor Lt at a wage wt , to maximize



     X
     1
              t
                  [log(CW t )          V (Lt )]
      t=0


subject to


(28) CW t = wt Lt :


The economy has a unit mass of entrepreneurs indexed by i 2 [0; 1] and a unit mass of
identical households. An entrepreneur of type i draws an idiosyncratic shock zit ; which is
i.i.d. over time and across entrepreneurs and has density                   (z). This entrepreneur has a



                                                            17
technology to produce output of the form yit = zit kit lit1                         where kit and lit are the amounts
of capital invested and labor hired by entrepreneur i.
         The timing is that an entrepreneur’s productivity in period t + 1; namely, zit+1 , is
revealed at the end of period t, before the entrepreneur issues new debt dt+1 . Written in
                                                      P t
recursive form, an entrepreneur with utility function     log(ct ) solves


        Vt (k; d; z 1 ; z) = max
                              0 0
                                  log c + E [Vt+1 (k 0 ; d0 ; z; z 0 )]
                                         c;d ;k



subject to a budget constraint


        c + k0            d0 =       (z 1 ; w; k) + (1           )k   (1 + rt )d


and a collateral constraint


(29) d0          tk
                      0
                          with       t   2 [0; 1] :


Note that (29) restricts the amount of leverage d0 =k 0 to be less than some exogenous amount,
 t.   We use the constant returns to scale production function and the multiplicative technology
shock to write total pro…ts                            (z 1 ; w; k) as linear functions of the technology shock and the
capital stock so that


            (z 1 ; w; k) = z (w)k = max(zk) l1                             wl;
                                                          l


                             1           (1   )=
where (w) =                      w
                                                   .
         An equilibrium consists of sequences of prices frt ; wt g and quantities such that the
allocations solve both the entrepreneur problem and the household problem, and markets
clear in that
        Z                                Z
(30)        dit di = 0 and                    lit di = Lt


        CEt + CW t + Xt = Yt



                                                                      18
      Kt+1 = Xt + (1                        )Kt ;

where Xt denotes aggregate investment. To characterize the equilibrium, we let mit denote
the entrepreneur’s cash on hand given by


      mit      zit t kit + (1                    )kit           (1 + rt )dit ;


and we let ait denote the net worth of the entrepreneur,


      ait     kit        dit :


We can use this notation to rewrite the dynamic programming problem of the entrepreneur
as a two-stage budgeting problem: …rst choose how much net worth a0 to carry over to the
next period, and then in the second stage, conditional on a0 ; decide how to split this net
worth between capital k 0 and bonds                                  d0 . The two-stage problem is then to solve


      vt (m; z) = max
                   0
                      [log(m                            a0 ) + Evt+1 (m
                                                                      ~ t+1 (a0 ; z); z 0 )] ;
                           a



where


      ~ t+1 (a0 ; z) = max
      m                 0 0
                            z                   t+1 k
                                                        0
                                                            + (1       )k 0      (1 + rt+1 )d0
                                 k ;d



subject to


      k0     d 0 = a0 ;


and

                                                    1
(31) k 0       ta
                    0
                        where           t   =                   2 [1; 1):
                                                1           t


This formulation immediately implies the following result.
        Lemma 1. There is a productivity cuto¤ for being active z t+1 de…ned by z t+1 (wt+1 ) =



                                                                                 19
rt+1 + . Given this cuto¤, capital and debt holdings are given by
                 8                                 9          8                                               9
                 <                           z t+1 =          < (                                       z t+1 =
                        t ait+1 for zit+1                                       t   1)ait+1 for zit+1
(32) kit+1 =                                         ,dit+1 =                                                   ;
                 :               0 otherwise       ;          :                       ait+1   otherwise       ;


and entrepreneurs save a constant fraction of cash on hand ait+1 = mit .
        Note that the optimal capital choice is always at one of two corners. Su¢ ciently
unproductive entrepreneurs lend out all their net worth for use by other entrepreneurs and
receive return rt+1 + , whereas su¢ ciently productive entrepreneurs borrow the maximal
amount allowed by the collateral constraint,                        t ait+1 ;   and invest these funds in their own
projects. The marginal entrepreneur has a productivity that makes the returns from investing
in capital, z t+1     t+1 ,   just equal to the returns to lending out funds, rt+1 + .
        We can use this characterization of decision rules together with market clearing con-
ditions to determine the cuto¤ z t+1 as a function of the parameters of the economy. To do
so, we aggregate over entrepreneurs to obtain


       Kt+1 =        [ Yt + (1             )Kt ] and Yt = At Kt L1t         ;


where
                 R                     !
                 zt
                      z (z)dz
(33) At =                                  = (E [zjz   z t ]) ;
                 1            (z t )

where z t is given by the solution to


(34)    t 1 (1        (z t )) = 1.


To understand the determination of the cuto¤ productivity level, we use the results of Lemma
1 to obtain that
                 8                                             9
                 < (             1) mit for zit+1      z t+1   =
                         t
       dit+1   =                                                    :
                 :                     mit otherwise           ;




                                                               20
Using the observation that mit chosen before zit+1 is realized and is therefore independent of
zit+1 ; we can write the market clearing condition for debt given in (30) for period t + 1 as
                         Z   1              Z   z t+1
       (    t       1)            (z)dz =               (z)dz;
                          z t+1             0


which, when rearranged, yields (34).
The Associated Prototype Economy with E¢ ciency, Labor, and Investment Wedges
           Consider a version of the benchmark prototype economy that will have the same aggre-
gate allocations as the banking economy just detailed. This prototype economy is identical to
our benchmark prototype except that the new prototype economy has an investment wedge
that resembles a tax on capital income rather than a tax on investment.
           This economy can be mapped into our prototype economy with a period utility function
of the form U (Ct ; Lt ) = log Ct                 V (Lt ) as follows. The e¢ ciency wedge is given by (33), the
labor wedge is given by

                         CEt
(35)       Lt   =             ;
                         CW t

and the investment wedge is de…ned recursively from

        Uct                                         CW t   CW t+1     CEt+1
(36)                 xt   = (1       )   xt+1   +
       Uct+1                                         Ct     CW t       CEt

with   x0       = 0. To derive (35), note that the labor wedge in the prototype economy is given
by


(37) Ct V 0 (Lt ) = (1              Lt )FLt :



Next, note that in the detailed economy, the …rst-order condition for the worker can be
manipulated to yield Lt V 0 (Lt ) = 1. Using this condition along with wt = FLt ; Ct = CW t +CEt ,
and CW t = wt Lt in (37) yields (35). Note that (36) can be obtained by using the result that
entrepreneurs save a constant fraction of their wealth.
           Proposition 3: The aggregate allocations in the detailed economy with heterogeneous


                                                                 21
productivity and a collateral constraint coincide with those of the prototype economy if the
e¢ ciency wedge in the prototype economy is given by (33), the labor wedge is given by (35),
and the investment wedge is given by (36).

An Equivalence Result for an Economy with E¢ cient Search
       Consider the e¢ cient outcomes from a standard search model. We will show that if we
view the outcomes of this model through the lens of a prototype growth model, the prototype
model has a labor wedge and an e¢ ciency wedge but no investment wedge.
A Detailed Economy with E¢ cient Search
       For simplicity, we focus on a version of the model without aggregate uncertainty. The
technology is as follows. The population is normalized to 1. In each period, measure nt of the
population is employed and the rest are unemployed. Of the employed, measure vt is used
as recruiters and nt            vt are used in producing the single consumption-investment good. The
matching technology depends on the measure of recruiters and the measure of unemployed,
1 nt . The measure of new matches mt created in any period is given by the constant returns
to scale function G(vt ; 1          nt ). Existing matches dissolve at an exogenous rate    n   so that the
law of motion for the measure of employed is given by


(38) nt+1         (1      n )nt   + mt


and the resource constraint for goods is


(39) ct + kt+1          yt + (1      )kt ;


where ct is consumption, kt+1 is the capital stock, yt = At F (kt ; nt          vt ), and   is the depre-
ciation rate. We assume that F = kt (nt               vt )1   . The utility of the stand-in household is
given by

       X
            t
(40)            U (ct ; nt ):


The social planner’s problem is to choose fct ; vt ; nt+1 ; kt+1 g to maximize utility subject to


                                                      22
(38) and (39). We summarize the key …rst-order conditions as

                                  yt+1
(41) Uct = Uct+1                       +1                     ;
                                 kt+1

           Fnt                            Fnt+1                                              Unt+1
(42) Uct       = Uct+1                          [(1               n)     G2t+1 ] + Fnt+1 +           ;
           G1t                            G1t+1                                              Uct+1
and


       yt = At F (kt ; nt             vt ):


The Associated Prototype Economy with E¢ ciency and Labor Wedges
         Consider a prototype economy in which the production function is yt = A^t kt n1t
where

                       nt        vt
(43) A^t = At
                            nt

and the resource constraint is the same as in (39). Lagging and manipulating (42) and using

                                          yt                           y t nt
       At Fnt = (1               )                  = (1           )            ;
                                     nt        vt                      nt nt vt

we obtain

                 Unt                                nt            Uct 1 Fnt 1 1           1                           1
(44)                                 =                                                         [(1       n)   G2t ]      :
        Uct (1         )yt =nt                 nt        vt        Uct At Fnt G1t   1   G1t At                        At

Since the labor wedge in the prototype economy is given by the right side of (44), we have
the following result.
         Proposition 4: The aggregate allocations in the e¢ cient search economy coincide
with those of the prototype economy if the e¢ ciency wedge in the prototype economy is given
by (43), the labor wedge 1                           lt   is given by the right side of (44), and the investment wedge
is zero.




                                                                            23
C. Adjusting the Prototype Economy
       So far we have always established equivalence results between a given detailed economy
and the prototype one-sector growth model. When using business cycle accounting logic, one
can always do that. When the underlying economy is su¢ ciently di¤erent from the one-sector
growth model, however, it is often more instructive to adjust the prototype model so that
the version of it without wedges is the planning problem for the class of models at hand.

An Equivalence Result for an Economy with Ine¢ cient Search
       Here we illustrate what we mean by considering a version of the search model in
which search is ine¢ cient in that the equilibrium of the economy does not solve the planning
problem just discussed. One alternative is to keep the prototype model as the one-sector
growth model, in which case the wedges will simply be more elaborate versions of those
just discussed. Here we illustrate an alternative: we now measure the wedges relative to a
distorted version of the social planning problem just studied.
A Detailed Economy with Ine¢ cient Search
       Consider the decentralized equilibrium of a standard search model. The matching
technology is as before: the measure of new matches mt created in any period is given
by the constant returns to scale function G(vt ; 1           nt ). Letting   t   = vt =(1   nt ) be the
number of recruiters per unemployed worker, each …rm that uses the recruiting technology
attracts   f ( t)   = G(vt ; 1    nt )=vt per recruiter to the …rm. Thus, a measure of recruiters
vt attracts vt   f ( t)   workers to the …rm. The probability that an unemployed worker …nds
a job is   w(   ) = G(vt ; 1     nt )=(1   nt ). Note for later that under constant returns to scale,
 w(   )=    f(   ).
       Here, as is standard, we imagine that workers are part of a family that has idiosyncratic
risk across its members. Since we abstract from aggregate shocks, the law of large numbers
implies that the family solves a deterministic problem. As we did earlier, we assume that
productivity deterministically varies over time. To keep notation simple, we only index the
value function and the prices by time. The problem of a family written in recursive form is


      Vt (at ; nt ) = max
                        0
                          U (c; n) + Vt+1 (a0 ; n0 )
                      c;a




                                                       24
subject to the household budget constraint and the transition law for employed workers,


(45) c + qt+1 a0 = a + wn;


(46) n0 = (1      n )n   +   w(   )(1    n):

In (45), a0 is the quantity of goods saved at t and qt+1 is the price at t per unit of goods
delivered at t + 1. In (46),      n   is the separation rate of employed workers and   w(   )(1   n) is
the measure of workers that transit from unemployment to employment.
       The …rst-order condition for a0 is


      qt+1 Uct = Vat+1 ;


and using the envelope condition for a, namely, Vat = Uct , gives


(47) qt+1 Uct = Uct+1 :


We can use the envelope condition to derive the marginal value to the household of an
additional employed worker,

                                                                0   0
(48) Vnt = Uct wt + Unt + [1             n     w ( t )] Vnt+1 (a ; n );



at the equilibrium wage wt where n0 is given from (46). The …rst term gives the marginal
increase in utility from the increased consumption due to having an additional worker earning
wt . The second term gives the decrease in utility from increased work. The third term is
the increase in the present value of utility from entering the next period with an additional
worker.
       In order to determine the wages in Nash bargaining, it is useful to de…ne the value to
the family of having an additional employed worker at an arbitrary current wage w. This
worker will receive the equilibrium wage in all future periods if employed. This value is


      V~nt (a; n; w) = Uc (w      wt ) + Vnt (a; n):


                                                       25
       The problem of the …rm with a current stock of employed workers n and a current
stock of capital k can be written in recursive form as


  Jt (n; k) = max
                0
                  fzt F (k; n           v)      [k 0      (1         )k]   wt n + qt+1 Jt+1 ((1   n) n   +v   f ( t ); k
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                               )g ;
                v;k



where the transition law from workers employed at this …rm is


      n0 = (1         n) n   +v    f ( t ):



Here the ‡ow pro…ts at t are output, zt F (k; n                        v); minus investment, [k 0    (1       )k] ; minus
the wage bill, wt n. The …rm discounts the present value of future pro…ts from t+1 on by qt+1 .
The …rst-order condition for capital is qt+1 Jkt+1 (n0 ; k 0 ) = 1: Using the envelope condition for
k; Jkt (n; k) = zt Fkt + (1          ) in this …rst-order condition gives


(49) 1 = qt+1 [zt+1 Fkt+1 + (1                )] :


The …rst-order condition for the mass of recruiters to deploy at t is

                                      0   0
(50) zt Fnt =     f ( t )qt+1 Jnt+1 (n ; k ):



Using the envelope condition for n;

                                                                      0   0
(51) Jnt (n; k) = zt Fn           wt + [1            n ] qt+1 Jnt+1 (n ; k );



in the …rst-order condition for recruiters (50) gives

                                                          zt Fn
(52) Jnt (n; k) = zt Fnt          wt + [1            n]          .
                                                          f ( t)


The value of having an additional worker employed at an arbitrary wage w in the current
period, who will receive the equilibrium wage in all future periods, is


      J~nt (n; k; w) = wt         w + Jnt (nt ; kt ):


                                                                 26
        Wages are determined according to Nash bargaining with the bargaining parameter
  for the worker and 1                       for the …rm. The bargained wage w maximizes the asymmetric
Nash product by solving

              h                  i                          h                  i
       max log V~nt (at ; nt ; w) + (1                 ) log J~nt (kt ; nt ; w) ;
        w



where the …rst term in brackets is the value to the family of having an additional worker
employed rather than unemployed at an arbitrary wage w. The …rst-order condition is

        V~nwt                      J~nwt
              + (1             )         = 0:
         V~nt                       J~nt

Using V~nwt (at ; nt ; w) = Uct and J~nwt (kt ; nt ; w) =            1 and evaluating this …rst-order condition
at equilibrium with w = wt so that V~nt = Vnt and J~nt = Jnt gives

        Uct                     1
(53)        = (1          )        :
        Vnt                    Jnt

Substituting for Vnt and Vnt+1 from (53) into (48) and replacing Jnt with the right side of
(52) gives

                  1       n                                            Unt
             1+                     zt Fnt     wt = (1       ) wt +        + [1      n    w ( t )] qt+1 Jnt+1 :
                      f ( t)                                           Uct

Replacing Jnt+1 using the …rst-order condition for recruiters (50), we can solve for the equi-
librium wage,

                                                       Unt
(54) wt =      [1 +      t ] zt Fnt    + (1       )           :
                                                       Uct

Here, hiring an unemployed worker produces a marginal value to the …rm that includes both
the direct value of production and the savings on recruiters’time. The wage is a weighted
average of this marginal value and the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and
employment for the household. Substituting the wage equation into the recruiter’s …rst-order




                                                              27
condition (50) gives


(55)
                                                           1        n                                                   Unt+1
       zt Fnt Uct = Uct+1         ft     zt+1 Fnt+1 1 +                      [1 +     t+1 ] zt+1 Fnt+1   + (1       )           :
                                                               f t+1                                                    Uct+1

The corresponding …rst-order condition for recruiters for the planner (42) can be manipulated
to be

                                                         1   n          G2t+1                Unt+1
(56) zt Fnt Uct = Uct+1 G1t zt+1 Fnt+1                                        + zt+1 Fnt+1 +                    :
                                                         G1t+1          G1t+1                Uct+1

With a Cobb-Douglas matching function G(v; 1                             n) = Bv 1 (1         n) , we have that G1t =
(1      )   ft   and G2t =        t ft    so that (56) becomes

                                                           1        n                                                   Unt+1
(57) zt Fnt Uct = Uct+1            ft    zt+1 Fnt+1 1 +                      [1 +     t+1 ] zt+1 Fnt+1   + (1       )           :
                                                               f t+1                                                    Uct+1

Clearly, these …rst-order conditions coincide if the Mortensen–Hosios condition is satis…ed
in that the worker’s bargaining weight                    equals the elasticity of the matching function with
respect to unemployment . We can decentralize the solution to the planning problem as an
equilibrium with a wage of

                                                     Unt
(58) wtp = [1 +            t ] zt Fnt   + (1     )             :
                                                     Uct

         Notice that even in an e¢ cient equilibrium, the wage typically equals neither the mar-
ginal product of labor zt Fnt nor the marginal rate of substitution                              Unt =Uct . Furthermore,
the marginal rate of substitution is not equal to the marginal product of labor. These consid-
erations suggest a di¤erent notion of a wedge relative to that used in the one-sector model.
                                                                                  p
To that end, write the equilibrium wage as wt = (1                           lt )wt   where wtp is the planner’s wage.
Hence,

                                                            Unt
                          [1 +   t ] zt Fnt   + (1   )      Uct
(59) 1           lt   =                                             :
                                                           Unt
                          [1 +   t ] zt Fnt + (1     )     Uct




                                                               28
Clearly, if the Mortensen–Hosios condition is satis…ed, the wedge             lt   = 0.
The Associated Prototype Economy with E¢ ciency and Labor Wedges
         Consider the following prototype model. In this model, the bargaining power of the
worker is equal to the elasticity ; but workers have to pay a tax        lt   on their wages, investment
is taxed at rate    xt ,   and the productivity is given by A^t . Next we compare the aggregate
outcomes of the prototype model and the equilibrium search model. From (47) and (49),
we immediately have that the Euler equation is undistorted so that the investment wedge
 xt   = 0. Using the production function yt = At F (kt ; nt        vt ); it is immediate that A^t = At .
Thus, we have the following proposition.
         Proposition 5: The aggregate allocations in the equilibrium search economy coincide
with those of the prototype economy if the e¢ ciency wedge in the prototype economy is given
by A^t = At , the labor wedge 1        lt   is given by (59), and the investment wedge is zero.
         Note that if search is e¢ cient, the labor wedge is zero in the two-sector prototype
economy.

2. The Accounting Procedure
         Having established our equivalence result, we now describe our accounting procedure
at a conceptual level, discuss a Markovian implementation of it, and distinguish our procedure
from others.
         Our procedure is designed to answer questions of the following kind: How much would
output ‡uctuate if the only wedge that ‡uctuated is the e¢ ciency wedge and the probability
distribution of the e¢ ciency wedge is the same as in the prototype economy? Critically, our
procedure ensures that agents’expectations of how the e¢ ciency wedge will evolve are the
same as in the prototype economy. For each experiment, we compare the properties of the
resulting equilibria to those of the prototype economy. These comparisons, together with our
equivalence results, allow us to identify promising classes of detailed economies.

A. The Accounting Procedure at a Conceptual Level
         Recall that the state st is the history of the underlying abstract events st . Suppose for
                                          t
now that the stochastic process       t (s )   and the realizations of the state st in some particular
episode are known. Recall that the prototype economy has one underlying (vector-valued)

                                                     29
random variable, the state st ; which has a probability of                                          t
                                                                                                t (s ):   All of the other stochastic
variables, including the four wedges— the e¢ ciency wedge At (st ); the labor wedge 1                                               t
                                                                                                                               lt (s );
                                                                t
the investment wedge 1=[1 +                             xt (s       )], and the government consumption wedge gt (st )— are
simply functions of this random variable. Hence, when the state st is known, so are the
wedges.
              To evaluate the e¤ects of just the e¢ ciency wedge, for example, we consider an econ-
omy, referred to as an e¢ ciency wedge alone economy, with the same underlying state st and
                                t
probability                 t (s )   and the same function At (st ) for the e¢ ciency wedge as in the prototype
economy, but in which the other three wedges are set to be constant functions of the state,
                        t                      t
in that         lt (s       ) =      l;   xt (s )   =   x;   and gt (st ) = g: Note that this construction ensures that
the probability distribution of the e¢ ciency wedge in this economy is identical to that in the
prototype economy.
              We compute the decision rules for the e¢ ciency wedge alone economy, denoted y e (st ),
le (st ), and xe (st ). For a given initial value k0 , for any given sequence st , we refer to the re-
sulting values of output, labor, and investment as the e¢ ciency wedge components of output,
labor, and investment.
              In a similar manner, we de…ne the labor wedge alone economy, the investment wedge
alone economy, and the government consumption wedge alone economy, as well as economies
with a combination of wedges, such as the e¢ ciency and labor wedge economy.

B. A Markovian Implementation
              So far we have described our procedure assuming that we know the stochastic process
        t
 t (s       ) and that we can observe the state st : In practice, of course, we need to either specify
the stochastic process a priori or use data to estimate it, and we need to uncover the state
st from the data. Here we describe a set of assumptions that makes these e¤orts easy. Then
we describe in detail the three steps involved in implementing our procedure.
              We assume that the state st follows a Markov process (st jst 1 ) and that the wedges
in period t can be used to uniquely uncover the event st , in the sense that the mapping from
the event st to the wedges (At ;                          lt ;       xt ; gt )   is one to one and onto. Given this assumption,
without loss of generality, let the underlying event st = (sAt ; slt ; sxt ; sgt ); and let At (st ) =


                                                                                  30
                t                    t
sAt ;   lt (s       ) = slt ;   xt (s )   = sxt ; and gt (st ) = sgt : Note that we have e¤ectively assumed that
agents use only past wedges to forecast future wedges and that the wedges in period t are
su¢ cient statistics for the event in period t. This assumption is only to make our estimation
easier, and it can be relaxed.
          In practice, to estimate the stochastic process for the state, we …rst specify a vector
autoregressive AR(1) process for the event st = (sAt ; slt ; sxt ; sgt ) of the form


(60) st+1 = P0 + P st + "t+1 ;


where the shock "t is i.i.d. over time and is distributed normally with mean zero and co-
variance matrix V: To ensure that our estimate of V is positive semide…nite, we estimate the
lower triangular matrix Q, where V = QQ0 : The matrix Q has no structural interpretation.
(Attempting to give Q such a structural interpretation is part of the source of some of the
conceptual confusion about our approach. See Christiano and Davis (2006) for one such
attempt.)
          The …rst step in our procedure is to use data on yt ; lt ; xt ; and gt from an actual economy
to estimate the parameters of the Markov process (st jst 1 ): We can do so using a variety of
methods, including the maximum likelihood procedure described later.
          The second step in our procedure is to uncover the event st by measuring the realized
wedges. We measure the government consumption wedge directly from the data as the sum of
government consumption and net exports. To obtain the values of the other three wedges, we
use the data and the model’s decision rules. With ytd ; ltd ; xdt ; gtd , and k0d denoting the data and
y(st ; kt ); l(st ; kt ); and x(st ; kt ) denoting the decision rules of the model, the realized wedge
series sdt solves


(61) ytd = y(sdt ; kt ); ltd = l(sdt ; kt ); and xdt = x(sdt ; kt );


with kt+1 = (1                   )kt + xdt ; k0 = k0d , and gt = gtd : Note that we construct a series for the
capital stock using the capital accumulation law (1), data on investment xt , and an initial
choice of capital stock k0 . In e¤ect, we solve for the three unknown elements of the vector
st using the three equations (3)–(5) and thereby uncover the state. We use the associated

                                                               31
values for the wedges in our experiments.
        Note that the four wedges account for all of the movement in output, labor, investment,
and government consumption, in that if we feed the four wedges into the three decision rules
in (61) and use gt (sdt ) = sgt along with the law of motion for capital, we simply recover the
original data.
        Note also that, in measuring the realized wedges, the estimated stochastic process
plays a role only in measuring the investment wedge. To see that the stochastic process does
not play a role in measuring the e¢ ciency and labor wedges, note that these wedges can
equivalently be directly calculated from (3) and (4) without computing the equilibrium of
the model. In contrast, calculating the investment wedge requires computing the equilibrium
of the model because the right side of (5) has expectations over future values of consumption,
the capital stock, the wedges, and so on. The equilibrium of the model depends on these
expectations and, therefore, on the stochastic process driving the wedges.
        The third step in our procedure is to conduct experiments to isolate the marginal e¤ects
of the wedges. To do that, we allow a subset of the wedges to ‡uctuate as they do in the
data while the others are set to constants. To evaluate the e¤ects of the e¢ ciency wedge, we
compute the decision rules for the e¢ ciency wedge alone economy, denoted y e (st ; kt ); le (st ; kt );
and xe (st ; kt ); in which At (st ) = sAt ;   lt (s
                                                       t
                                                           )=    l;
                                                                           t
                                                                      xt (s )   =   x;   and gt (st ) = g: Starting from
k0d , we then use sdt , the decision rules, and the capital accumulation law to compute the realized
sequence of output, labor, and investment, yte ; lte ; and xet , which we call the e¢ ciency wedge
components of output, labor, and investment. We compare these components to output,
labor, and investment in the data. Other components are computed and compared similarly.
        Notice that in this experiment, we computed the decision rules for an economy in
which only one wedge ‡uctuates and the others are set to be constants in all events. The
‡uctuations in the one wedge are driven by ‡uctuations in a four-dimensional state st :
        By distinguishing the events to which the wedges are indexed from the wedges them-
selves, we can separate out the direct e¤ect and the forecasting e¤ect of ‡uctuations in
wedges. As a wedge ‡uctuates, it directly a¤ects either budget constraints or resource con-
straints. Whenever a wedge is not set to a constant, the ‡uctuations in the underlying state
that lead to the ‡uctuations in the wedges also a¤ect the forecasts of that wedge as well as


                                                            32
those of other wedges in the future. Our experiments are designed so that when we hold a
particular wedge constant, we eliminate the direct e¤ect of that wedge, but we retain the
forecasting e¤ect of the underlying state on the future evolution of the wedge. By doing so,
we ensure that expectations of the ‡uctuating wedges are identical to those in the prototype
economy.

C. Distinguishing Our Procedure from Others
         Since this way of separating the direct and forecasting e¤ects of wedges is critical to
our procedure, here we describe an alternative procedure that might, at …rst, seem like the
intuitive way to proceed but does not answer the question that interests us.
         Consider a simple example with just two wedges, an e¢ ciency wedge and a labor
                                            0
wedge, denoted Wt = (At ;            lt )       . Suppose that we used our prototype model to estimate the
following vector process for them of the form Wt+1 = P Wt + "t+1 where E"t "0t = V :
       2           3   2            32         2  3    3
           At+1            PAA   PAl    A       "
(62) 4             5=4               5 4 t 5 + 4 At+1 5 ;
            lt+1           PlA   Pll     lt      "lt+1

where we have suppressed the constant terms. Suppose also that we have decision rules of
the form


(63) yt = y(Wt ; kt ); lt = l(Wt ; kt ); and xt = x(Wt ; kt )


and that we have recovered the realized wedge series Wtd along with the realized innovation
series "dt+1 .
         Now suppose we want to answer the question: How much would output ‡uctuate under
the following three conditions? First, only the e¢ ciency wedge ‡uctuates. Second, for the
event, the realized sequence of the e¢ ciency wedges coincides with that in the data. Third,
the probability distribution of the e¢ ciency wedge is the same as in the prototype economy.
         A …rst attempt to answer this question is to simply feed a realized innovation series




                                                             33
^"t+1 = ("dAt+1 ; 0) for the event and to simulate the resulting shocks using
       2           3       2            32       2  3   3
           A^t+1               PAA   PAl      A^t " d
(64) 4             5=4                   5 4 5 + 4 At+1 5 :
           ^lt+1               PlA   Pll    ^lt       0

This attempt meets our …rst condition but does not meet our second condition if P or V has
nonzero o¤-diagonal elements, as we show they do in the data. Indeed, with nonzero o¤-
        diagonal elements, this procedure will not even produce a simulated A^t series that
agrees with Adt . Moreover, this attempt clearly does not meet our third condition.
        For a second attempt, suppose we choose the sequence of innovations so that the …rst
two conditions are met. That is, we choose the sequence f^"t+1 g so that, in the event, the
realized value of the e¢ ciency wedge coincides with that in the data and the labor wedge is
constant at, say, its mean value                l.   Speci…cally, we choose f^"t+1 g so that (A^t ; ^lt ) = (Adt ; l ) in
the event. The problem with this procedure is that agents’forecasts about future e¢ ciency
wedges are di¤erent under this procedure from what they are in the prototype economy.
Hence, this procedure meets our …rst two conditions but not our third. To see why, note that
the expected value of At+1 in this procedure is given from


            2         23        32 3
            At+1       P    PAl   Ad
       Et 4       5 = 4 AA      54 t5
             lt+1       PlA Pll    l


so that


(65) Et At+1 = PAA Adt + PAl              l   and Et      lt+1   = PlA Adt + Pll l .


The expectation of the underlying state st+1 in the prototype economy, however, is calculated
from
        2       3 2          32 3
         sAt+1       P   PAl    sd
(66) Et 4       5 = 4 AA     5 4 At 5
          slt+1      PlA Pll    sdlt




                                                                  34
to be


(67) Et sAt+1 = PAA sdAt + PAl sdlt and Et slt+1 = PlA sdAt + Pll sdlt .


Since we have identi…ed sAt+1 with At+1 and slt+1 with           lt+1 ;   then (67) gives the expectations
of the e¢ ciency wedge and the labor wedge in the prototype economy during the event.
Clearly, (65) and (67) do not agree when PAl is not zero, so the procedure does not meet
our third condition. Note that in some preliminary notes for Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan
(2007), while we were aware of the ‡aws in the second attempt, we followed a version of this
second attempt as a quick approximation to get an initial set of answers. Christiano and
Davis (2006) unfortunately did not realize that even in our NBER working paper version
(Chari, Lehoe, McGrattan (2004)), we followed the correct procedure. We view their paper
as a valuable exposition of why the second attempt is incorrect and of the ‡aws that arise
when one follows it.
        Next we show that our procedure meets our three conditions. In the e¢ ciency wedge
alone economy, the …rst two conditions are clearly met: only the e¢ ciency wedge ‡uctuates,
and in the event the realized e¢ ciency wedge coincides with the measured e¢ ciency wedge
in the data. To see that the third, and more subtle, condition is met, note from (60) the
probability distribution over st+1 , and therefore At+1 is the same in both the prototype
economy and the e¢ ciency wedge alone economy.

3. Applying the Accounting Procedure
        Now we demonstrate how to apply our accounting procedure to the Great Recession
and postwar data for the United States and a group of other OECD countries. (In the
Appendix, we describe in detail our data sources, parameter choices, computational methods,
and estimation procedures.)

A. Details of the Application
        To apply our accounting procedure, we use functional forms and parameter values that
are familiar from the business cycle literature. We assume that the production function has
the form F (k; l) = k l1        and the utility function the form U (c; l) = log c +           log(1   l):


                                                    35
We choose the capital share         to be one-third and the time allocation parameter         = 2:5:
We choose the depreciation rate , the discount factor           , and growth rates      and    n   so
that, on an annualized basis, depreciation is 5%, the rate of time preference 2.5%, and the
population growth rate and the growth of technology are country-speci…c and computed using
OECD data. The adjustment cost parameter b = + +                n   is pinned down by the previous
parameters and varies across countries. For the adjustment cost parameter a; we follow
Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) in choosing this parameter so that the elasticity, ,
of the price of capital with respect to the investment-capital ratio is .25. In this setup, the
                             0
price of capital q = 1=(1        ), so that, evaluated at the steady state,   = ab. Given     and b;
we then set a accordingly.
       Our prototype economy is a closed economy. When confronting the data, we let
government consumption in the model correspond to the sum of government consumption
and net exports in the data. The rationale for this choice is given in Chari, Kehoe, and
McGrattan (2005), where we prove an equivalence result between an open economy model
and a closed economy model in which government consumption is treated in this fashion. We
then use a standard maximum likelihood procedure to estimate the parameters P0 ; P , and V
of the vector AR(1) process for the wedges. In doing so, we use the log-linear decision rules
of the prototype economy and data on output, labor, investment, and the sum of government
consumption and net exports.
       In confronting the theory with the data, we need to decide how to treat consumer
durables and sales taxes. At a conceptual level, we think of current expenditures on consumer
durables as augmenting the stock of consumer durables, which in turn provides a service ‡ow
of consumption to consumers. Based on this idea, we reallocate current expenditures of
consumer durables from consumption to investment. We then add the imputed service ‡ow
from the stock of consumer durables to consumption and output. This imputed service ‡ow is
the rental rate on capital times the stock of durables. We assume that the stock of consumer
durables depreciates at the same rate as the stock of physical capital. We also adjust the data
to account for sales taxes. We assume that sales taxes are levied solely on consumption. This
assumption leads us to subtract sales tax revenues from both consumption and measured
output.


                                                  36
        At a practical level, it turns out that while the U.S. NIPA accounts have quarterly data
on consumer durable expenditures for the 1980:1-2014:4 sample we use, the OECD has more
limited data. For some of the countries in our sample, data are only available annually or are
missing. For countries for which we only have annual data, we …ll in quarterly estimates using
maximum likelihood estimates of a state space model. For countries for which we only have
quarterly data for a subsample, we regress consumer durables on investment and output and
use the coe¢ cients to construct estimates of the missing data. Once we have the quarterly
series on consumer durables, we construct estimates of the capital stock using the perpetual
inventory method. The service ‡ow of durables is assumed to be 4% of the stock of durables.
(For details, see our Appendix.)
        We express all variables in per capita form and de‡ate by the GDP de‡ator. We
then estimate separate sets of parameters for the stochastic process for wedges (60) for each
of the OECD countries after removing country-speci…c trends in output, investment, and
government consumption. The other parameters are the same across countries. The stochastic
process parameters for the Great Recession are estimated using quarterly data for 1980:1–
2014:4. The stochastic process (60) with these values is used by agents in our economy to
form their expectations about future wedges. In the Appendix, we give the details of the
estimated values of the stochastic processes for each of the countries.

B. Findings
        Now we describe the results of applying our procedure to OECD countries for the
Great Recession and the 1982 recession. Here we focus primarily on the ‡uctuations due to
the e¢ ciency, labor, and investment wedges.1

The Great Recession
        Here we discuss our …ndings for the 24 OECD countries. The main …nding is that in
terms of accounting for the downturn, in the United States the labor wedge is by far the most
important, in Spain, Ireland, and Iceland the investment wedge is the most important, and

   1
    We alert the reader that the quantitative results for Spain should be treated with caution. In some
robustness analysis for Spain, we found that the nonlinear labor wedge computed directly from the consumer’s
…rst-order condition (4) moved substantially more than the labor wedge computed using our log-linearization
procedure.


                                                    37
in the rest of the countries, the e¢ ciency wedge is the most important.


Three Illustrative Recessions Here we illustrate our …ndings for one country for which
the e¢ ciency wedge, labor wedge, and investment wedge, respectively, is the most important.
In reporting our …ndings, we remove a country-speci…c trend from output, investment, and the
government consumption wedge. Both output and labor are normalized to equal 100 in the
base period 2008:1. Here we focus primarily on the ‡uctuations due to the e¢ ciency, labor,
and investment wedges. We discuss the government consumption wedge and its components
in our Appendix.


      France: Primarily an E¢ ciency Wedge Recession We begin with France. In
Figure 1, panel A, we see that from 2008:1 to 2009:3, output fell about 7% while labor fell
about 3% and investment fell about 18%. In Figure 1, panel B, we see that the e¢ ciency
wedge worsened by about 5%, the labor wedge worsened by about 1%, and the investment
wedge worsened by about 5%. In Figure 1C we see that the e¢ ciency wedge accounts for the
bulk of the decline in output, namely, about 6% of the 7% decline. Figures 1D-E show that
the labor and investment wedges play the most important roles in accounting for the declines
in labor and investment.
      Overall, these results imply that the Great Recession in France should be thought of
as primarily an e¢ ciency wedge recession with some role for the labor and investment wedges
in accounting for the decline in hours and investment. This …nding implies that models
that emphasize ‡uctuations in the labor wedge in France are less promising than those that
emphasize ‡uctuations in the e¢ ciency and investment wedges.


      United States: Primarily a Labor Wedge Recession Next consider the United
States. In Figure 2, panel A, we see that output and labor both fell about 7% from 2008:1
to 2009:3 while investment fell about 23%. In Figure 2, panel B, we see that the e¢ ciency
wedge fell very modestly by only about 1%, while the labor wedge and the investment wedge
both worsened dramatically, by about 8% and 9%, respectively. In Figure 2, panels C, D, and
E, we see that the labor and investment wedges play the most important role in accounting
for the downturn in output and labor, while the investment wedge accounts for the bulk of

                                             38
the downturn in investment.
        Overall, considering the period from 2008 until the end of 2011, these results imply
that the Great Recession in the United States should be thought of as primarily a labor wedge
recession, with an important secondary role for the investment wedge. This …nding implies
that the most promising models must yield signi…cant ‡uctuations in the labor wedge, with
some role for the investment wedge. Models that emphasize the e¢ ciency wedge are less
promising.2


        Ireland: Primarily an Investment Wedge Recession Finally consider Ireland.
In Figure 3, panel A, we see that from 2008:1 to 2009:3, output fell about 13%, labor about
11%, and investment almost 50%. Figure 3, panel B, shows that during this period, the
e¢ ciency wedge fell about 5%, the labor wedge worsened by about 10%, and the investment
wedge worsened dramatically, that is, by about 20%.
        In Figure 3, panels C, D, and E, we see that the investment wedge plays the largest
role: it accounts for about half of the fall in output, about four-…fths of the fall in investment,
and all of the fall in hours. Overall, these results imply that the Great Recession in Ireland
should be thought of as primarily an investment wedge recession.


Summary Statistics for our OECD Countries So far we have described the Great
Recession in three countries. Here we describe useful summary statistics over the period
2008:1 to 2011:3. One such statistic, referred to as the              statistic, is intended to capture
how closely a particular component, say, the output component due to the e¢ ciency wedge,
tracks the underlying variable, say, output. For our decomposition of output, we let
                  P
        Y      1= t (yt yit )2
        i   =P      P               ;
              j (1=  t (yt yjt )2 )

where yit is the output component due to wedge i = (A; l ;                 x ; g).   We compute similar
statistics for labor and investment. The           statistic has the desirable feature that it lies in

   2
    In the Appendix we show that if we estimated the stochastic process for the wedges from 1948 to 2015,
the contribution of the labor wedge rises and that of the investment wedge falls. A similar change occurs if
we decrease the investment adjustment cost parameter.



                                                    39
[0; 1]; sums to one across the four wedges, and when a particular output component tracks
                                                               Y
output perfectly, in that if (yt   yit ) = 0 for all t, then   i   = 1; that is, the   statistic for
the wedge reaches its maximum value of 1. Note that this statistic is the inverse of the
mean-square error for each wedge appropriately scaled so that the sum across wedges adds
to one.
       Now consider our main …nding. In Figure 4, panel A, we display the                  statistic
for the e¢ ciency wedge and labor wedge components of output. The downward-sloping lines
represent combinations for which the sum of the labor wedge and e¢ ciency wedge components
is constant at 70% and 90%, respectively. This …gure shows that the United States stands out
from the other countries in that the labor wedge accounts for a much greater fraction of the
movements in output than it does in any other country. Speci…cally, the labor wedge accounts
for about 46% of the movements in output in the United States but no more than 22% in
any other country. In all other countries except Iceland, Ireland and Spain, the e¢ ciency
wedge accounts for roughly 50% or more of the movements in output. In Table 1, we report
the decompositions of output, labor, and investment for all countries. There we see that
for Iceland, Ireland, New Zealand, and Spain, the investment wedge accounts for 51%, 48%,
42%, and 82% of the movements in output, respectively. In the other panels of Figure 4, we
display the   statistics for the components of labor and investment.
       Our main …nding is also apparent if we use other ways to measure how important a
given wedge is for the movements in output, labor, and investment. When we discussed the
three illustrative recessions earlier, we compared simple peak-to-trough measures of output,
labor, and investment to the corresponding measures for each of the components. In Tables
2A, 2B, and 2C, we report such measures for all of our countries. A quick perusal of these
measures shows that they give the same message as the              statistics do. Consider France,
for example. The      statistic indicates that the e¢ ciency wedge accounts for the bulk of
the movements in output, namely, about 92% of its decline. The peak-to-trough measure
indicates that the e¢ ciency wedge also accounts for the bulk of the peak-to-trough decline,
namely about 5.9% of the 6.5% decline, or about 91% of the decline.




                                               40
Comparing the Great Recession with Recessions of the Early 1980s
       The postwar era had essentially two periods during which most developed economies
experienced recessions at roughly the same time: the early 1980s and the Great Recession
of 2008. Here we compare the recessions of the early 1980s with the Great Recession. For
the United States, we use the NBER business cycle dates; for the OECD countries, we use
the business cycle dates as estimated by ECRI when available and otherwise use the CEPR
Euro Area Business Cycle Dates. We use the stochastic process for wedges estimated over
the 1980-2014 period for both episodes. (See the Appendix for details.)
       In Figure 5, panel A, we compare the    statistics for the e¢ ciency wedge component of
output for the two recessions. This panel shows that for most of the countries, the e¢ ciency
wedge in the Great Recession played a more important role than it did during the recessions
of the 1980s. In Figure 5, panel B, we compare the   statistics for the labor wedge component
of output for the two recessions. This panel shows that in the Great Recession, the labor
wedge accounts for over 40% of the ‡uctuations in output only in the United States, while in
the 1982 recession it does so only in Belgium, the United Kingdom, and France. In Figure 5,
panel C, we compare the      statistics for the investment wedge component of output for the
two recessions. This panel shows that in most of the countries, the investment wedge played
a larger role in the recessions of the 1980s than it did during the Great Recession.
       In Table 3 we report the   statistics for the 1982 recessions. This table shows that the
e¢ ciency wedge played the most important role for ten countries, the labor wedge for three
countries, and the investment wedge for seven countries. Together with Table 1, this table
broadly reinforces our two main …ndings for the comparison. First, the labor wedge played
an important role for output in the Great Recession only for the United States, and in the
1982 recession it played a dominant role only in Belgium, France, the United Kingdom, and
New Zealand. Second, for most countries, in the Great Recession the e¢ ciency wedge played
a more important role and the investment wedge played a less important role than they did
in the recessions of the 1980s.
       In Table 4, panels A, B, and C, we report peak-to-trough results for the 1982 recession.
Comparing Table 3 with the panels of Table 4, we see that the peak-to-trough results present
the same overall picture as our    statistics do. If we compare the classi…cation of the most


                                              41
important wedge for each country using       statistics for output to that using the peak-to-
trough decline for output, we see that they agree in all but three cases.

Summary Statistics for the Entire Period
       In Tables 5A, 5B, and 5C, we present some summary statistics for the entire period
1980:1–2014:3 about the importance of the various wedges in accounting for the movements in
output, labor, and investment. In Table 5A, for example, we report the standard deviation of
the output component due to each wedge relative to the standard deviation of output during
entire period, along with the correlation of each such output component with output. In
Tables 5B and 5C, we report similar statistics for labor and its components and for investment
and its components.
       Using these statistics to infer the importance of various wedges is more subtle than
using the    statistics. The    statistic captures in one statistic how much the component
due to a wedge moves, as well as how closely this component tracks the underlying variable.
Instead, to evaluate the importance of a wedge using the statistics in this table, we need to
jointly consider the relative standard deviations and the correlations.
       Consider France, for example. Viewing the relative standard deviations alone sug-
gests that the labor and investment wedges play roughly the same role in accounting for the
movement in output. Indeed, the relative standard deviations of the labor and investment
components of output are 93% and 92%, respectively. But the correlations of these variables
with output suggests that the investment wedge plays a much more important role. Indeed,
the labor component of output comoves negatively with output, whereas the investment
component of output comoves positively with output.
       With this perspective in mind, the averages across countries show that the e¢ ciency
wedge plays the most important role in accounting for output. The standard deviation of the
e¢ ciency component of output is 92% of output, and its correlation with output is 0.77. Even
though the labor component of output is 89% as variable as output itself, it is essentially
uncorrelated with output. In this sense, the labor wedge does not account for much of the
movements in output.




                                              42
The Importance of the Classi…cation of Consumer Durables
       Macroeconomists have long argued that theory implies it is appropriate to treat the
expenditures on consumer durables as a form of investment that yields a ‡ow of consumption
services. This treatment requires adjustments to the national income accounts classi…cation
of consumption and investment to make them consistent with the theory.
       Here we show that while this adjustment is quantitatively important for some coun-
tries, for most countries it does not change the overall …ndings. In Figure 6, panel A, we
contrast the     statistic for the e¢ ciency wedge component of output when this consistent
adjustment is made and when it is not. Clearly, the countries with statistics most a¤ected
by this adjustment are Iceland and Spain. In Iceland, for example, the contribution of the
e¢ ciency wedge falls from 26% when durables are correctly accounted for to 12% when they
are not. In Spain, the contribution of the e¢ ciency wedge increases from 11% when durables
are correctly accounted for to 29% when they are not.
       In Figure 6, panels B and C, we contrast the analogous            statistics for the labor wedge
component of output and for the investment wedge component of output. In panel C we see
that in Iceland and Spain, the contribution of the investment wedge to output is 51% and
82% when durables are correctly accounted for and 65% and 35% when they are not.

Comparing our Procedure with a Perfect Foresight Procedure
       Some authors implement a perfect foresight version of our procedure in which agents
have perfect foresight about the future evolution of the wedges. The equilibrium conditions
for the deterministic version of our prototype model are


(68) ct + xt + gt = yt ;


(69) yt = At F (kt ; (1 + )t lt );
        Ult
(70)        = [1         lt ]At (1   + )t Flt ; and
        Uct
(71) Uct [1 +   xt ]   = Uct+1 fAt+1 Fkt+1 + (1       )[1 +   xt+1 ]g:




                                                      43
Clearly, the e¢ ciency wedge, the labor wedge, and the government consumption wedge can
be recovered from the static relationships in (68), (69), and (70). Recovering the investment
wedge, however, requires solving the di¤erence equation implied by the Euler equation (71).
To do so we need to impose either an initial condition or a terminal condition. In practice,
we imposed an initial condition that the investment wedge begins at zero.
       In Figure 7, panels A, B, and C, we plot the      statistics for the perfect foresight pro-
cedure against the same statistics for our procedure. These panels show that for a signi…cant
number of the countries, the    statistics are very di¤erent. In particular, the perfect foresight
procedure greatly exaggerates the importance of the labor wedge for the United States and
Spain. Under perfect foresight, the labor wedge accounts for 92% and 72% of the movements
in output for the United States and Spain, while under the standard business cycle accounting
procedure, the labor wedge accounts for only 46% and 5%, respectively.
       We highlight two important sources for these di¤erences. One is that in the perfect
foresight procedure, private agents anticipate the evolution of future wedges perfectly and
thus react in the current period to actual future worsening or improvement of the wedges.
In this sense, the perfect foresight procedure brings with it all the undesirable properties of
the simple “news” models by which an anticipated worsening of, say, the labor wedge leads
to a current boom as households choose to increase labor supply before times worsen. The
other is that, as we noted earlier, the perfect foresight procedure uses the nonlinear version
of the …rst-order conditions (68)-(71) to compute the wedges, whereas our procedure uses
log-linearized versions of these conditions.

4. Conclusion
       We have elaborated on the business cycle accounting method proposed by CKM,
cleared up some misconceptions about the method, and applied it to compare the Great
Recession across OECD countries as well as to the recessions of the 1980s in these countries.
       We documented four …ndings. First, with the notable exception of the United States,
Spain, Ireland, and Iceland, the Great Recession was driven primarily by the e¢ ciency wedge.
Second, in the Great Recession, the labor wedge plays a dominant role only in the United
States, and the investment wedge plays a dominant role in Spain, Ireland and Iceland. Third,


                                               44
in the recessions of the 1980s, the labor wedge played a dominant role only in France, the
United Kingdom, Belgium, and New Zealand. Finally, overall in the Great Recession the
e¢ ciency wedge played a much more important role and the investment wedge played a less
important role than they did in the recessions of the 1980s.

5. Appendix
A. Data and Sources
      The data used for the business cycle accounting exercises throughout the paper come
mainly from the OECD (variable codes in parentheses). The time span is from 1980 to the
end of 2014 and, unless mentioned otherwise, at the quarterly frequency. For some coun-
tries (such as Germany, Ireland, Israel, and Mexico), data for most series were only available
starting later than 1980Q, and thus the business cycle accounting exercises were performed
for shorter samples. We obtained data from Economic Outlook 98 for the following variables
and have indicated the mnemonic for each variable in parentheses: Gross domestic product,
value, market prices (GDP), GDP de‡ator, market prices (PGDP), Gross capital formation,
current prices (ITISK), Government …nal consumption expenditures, value, expenditure ap-
proach (CG), Exports of goods and services, value, national accounts basis (XGS), Imports of
goods and services, value, national accounts basis (MGS), Hours worked per employee, total
economy (HRS), Total employment (ET). For durable goods, we obtained data from the Sys-
tem of Quarterly National Accounts. These data are a subcategory of CQRSA: private …nal
consumption expenditure by durability, national currency, current prices. For taxes on goods
and services, we used tax on goods and services as a share of GDP, annual (TAXGOODSERV,
PCGDP). For Population and Labor Force, we used Population 15-64, persons, annual.
      All data are de‡ated by the GDP de‡ator. Data on durables are available for di¤erent
time spans and frequency. When data were available at a quarterly frequency, the series
of durables were computed by regressing durables on a constant, Gross Capital Formation
(ITISK) and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in logs, for the available time span, and then
using the coe¢ cient estimates to compute the series for durables from the beginning of the
sample. When data on durables were only available at an annual frequency, quarterly obser-
vations were estimated using maximum likelihood estimates of a state space model and, as
before, series on gross capital formation and gross domestic product. Once we get durables at

                                             45
the quarterly frequency, we extend the series to the beginning of the sample by the method
described earlier. Population data are available at an annual frequency and are interpolated
to quarterly frequency using cubic splines. All other transformations are standard and con-
structed as follows: per capita output (y) is given by real GDP      sales taxes + services from
consumer durables (with return = 4%) + depreciation of durables (at an annualized rate
of 25%), de‡ated by the GDP de‡ator and divided by population 16-64; per capita hours
(h): hours worked total employment, divided by population 16-64; per capita investment
(x): gross capital formation + personal consumption expenditures on durables net of sales
taxes, all de‡ated by the GDP de‡ator and divided by population 16-64; per capita govern-
ment consumption (g): government …nal consumption expenditures + Exports of goods and
services     Imports of goods and services, all de‡ated by the GDP de‡ator and divided by
population 16-64.

B. Parameterization and Calibration
         The period utility function is


       log c +   log(1   l):


The parameters held …xed across countries are as follows: the annualized discount factor        =
0.975, the annualized depreciation rate     = 0.05,    = 2.5, and the capital share   = 0:33.
         Other parameters are speci…c to each country and shown in the following table, where

 n   is the average growth rate of population,   the growth rate of labor-augmenting technology,
and a the adjustment costs coe¢ cient. To compute , we set it so that detrended log output
is mean zero over the sample period.
         The other parameters that are country speci…c are the stochastic processes for the
wedges, which are obtained from the maximum likelihood estimation procedure. These es-
timates are available online in a longer appendix, which includes all tables and …gures in
the paper and auxiliary reports for each country with additional tables and …gures. (The
website is http://pedrobrinca.pt/2016-accounting-for-business-cycles.) Replication …les are
also available at this website.



                                                 46
                      Table 1: Parameters   Speci…c to Each Country
                        Country                 n             a
                        Australia            0.014 0.021 11.646
                        Austria              0.005 0.022 12.901
                        Belgium              0.003 0.020 13.427
                        Canada               0.011 0.017 12.694
                        Denmark              0.003 0.020 13.639
                        Finland              0.002 0.030 12.058
                        France               0.005 0.018 13.672
                        Germany             -0.001 0.019 14.451
                        Iceland              0.012 0.024 11.516
                        Ireland              0.014 0.046 9.066
                        Israel               0.020 0.021 10.872
                        Italy                0.002 0.015 14.715
                        Japan               -0.001 0.021 14.121
                        Korea                0.013 0.051 8.822
                        Luxembourg           0.013 0.036 10.060
                        Mexico               0.018 0.007 13.141
                        New Zealand          0.012 0.016 12.696
                        Netherlands          0.005 0.024 12.597
                        Norway               0.008 0.023 12.151
                        Spain                0.007 0.022 12.394
                        Sweden               0.004 0.022 13.060
                        Switzerland          0.009 0.014 13.666
                        United Kingdom       0.003 0.025 12.824
                        USA                  0.010 0.019 12.551


6. References
      Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Finan-
cial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,”in John B. Taylor and Michael
Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1C. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
      Brinca, Pedro (2013). "Monetary Business Cycle Accounting for Sweden," BE
Journal of Macroeconomics, 13(1): 1085-1119.
      Brinca, Pedro (2014). "Distortions in the Neoclassical Growth Model: A Cross-
Country Analysis," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 47: 1-19.
      Buera, Francisco J., and Benjamin Moll (2015). "Aggregate Implications of a
Credit Crunch: The Importance of Heterogeneity," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
nomics, 7(3): 1-42.


                                            47
      Cavalcanti, Tiago V. (2007). "Business Cycle and Level Accounting: The Case of
Portugal." Portuguese Economic Journal 6(1): 47-64.
      Chakraborty, Suparna, and Keisuke Otsu (2013). "Business Cycle Accounting
of the BRIC Economies." BE Journal of Macroeconomics 13(1): 381-413.
      Chakraborty, Suparna (2006). "Business Cycle Accounting of the Indian Econ-
omy." Indian Economic Journal 54(2): 117.
      Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (2005). "Sudden
stops and Output Drops." American Economic Review 95(2): 381-387.
      Chari, V. V., Patrick Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (2004). "Business
Cycle Accounting". NBER Working Paper 10351.
      Chari, V. V., Patrick Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (2006). "Business
Cycle Accounting". Econometrica, 75(3): 781-836.
      Cho, Dooyeon, and Antonio Doblas-Madrid (2013). "Business Cycle Ac-
counting East and West: Asian Finance and the Investment Wedge." Review of Economic
Dynamics 16(4): 724-744.
      Christiano, Lawrence J., Joshua M. Davis (2006). “Two Flaws in Business
Cycle Accounting.”NBER Working Paper 12647.
      Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (2009). “Financial Intermediation and
Credit Policy in Business Cycle Analysis,”in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford,
eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
      Gertler, Mark, & Peter Karadi (2011). "A model of unconventional monetary
policy". Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(1): 17-34.
      Gertler, Mark, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Albert Queralto (2012). "Fi-
nancial Crises, Bank Risk Exposure and Government Financial Policy. Journal of Monetary
Economics, 59: S17-S34.
      Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell (1997). “ Long-
Run Implications of Investment-Speci…c Technological Change.”American Economic Review,
87(3): 342-362.
      Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott: “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles;
an Empirical Investigation,”Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 29(1): 1–16.


                                            48
      Kersting, Erasmus K. (2008). "The 1980s Recession in the UK: A Business Cycle
Accounting Perspective." Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(1): 179-191.
      Kobayashi, Keiichiro, and Masaru Inaba (2006). "Business Cycle Accounting
for the Japanese Economy." Japan and the World Economy 18(4): 418-440.
      Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore 1997. "Credit Cycles", Journal of Polit-
ical Economy, 105(2): 211–248.
      Mulligan, Casey (2009). “What Caused the Recession of 2008? Hints from Labor
Productivity.”NBER Working Paper 14729.
      Ohanian, Lee E.(2010). “The Economic Crisis from a Neoclassical Perspective".
Journal of Economic Perspectives. 24(4): 45-66.
      Ohanian, Lee and Andrea Raffo. (2012). “Aggregate Hours Worked in OECD
Countries: New Measurement and Implications for Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 59(1): 40-56.
      Otsu, Keisuke (2010): "A Neoclassical Analysis of the Asian crisis: Business Cycle
Accounting for a Small Open Economy." BE Journal of Macroeconomics, 10(1): 1-39.
      Rodriguez-Lopez, Jesus, & Mario Solis Garcia (2016). Accounting for Span-
ish Business Cycles. Macroeconomic Dynamics, 20(3): 685-714.
      Sustek, Roman (2011). "Monetary Business Cycle Accounting." Review of Eco-
nomic Dynamics, 14(4): 592-612.




                                           49
                                                     Figure 1A


                              Output, Labor, and Investment for Fran    e, 2008:1-2014:4




                     110




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      90




                      80
                                        Output
                                        Labor
                                        Investment


                      70
                       2008    2009      2010        2011        2012   2013        2014   2015




                                                            50
                                                   Figure 1B


                              Output and Three Wedges for Fran       e, 2008:1-2014:4




                     105




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      95




                                     Output
                      90             Efficiency wedge
                                     Labor wedge
                                     Investment wedge



                      85
                       2008   2009     2010       2011        2012      2013       2014   2015




                                                         51
                                                    Figure 1C


                              Output and Output Components for Fran   e, 2008:1-2014:4




                     105




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      95




                      90               Output
                                       Efficiency wedge component
                                       Labor wedge component
                                       Investment wedge component


                      85
                       2008     2009     2010      2011        2012   2013       2014    2015




                                                          52
                                                   Figure 1D


                              Labor and Labor Components for Fran    e, 2008:1-2014:4




                     105




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      95
                                      Labor
                                      Efficiency wedge component
                                      Labor wedge component
                                      Investment wedge component


                      90
                       2008   2009      2010      2011        2012    2013        2014   2015




                                                         53
                                                     Figure 1E


                           Investment and Investment Components for Fran   e, 2008:1-2014:4




                     110




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      90




                      80
                                        Investment
                                        Efficiency wedge component
                                        Labor wedge component
                                        Investment wedge component

                      70
                       2008     2009     2010       2011        2012   2013       2014        2015




                                                           54
                                                        Figure 2A


                           Output, Labor, and Investment for the United States, 2008:1-2014:4




                     110




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      90




                      80




                      70                   Output
                                           Labor
                                           Investment


                      60
                       2008       2009      2010        2011        2012   2013     2014        2015




                                                               55
                                                        Figure 2B


                              Output and Three Wedges for the United States, 2008:1-2014:4




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      90


                                          Output
                                          Efficiency wedge
                                          Labor wedge
                                          Investment wedge



                      80
                       2008       2009      2010       2011        2012   2013     2014      2015




                                                              56
                                                       Figure 2C


                           Output and Output Components for the United States, 2008:1-2014:4




                     105




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      95




                      90                  Output
                                          Efficiency wedge component
                                          Labor wedge component
                                          Investment wedge component


                      85
                       2008       2009      2010      2011        2012   2013      2014        2015




                                                             57
                                                      Figure 2D


                           Labor and Labor Components for the United States, 2008:1-2014:4




                     105




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      95




                      90                 Labor
                                         Efficiency wedge component
                                         Labor wedge component
                                         Investment wedge component


                      85
                       2008      2009      2010      2011        2012   2013      2014       2015




                                                            58
                                                      Figure 2E


                     Investment and Investment Components for the United States, 2008:1-2014:4




                     100




                      90
Index (2008:1=100)




                      80




                                        Investment
                      70
                                        Efficiency wedge component
                                        Labor wedge component
                                        Investment wedge component


                      60
                       2008     2009      2010      2011        2012   2013      2014      2015




                                                           59
                                                      Figure 3A


                              Output, Labor, and Investment for Ireland, 2008:1-2014:4




                     110


                     100


                      90
Index (2008:1=100)




                      80


                      70


                      60


                      50
                                         Output
                                         Labor
                      40                 Investment


                      30
                       2008     2009      2010        2011        2012   2013     2014   2015




                                                             60
                                                  Figure 3B


                             Output and Three Wedges for Ireland, 2008:1-2014:4




                     110




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      90




                      80

                                    Output
                                    Efficiency wedge
                                    Labor wedge
                      70            Investment wedge



                      2008   2009     2010       2011        2012   2013     2014   2015




                                                        61
                                                     Figure 3C


                              Output and Output Components for Ireland, 2008:1-2014:4




                     110




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      90




                      80                Output
                                        Efficiency wedge component
                                        Labor wedge component
                                        Investment wedge component


                      70
                       2008     2009      2010      2011        2012   2013      2014   2015




                                                           62
                                                    Figure 3D


                              Labor and Labor Components for Ireland, 2008:1-2014:4




                     110




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      90




                      80               Labor
                                       Efficiency wedge component
                                       Labor wedge component
                                       Investment wedge component


                      70
                       2008    2009      2010      2011        2012   2013      2014   2015




                                                          63
                                                      Figure 3E


                           Investment and Investment Components for Ireland, 2008:1-2014:4




                     120




                     100
Index (2008:1=100)




                      80




                      60



                                         Investment
                      40                 Efficiency wedge component
                                         Labor wedge component
                                         Investment wedge component


                      20
                       2008      2009      2010      2011        2012   2013      2014       2015




                                                            64
                                                                 Figure 4A


                                                 De   omposition of Output, 2008:1-2011:3



                                  100

                                  90

                                  80
Contribution of Labor Wedge (%)




                                  70

                                  60

                                  50
                                                 USA

                                  40

                                  30
                                                      IRL                                  AUS
                                  20                                     KOR
                                                         ISL
                                                                        CAN
                                                                          MEXJPNITAGBR
                                  10                                NZL
                                             ESP                             DNK AUTNOR     BEL
                                                                                       ISR
                                                                                         DEU CHE
                                                                                              NLD
                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                                 FINLU
                                                                                                    SW
                                   0
                                        0   10     20       30   40    50    60     70  80   90     100
                                                        Contribution of Efficiency Wedge (%)




                                                                     65
                                                                   Figure 4B


                                                   De    omposition of Labor, 2008:1-2011:3



                                  100

                                  90

                                  80
Contribution of Labor Wedge (%)




                                  70        USA BEL


                                  60

                                  50

                                  40

                                  30         IRL
                                                                  ISLISR
                                                                    KOR
                                                       MEX
                                  20                GBR
                                                    JPN   DEU
                                                     CANNZL
                                                    ESP                                 LUX
                                                   ITA
                                                           DNK                            AUS
                                  10                      NOR            NLD
                                                          AUT
                                                                                  FRA                  CHE
                                                                           FIN            SWE
                                   0
                                        0    10     20       30     40       50    60     70      80   90    100
                                                           Contribution of Efficiency Wedge (%)




                                                                         66
                                                               Figure 4C


                                             De   omposition of Investment, 2008:1-2011:3



                                  100

                                  90

                                  80
Contribution of Labor Wedge (%)




                                  70

                                  60

                                  50

                                  40

                                  30
                                                                               AUS
                                  20                                             BEL
                                                          JPN
                                                      MEX GBR
                                                            LUX
                                  10                ISR        KOR
                                                             CAN
                                           IRL
                                          USA     ITA                                AUT
                                            NZL   DNK         DEU                          FRA NOR
                                                                                     FIN NLD
                                       ISL
                                       ESP
                                         CHE                                                  SWE
                                   0
                                     0      10    20     30     40        50     60     70    80     90   100
                                                       Contribution of Efficiency Wedge (%)




                                                                     67
                                                                                   Figure 5A


                                                        Effi   ien   y Component of Output for Two Re          essions



                                              100
                                                                                                                          SWE

                                              90
                                                                                                     ITA                    FIN
                                                                     USA                                       NOR
Contribution of Efficiency Wedge (%), 1980s




                                              80                                                                          LUX

                                              70
                                                                                                     JPN
                                              60                                                                          CHE
                                                                                                             AUS
                                              50
                                                                                        NZL
                                              40                           ISL
                                                                                                                          NLD
                                              30                                                           AUT
                                                                                             CAN
                                              20
                                                               ESP
                                                                                              KOR
                                              10
                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                    DNK                  BELFRA
                                               0
                                                    0      10        20     30     40        50     60  70       80      90   100
                                                                      Contribution of Efficiency Wedge (%), 2008-11




                                                                                        68
                                                                       Figure 5B


                                                 Labor Component of Output for Two Re             essions



                                         100
                                                BEL

                                         90           GBR

                                         80
Contribution of Labor Wedge (%), 1980s




                                         70
                                               FRA
                                         60

                                         50

                                         40

                                         30
                                                ESP
                                                            AUS
                                         20          NZL
                                              NLD
                                                DNK
                                              CHE
                                         10 LUXAUT  JPN KOR
                                                     CAN                         USA
                                               NOR
                                             FIN  ITA ISL
                                          0 SWE
                                           0     10     20      30     40        50    60    70        80   90   100
                                                            Contribution of Labor Wedge (%), 2008-11




                                                                            69
                                                                               Figure 5C


                                                    Investment Component of Output for Two Re             essions



                                              100

                                              90
                                                                         DNK
Contribution of Investment Wedge (%), 1980s




                                              80
                                                                KOR
                                              70
                                                                CAN

                                              60
                                                          AUT

                                              50                                                                ESP
                                                     NLD                                  ISL
                                              40
                                                    FRA
                                              30     CHE

                                                           JPN
                                              20
                                                                                    NZL
                                                    AUS
                                                    FIN           ITA
                                              10
                                                          GBR                USA
                                                   LUX
                                                   SWE
                                                     NOR
                                                     BEL
                                               0
                                                 0     10  20           30     40        50     60   70    80         90   100
                                                                Contribution of Investment Wedge (%), 2008-11




                                                                                    70
                                                                                                       Figure 6A


                                                                   Effi      ien   y Component of Output for Two Investment Measures



                                                                   100                                                                             SW
                                                                                                                                                FINLU
Contribution of Efficiency Wedge (%), Durables not in Investment




                                                                                                                                              NLD
                                                                   90                                                                          FRA
                                                                                                                                              CHE
                                                                                                                                       DEU BEL
                                                                   80                                                                ISR

                                                                   70                                                      ITA    NOR
                                                                                                                         DNKGBR
                                                                                                                                 AUS
                                                                   60                                                     JPN
                                                                                                                       MEX     AUT
                                                                                                             NZL KOR
                                                                   50                                           CAN


                                                                   40

                                                                   30               ESP
                                                                                           IRL
                                                                   20
                                                                                        USA ISL
                                                                   10

                                                                    0
                                                                         0         10     20     30     40        50     60   70      80     90   100
                                                                                   Contribution of Efficiency Wedge (%), Durables in Investment




                                                                                                             71
                                                                                             Figure 6B


                                                                Labor Component of Output for Two Investment Measures



                                                              100
Contribution of Labor Wedge (%), Durables not in Investment




                                                              90

                                                              80

                                                              70

                                                              60                                       USA

                                                              50

                                                              40
                                                                                    IRL
                                                                                    AUS
                                                              30     ESP

                                                                             ISL
                                                                               KOR
                                                              20
                                                                            CAN
                                                                          MEX
                                                              10          GBR
                                                                         ITA
                                                                         NZL
                                                                           JPN
                                                                       DNK
                                                                     ISR
                                                                       BEL
                                                                        AUT
                                                                      NOR
                                                                    FRA
                                                                    NLD
                                                                    CHE
                                                                    DEU
                                                                   LUX
                                                                   FIN
                                                                   SWE
                                                               0
                                                                 0      10     20     30     40        50    60    70      80        90   100
                                                                           Contribution of Labor Wedge (%), Durables in Investment




                                                                                                  72
                                                                                               Figure 6C


                                                                   Investment Component of Output for Two Investment Measures



                                                                   100
Contribution of Investment Wedge (%), Durables not in Investment




                                                                   90

                                                                   80

                                                                   70
                                                                                                           ISL
                                                                   60

                                                                   50

                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                  ESP
                                                                            AUT                      NZL IRL
                                                                   30
                                                                                          USA
                                                                                        MEX
                                                                   20            JPN     DNK
                                                                                   KOR
                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                DEUCAN
                                                                           NOR ISRITA
                                                                   10      BEL
                                                                            CHE
                                                                          FRA
                                                                           NLD
                                                                         FIN
                                                                         AUS
                                                                        SWE
                                                                        LUX
                                                                    0
                                                                      0      10    20  30       40        50     60   70     80         90   100
                                                                           Contribution of Investment Wedge (%), Durables in Investment




                                                                                                     73
                                                                                          Figure 7A


                   Effi                                     ien     y Component of Output for Two Expe         tational Assumptions



                                                          100                                                                      FINSW
                                                                                                                                 NLD
                                                          90                                                                FRA
                                                                                                                  NOR
Contribution of Efficiency Wedge (%), Perfect Foresight




                                                                                                           JPNGBR
                                                                                                            ITA    ISR   BEL   LU
                                                          80                                                         DEU
                                                                                                          DNK
                                                          70                                                      AUT
                                                                                                                                CHE
                                                                                                                      AUS
                                                          60
                                                                                  ISL
                                                          50                                    NZL KOR

                                                          40                                         CAN
                                                                                                       MEX
                                                                               IRL
                                                          30

                                                          20
                                                                       ESP
                                                          10
                                                                           USA
                                                           0
                                                                0     10     20      30    40        50   60     70     80      90    100
                                                                           Contribution of Efficiency Wedge (%), Standard BCA




                                                                                                74
                                                                                 Figure 7B


                                                     Labor Component of Output for Two Expe            tational Assumptions



                                                     100

                                                                                            USA
                                                     90
Contribution of Labor Wedge (%), Perfect Foresight




                                                     80
                                                           ESP
                                                     70

                                                     60

                                                     50
                                                                       IRL
                                                                    KOR
                                                     40
                                                                          AUS
                                                     30
                                                              NZL
                                                     20
                                                                  CAN
                                                                   ISL
                                                                MEX
                                                     10 CHE   AUT
                                                             DNKGBR
                                                               ITA
                                                             BEL JPN
                                                           ISR
                                                          DEU
                                                          FRA
                                                         LUXNOR
                                                          NLD
                                                      0 SWE
                                                         FIN
                                                       0      10     20     30    40        50    60      70    80    90      100
                                                                    Contribution of Labor Wedge (%), Standard BCA




                                                                                       75
                                                                                      Figure 7C


        Investment Component of Output for Two Expe                                                            tational Assumptions



                                                          100

                                                          90
Contribution of Investment Wedge (%), Perfect Foresight




                                                          80

                                                          70

                                                          60

                                                          50

                                                          40                   MEX

                                                          30
                                                                         CAN
                                                          20                                        ISL
                                                                                            NZL
                                                                   CHE                            IRL
                                                                      AUT         DNK                                     ESP
                                                          10           DEU
                                                                  BEL    ISR
                                                                  NOR JPN
                                                                 FRA
                                                                AUS
                                                               LUX        KOR
                                                                         GBR ITA
                                                               SWENLD               USA
                                                                FIN
                                                           0
                                                             0      10    20     30    40        50       60   70    80         90   100
                                                                      Contribution of Investment Wedge (%), Standard BCA




                                                                                            76
                                          Table 1


φ-statisti    s for Output, Labor, and Investment Components, Great Re               ession




                    Output components            Labor components     Investment components

Countries:          φYA    φYτl    φYτx      φL
                                              A         φL
                                                         τl    φL
                                                                τx     φX
                                                                        A      φX
                                                                                τl       φX
                                                                                          τx


Australia           0.73   0.22   0.02       0.65      0.12    0.13   0.53    0.25      0.04
Austria             0.70   0.07   0.11       0.27      0.08    0.19   0.61    0.06      0.21
Belgium             0.87   0.05   0.05       0.13      0.69    0.14   0.58    0.19      0.15
Canada              0.49   0.13   0.18       0.17      0.15    0.32   0.40    0.08      0.47
Denmark             0.58   0.06   0.30       0.30      0.12    0.47   0.18    0.04      0.72
Finland             0.94   0.01   0.03       0.46      0.01    0.07   0.61    0.03      0.30
France              0.92   0.02   0.04       0.55      0.04    0.30   0.73    0.04      0.17
Germany             0.79   0.03   0.12       0.27      0.16    0.33   0.41    0.04      0.50
Iceland             0.25   0.15   0.51       0.35      0.26    0.27   0.01    0.01      0.95
Ireland             0.20   0.23   0.48       0.06      0.28    0.62   0.06    0.06      0.82
Israel              0.77   0.03   0.16       0.39      0.25    0.08   0.20    0.08      0.60
Italy               0.62   0.09   0.22       0.14      0.14    0.64   0.18    0.05      0.74
Japan               0.60   0.11   0.15       0.16      0.16    0.45   0.35    0.16      0.32
Korea               0.51   0.17   0.18       0.38      0.23    0.16   0.44    0.09      0.34
Luxembourg          0.97   0.01   0.01       0.62      0.16    0.15   0.39    0.11      0.07
Mexico              0.54   0.11   0.28       0.21      0.21    0.49   0.24    0.13      0.51
Netherlands         0.90   0.02   0.05       0.42      0.08    0.25   0.69    0.03      0.24
New Zealand         0.42   0.08   0.42       0.24      0.15    0.51   0.07    0.03      0.86
Norway              0.75   0.04   0.05       0.27      0.10    0.23   0.81    0.03      0.05
Spain               0.11   0.05   0.82       0.16      0.15    0.62   0.02    0.01      0.96
Sweden              0.98   0.00   0.01       0.67      0.02    0.17   0.80    0.01      0.17
Switzerland         0.89   0.02   0.07       0.87      0.03    0.03   0.03    0.01      0.94
United Kingdom      0.65   0.11   0.15       0.16      0.19    0.55   0.34    0.13      0.42
United States       0.16   0.46   0.32       0.04      0.70    0.25   0.05    0.05      0.88

Average             0.64   0.09   0.20       0.33      0.19    0.31   0.36    0.07      0.48




                                            77
                                         Table 2A


  Peak to Trough De         lines in Output and Components, Great Re            ession




                                                  Changes in Output and its Components

Countries:                Trough            ∆Y             ∆YA          ∆Yτl         ∆Yτx

Australia                  2011:1            -5.6           -5.6         -2.0            0.7
Austria                    2010:1            -9.2           -6.2         3.3             -4.7
Belgium                    2010:1            -7.4           -5.8         -2.3            -0.1
Canada                     2009:3            -6.5           -3.2         0.0             -2.1
Denmark                    2009:4            -9.9           -6.9         1.4             -5.3
Finland                    2010:1           -14.1          -12.5         4.2             -3.3
France                     2009:3            -6.5           -5.9         1.5             -2.8
Germany                    2009:2            -8.6           -7.2         2.3             -3.5
Iceland                    2011:1           -14.3           -4.6         2.2         -15.5
Ireland                    2009:4           -14.9           -5.3         -3.6            -7.7
Israel                     2009:2            -4.8           -3.3         -1.6            -0.8
Italy                      2010:1           -10.5           -6.7         -0.7            -3.5
Japan                      2009:1           -10.0           -8.3         -0.4            0.4
Korea                      2009:2            -7.4           -6.1         4.5             -5.6
Luxembourg                 2009:4           -15.6          -16.5         1.2             5.9
Mexico                     2009:2            -5.4           -4.7         0.5             -2.0
Netherlands                2010:3            -8.5           -7.4         1.2             -2.3
New Zealand                2010:4            -7.6           -5.3         -0.2            -2.2
Norway                     2011:2           -11.9           -8.8         1.1             0.5
Spain                      2013:4           -19.7           -9.2         -0.6        -10.8
Sweden                     2009:4           -10.5           -9.5         2.9             -2.7
Switzerland                2009:2            -5.7           -5.7         3.3             -4.8
United Kingdom             2012:2           -14.8          -10.3         0.1             -2.9
United States              2009:3            -7.0           -1.9         -3.4            -4.5

Average                                      -9.9           -7.0         0.6             -3.3

Note: The date of the peak is 2008:1 for all countries.




                                             78
                                         Table 2B


   Peak to Trough De         lines in Labor and Components, Great Re             ession




                                                    Changes in Labor and its Components

Countries:                 Trough            ∆L             ∆LA          ∆Lτl         ∆Lτx

Australia                  2011:1            -0.5            -1.0         -3.1            1.1
Austria                    2010:1            -4.9            -1.3         5.0             -7.0
Belgium                    2010:1            -3.2            -0.8         -3.4            -0.1
Canada                     2009:3            -5.7            -0.7         0.0             -3.1
Denmark                    2009:4            -5.3            -1.1         2.2             -7.9
Finland                    2010:1            -2.9            -1.3         6.3             -4.9
France                     2009:3            -2.8            -1.9         2.3             -4.1
Germany                    2009:2            -3.6            -2.0         3.5             -5.2
Iceland                    2011:1            -9.1             1.0         3.4         -22.4
Ireland                    2009:4           -12.6             0.0         -5.3        -11.3
Israel                     2009:2            -1.6             0.1         -2.3            -1.3
Italy                      2010:1            -5.2            -0.5         -1.0            -5.1
Japan                      2009:1            -3.4            -1.2         -0.6            0.6
Korea                      2009:2            -2.9            -1.7         6.8             -8.3
Luxembourg                 2009:4             3.7             0.0         1.7             9.0
Mexico                     2009:2            -2.5            -1.1         0.7             -3.0
Netherlands                2010:3            -1.1            -0.5         1.9             -3.4
New Zealand                2010:4            -3.3            -1.2         -0.3            -3.3
Norway                     2011:2            -3.3             1.0         1.7             0.8
Spain                      2013:4           -14.8            -3.7         -0.8        -15.7
Sweden                     2009:4            -3.2            -2.0         4.3             -4.1
Switzerland                2009:2            -1.2            -1.3         5.1             -7.1
United Kingdom             2012:2            -3.8            -1.0         0.1             -4.2
United States              2009:3            -7.5            -0.9         -5.0            -6.7

Average                                      -4.2            -1.0         1.0             -4.9

Note: The date of the peak is 2008:1 for all countries.




                                             79
                                         Table 2C


Peak to Trough De         lines in Investment and Components, Great Re           ession




                                              Changes in Investment and its Components

Countries:                Trough            ∆X            ∆XA         ∆Xτl         ∆Xτx

Australia                  2011:1          -13.0           -9.8        -3.5          3.1
Austria                    2010:1          -19.6          -10.2         8.4         -16.2
Belgium                    2010:1          -21.8          -11.9       -10.1          -0.3
Canada                     2009:3          -13.9           -7.0        -0.1          -9.7
Denmark                    2009:4          -33.1          -14.7         5.0         -23.8
Finland                    2010:1          -23.9          -19.7         8.2         -12.6
France                     2009:3          -18.3          -12.2         4.4         -11.2
Germany                    2009:2          -19.9          -14.2         4.6         -14.5
Iceland                    2011:1          -56.6           -4.6         6.5         -55.0
Ireland                    2009:4          -46.9           -9.5        -5.9         -35.3
Israel                     2009:2          -14.9           -5.6        -4.8          -4.1
Italy                      2010:1          -18.4           -9.6        -2.2         -12.7
Japan                      2009:1          -15.4          -13.1        -2.2          1.7
Korea                      2009:2          -23.2           -9.8         9.0         -20.5
Luxembourg                 2009:4          -13.2          -28.2        -2.7         30.2
Mexico                     2009:2          -18.3           -8.7        -0.4          -9.7
Netherlands                2010:3          -16.6          -13.4         4.2         -10.0
New Zealand                2010:4          -16.7           -9.8         1.5          -9.9
Norway                     2011:2          -16.6          -14.4         4.5          2.0
Spain                      2013:4          -47.9          -17.8         2.2         -38.9
Sweden                     2009:4          -21.8          -21.4         8.4         -12.7
Switzerland                2009:2          -18.7          -10.4         8.6         -21.8
United Kingdom             2012:2          -28.0          -17.5        -1.5         -12.7
United States              2009:3          -23.2           -4.9        -3.0         -21.6

Average                                    -23.3          -12.4         1.6         -13.2

Note: The date of the peak is 2008:1 for all countries.




                                             80
                                           Table 3


 φ-statisti     s for Output, Labor, and Investment Components, 1982 Re           ession




                     Output components            Labor components     Investment components

Countries:           φYA    φYτl    φYτx      φL
                                               A         φL
                                                          τl    φL
                                                                 τx     φX
                                                                         A      φX
                                                                                 τl    φX
                                                                                        τx


Australia            0.54   0.22   0.14       0.22      0.39    0.23   0.43    0.18    0.24
Austria              0.29   0.07   0.57       0.19      0.13    0.59   0.04    0.02    0.91
Belgium              0.01   0.98   0.00       0.09      0.82    0.03   0.04    0.91    0.01
Canada               0.23   0.08   0.67       0.11      0.07    0.82   0.13    0.04    0.80
Denmark              0.01   0.12   0.87       0.02      0.28    0.68   0.01    0.02    0.96
Finland              0.86   0.01   0.12       0.87      0.06    0.02   0.04    0.01    0.94
France               0.02   0.62   0.33       0.07      0.63    0.25   0.04    0.10    0.82
Iceland              0.40   0.03   0.43       0.41      0.11    0.07   0.13    0.03    0.77
Italy                0.86   0.01   0.12       0.97      0.01    0.01   0.10    0.02    0.85
Japan                0.62   0.10   0.22       0.15      0.15    0.62   0.29    0.13    0.47
Korea                0.13   0.09   0.72       0.09      0.12    0.72   0.02    0.02    0.94
Luxembourg           0.79   0.09   0.03       0.05      0.72    0.01   0.10    0.73    0.02
Netherlands          0.34   0.13   0.44       0.13      0.28    0.50   0.03    0.01    0.94
New Zealand          0.46   0.20   0.17       0.22      0.47    0.09   0.17    0.06    0.61
Norway               0.84   0.01   0.01       0.66      0.23    0.07   0.11    0.34    0.10
Spain                0.16   0.26   0.50       0.12      0.28    0.54   0.04    0.04    0.90
Sweden               0.97   0.01   0.02       0.85      0.04    0.06   0.52    0.05    0.34
Switzerland          0.57   0.10   0.29       0.22      0.59    0.16   0.04    0.03    0.92
United Kingdom       0.04   0.88   0.04       0.06      0.85    0.05   0.17    0.49    0.15
United States        0.83   0.07   0.06       0.21      0.54    0.19   0.64    0.14    0.15

Average              0.42   0.22   0.29       0.28      0.33    0.30   0.17    0.16    0.59




                                             81
                                      Table 4A


        Peak to Trough De    lines in Output and Components, 1982 Re          ession




                                                 Changes in Output and its Components

Countries:            Peak         Trough        ∆Y        ∆YA        ∆Yτl             ∆Yτx

Australia            1981:3        1983:2        -10.4      -5.9       -1.4             -3.6
Austria              1980:1        1983:1         -7.2      -2.0       0.5              -6.4
Belgium              1980:1        1983:2         -8.6      -3.6       -7.9             2.4
Canada               1981:2        1982:4         -8.7      -5.1       -1.0             -6.5
Denmark              1980:1        1981:2         -5.4       0.4       -2.7             -4.8
Finland              1980:3        1984:2         -8.3      -7.0       0.9              -5.4
France               1982:1        1984:4         -4.4       1.5       -3.5             -2.5
Iceland              1980:1        1983:4        -10.5     -13.2       7.3              -5.5
Italy                1980:2        1983:2         -9.2      -8.3       6.1              -9.2
Japan                1991:2        1995:1         -5.8      -3.7       -0.9             -1.9
Korea                1997:3        1998:3        -11.5      -3.4       -2.2             -7.1
Luxembourg           1980:1        1983:1        -13.2      -9.7       -3.7             3.4
Netherlands          1980:1        1982:3        -11.2      -5.2       -3.0             -3.9
New Zealand          1981:3        1983:1         -5.1      -3.3       -0.9             -1.9
Norway               1980:1        1982:3         -7.7      -6.7       0.3              3.6
Spain                1980:1        1984:2        -13.9       0.3       -5.9            -10.8
Sweden               1980:1        1983:1         -6.3      -6.2       1.4              -2.3
Switzerland          1981:3        1982:4         -6.6      -6.2       -0.3             -2.6
United Kingdom       1980:1        1982:2         -8.7      -1.1       -8.9             1.7
United States        1980:1        1982:4         -9.1      -6.8       -1.3             -1.6

Average                                           -8.1      -4.2       -1.7             -3.2




                                            82
                                      Table 4B


        Peak to Trough De     lines in Labor and Components, 1982 Re      ession




                                                  Changes in Labor and its Components

Countries:           Peak          Trough        ∆L        ∆LA        ∆Lτl         ∆Lτx

Australia            1981:3        1983:2         -7.7      -1.1       -2.1         -5.3
Austria              1980:1        1983:1         -6.3      -0.1        0.7         -9.4
Belgium              1980:1        1983:2         -8.9      -1.4      -11.6         3.7
Canada               1981:2        1982:4         -8.4      -3.6       -1.6         -9.7
Denmark              1980:1        1981:2         -8.0      0.2        -4.0         -7.1
Finland              1980:3        1984:2         -1.2      0.3         1.3         -8.0
France               1982:1        1984:4         -7.3      -0.6       -5.2         -3.7
Iceland              1980:1        1983:4         3.9       -1.0       11.2         -8.2
Italy                1980:2        1983:2         -2.7      -2.9        9.4        -13.4
Japan                1991:2        1995:1         -4.8      -0.8       -1.3         -2.9
Korea                1997:3        1998:3        -11.8      -0.1       -3.2        -10.4
Luxembourg           1980:1        1983:1         -5.1      -0.3       -5.5         5.1
Netherlands          1980:1        1982:3         -7.0      1.0        -4.5         -5.8
New Zealand          1981:3        1983:1         -3.9      -0.6       -1.4         -2.8
Norway               1980:1        1982:3         -0.5      1.3         0.4         5.5
Spain                1980:1        1984:2        -15.8      1.3        -8.7        -15.7
Sweden               1980:1        1983:1         -0.4      -0.6        2.0         -3.4
Switzerland          1981:3        1982:4         -1.5      -1.1       -0.5         -3.9
United Kingdom       1980:1        1982:2         -9.5      -0.1      -13.0         2.5
United States        1980:1        1982:4         -4.2      -1.0       -2.0         -2.4

Average                                           -5.7      -0.6       -2.4         -4.6




                                            83
                                 Table 4C


   Peak to Trough De   lines in Investment and Components, 1982 Re         ession




                                            Changes in Investment and its Components

Countries:        Peak        Trough        ∆X         ∆XA         ∆Xτl        ∆Xτx

Australia         1981:3      1983:2        -25.1       -10.3       -2.1       -14.3
Austria           1980:1      1983:1        -21.0        -2.9        2.8       -21.5
Belgium           1980:1      1983:2        -29.9        -9.2      -25.4        12.8
Canada            1981:2      1982:4        -35.4       -15.5        0.3       -27.7
Denmark           1980:1      1981:2        -25.6        1.2        -4.4       -21.7
Finland           1980:3      1984:2        -23.3        -9.8        4.6       -20.0
France            1982:1      1984:4        -14.2        1.4        -5.3       -10.3
Iceland           1980:1      1983:4        -25.7       -20.7       14.9       -23.6
Italy             1980:2      1983:2        -32.2       -15.1       11.5       -30.9
Japan             1991:2      1995:1        -17.1        -6.4       -2.6        -8.2
Korea             1997:3      1998:3        -31.1        -3.9       -1.3       -25.2
Luxembourg        1980:1      1983:1         -9.5       -17.6       -7.9        16.6
Netherlands       1980:1      1982:3        -23.2        -7.3       -2.9       -16.8
New Zealand       1981:3      1983:1        -14.4        -6.0       -0.4        -8.4
Norway            1980:1      1982:3         -1.2       -10.4        1.2        15.4
Spain             1980:1      1984:2        -39.5        3.0        -8.0       -38.9
Sweden            1980:1      1983:1        -20.8       -13.2        4.7       -10.8
Switzerland       1981:3      1982:4        -13.2       -10.6        1.0       -12.5
United Kingdom    1980:1      1982:2        -10.9        -2.0      -17.8            8.1
United States     1980:1      1982:4        -20.2       -12.2       -3.2        -8.1

Average                                     -20.4        -7.4       -2.7       -11.8




                                       84
                                           Table 5A


                Properties of the Output Components, Entire Sample




                                Standard Deviations                      Correlations

Countries:             σYA /σY       σYτl /σY        σYτx /σY   ρYA ,Y      ρYτl ,Y     ρYτx ,Y


Australia                0.92          0.94            0.85     0.67        -0.10         0.71
Austria                  1.06          0.98            1.05     0.82        -0.32         0.37
Belgium                  0.77          1.00            0.44     0.72         0.68        -0.34
Canada                   0.67          0.42            0.63     0.89        -0.03         0.79
Denmark                  1.18          0.95            0.89     0.58        -0.15         0.72
Finland                  0.74          0.72            0.89     0.80        -0.33         0.71
France                   1.11          0.93            0.92     0.88        -0.45         0.64
Germany                  0.74          0.34            0.61     0.87         0.02         0.69
Iceland                  0.97          1.19            1.44     0.75        -0.15         0.27
Ireland                  0.84          0.92            0.92     0.62        -0.02         0.53
Israel                   0.83          0.58            0.59     0.92         0.08         0.40
Italy                    0.99          1.03            1.39     0.85        -0.32         0.51
Japan                    0.97          0.48            0.46     0.85         0.01         0.35
Korea                    1.04          0.99            0.90     0.69        -0.12         0.58
Luxembourg               1.14          1.01            1.14     0.95        -0.18        -0.20
Mexico                   0.97          0.69            0.68     0.91         0.15         0.21
Netherlands              0.99          0.87            1.06     0.72        -0.27         0.50
New Zealand              1.06          0.83            0.88     0.66        -0.14         0.58
Norway                   1.08          2.15            1.35     0.71        -0.21         0.24
Spain                    0.72          1.15            1.29     0.34         0.35         0.35
Sweden                   0.93          0.53            0.40     0.93        -0.28         0.84
Switzerland              1.13          1.15            1.32     0.90        -0.25         0.35
United Kingdom           0.73          0.85            0.55     0.61         0.50         0.43
United States            0.60          0.58            0.61     0.76         0.64         0.74

Average                  0.92          0.89            0.89     0.77        -0.04         0.46

Notes: The entire sample is 1980:1–2014:4. Series are first logged and detrended with the filter
       of Hodrick and Prescott (1997).




                                                85
                                           Table 5B


                Properties of the Labor Components, Entire Sample




                                Standard Deviations                      Correlations

Countries:             σLA /σL       σLτl /σL        σLτx /σL   ρLA ,L      ρLτl ,L     ρLτx ,L


Australia                0.27          1.20            1.08      0.39        0.42         0.50
Austria                  0.28          1.77            1.90     -0.14        0.36         0.20
Belgium                  0.26          1.40            0.61      0.36        0.95        -0.50
Canada                   0.39          0.66            0.99      0.75        0.36         0.82
Denmark                  0.23          1.10            1.03     -0.44        0.73         0.53
Finland                  0.16          1.25            1.56      0.19        0.05         0.61
France                   0.63          1.90            1.87      0.25        0.20         0.38
Germany                  0.27          0.63            1.13      0.40        0.31         0.78
Iceland                  0.22          2.05            2.47     -0.33        0.29         0.37
Ireland                  0.21          1.23            1.24      0.30        0.53         0.39
Israel                   0.09          1.69            1.74     -0.88        0.38         0.33
Italy                    0.55          2.15            2.90      0.07        0.15         0.29
Japan                    0.49          1.06            1.02     -0.05        0.46         0.51
Korea                    0.45          1.48            1.35     -0.28        0.49         0.34
Luxembourg               0.46          3.22            3.63     -0.18        0.39         0.08
Mexico                   0.38          1.64            1.62      0.17        0.39         0.29
Netherlands              0.39          1.45            1.76     -0.35        0.39         0.41
New Zealand              0.28          1.16            1.23     -0.43        0.47         0.55
Norway                   0.58          3.49            2.20     -0.13        0.31         0.25
Spain                    0.31          1.19            1.33      0.10        0.49         0.42
Sweden                   0.75          0.93            0.69      0.83        0.16         0.70
Switzerland              0.38          2.62            3.00     -0.03        0.30         0.13
United Kingdom           0.12          1.16            0.75     -0.27        0.81         0.29
United States            0.14          0.84            0.89      0.64        0.83         0.75

Average                  0.35          1.55            1.58      0.04        0.43         0.39

Notes: The entire sample is 1980:1–2014:4. Series are first logged and detrended with the filter
       of Hodrick and Prescott (1997).




                                                86
                                           Table 5C


             Properties of the Investment Components, Entire Sample




                                Standard Deviations                     Correlations

Countries:            σXA /σX        σXτl /σX    σXτx /σX     ρXA ,X       ρXτl ,X      ρXτx ,X


Australia                0.38          0.38           0.77     0.78         -0.31         0.87
Austria                  0.62          0.71           1.35     0.53         -0.71         0.89
Belgium                  0.39          0.76           0.47     0.84         0.91         -0.69
Canada                   0.43          0.16           0.75     0.89         -0.28         0.97
Denmark                  0.54          0.42           0.86     0.44         -0.32         0.97
Finland                  0.34          0.39           0.95     0.73         -0.66         0.98
France                   0.63          0.58           0.97     0.90         -0.72         0.91
Germany                  0.53          0.22           0.93     0.58         -0.12         0.96
Iceland                  0.29          0.40           1.12    -0.17         -0.36         0.93
Ireland                  0.34          0.40           0.92     0.49         -0.36         0.95
Israel                   0.39          0.33           0.79     0.69         -0.03         0.83
Italy                    0.47          0.48           1.37     0.54         -0.73         0.90
Japan                    0.70          0.37           0.74     0.65         -0.01         0.71
Korea                    0.56          0.50           1.01     0.57         -0.59         0.93
Luxembourg               0.58          0.58           1.33     0.23         -0.92         0.87
Mexico                   0.50          0.36           0.92     0.67         -0.12         0.72
Netherlands              0.60          0.54           1.30     0.20         -0.70         0.96
New Zealand              0.51          0.40           0.96     0.36         -0.47         0.94
Norway                   0.48          0.88           1.05    -0.06         0.20          0.44
Spain                    0.38          0.49           1.24     0.13         -0.36         0.90
Sweden                   0.74          0.32           0.51     0.94         -0.36         0.97
Switzerland              0.35          0.41           1.10     0.27         -0.81         0.99
United Kingdom           0.39          0.50           0.73     0.42         0.23          0.84
United States            0.35          0.29           0.92     0.79         0.15          0.94

Average                  0.48          0.45           0.96     0.52         -0.31         0.82

Notes: The entire sample is 1980:1–2014:4. Series are first logged and detrended with the filter
       of Hodrick and Prescott (1997).




                                                88
