                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        PUBLIC SCHOOL QUALITY VALUATION OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                       Stuart Gabriel
                                       Owen Hearey
                                      Matthew E. Kahn
                                      Ryan K. Vaughn

                                     Working Paper 22668
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22668


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




Hearey thanks the UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate's Howard and Irene Levine Program in
Housing and Social Responsibility for generous funding. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Stuart Gabriel, Owen Hearey, Matthew E. Kahn, and Ryan K. Vaughn. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public School Quality Valuation Over the Business Cycle
Stuart Gabriel, Owen Hearey, Matthew E. Kahn, and Ryan K. Vaughn
NBER Working Paper No. 22668
September 2016
JEL No. R21,R3

                                         ABSTRACT

Over the years 2000 to 2013, the Los Angeles real estate market featured a boom, a bust, and then
another boom. We use this variation to test how the hedonic valuation of school quality varies
over the business cycle. Following Black (1999), we exploit a regression discontinuity design at
elementary school attendance boundaries to test for how the implicit price of school quality
changes. We find that the capitalization of school quality is counter-cyclical. While good schools
always command a price premium, this premium grows during the bust. Possible mechanisms for
these findings include consumers "trading down" from private to public schools during
contractions as well as the effects of reduced household mobility during downturns in raising the
value of the public school option.

Stuart Gabriel                                  Matthew E. Kahn
Anderson School of Management                   Department of Economics
UCLA                                            University of Southern California
110 Westwood Plaza Suite C413                   KAP
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                      Los Angeles, CA 90089
sgabriel@anderson.ucla.edu                      and NBER
                                                kahnme@usc.edu
Owen Hearey
Analysis Group, Inc.                            Ryan K. Vaughn
333 South Hope Street                           UCLA
27th Floor                                      Ziman Center for Real Estate
Los Angeles, CA 90071                           110 Westwood Plaza #B100
owen.hearey@analysisgroup.com                   Los Angeles, CA 90095
                                                rkvaughn@gmail.com
1        Introduction

Both across and within metropolitan areas, business cycles affect local real estate prices. The Case-
Shiller price indices and data produced by Zillow and Trulia document these facts. As these real
estate prices change, the implicit prices that buyers pay for local public goods such as good schools
and safety are likely to change as well. But the existing compensating differentials literature has
not explored how hedonic valuation changes over the business cycle.1
        In this paper, we study Los Angeles County over the period 2000 to 2013 to examine varia-
tion over the business cycle in homeowners’ valuations of public school quality.2 The course of
the Los Angeles regional economy resembles the nation’s patterns during this period (Figure A.1)
but the local housing market faced disproportionately pronounced swings from “boom” to “bust”
(Figure 1), making this an attractive setting for exploring these dynamics. Because the standard
cross-sectional hedonic pricing approach is subject to the concern that there are omitted variables
correlated with key explanatory variables, we follow the lead of Black (1999) and exploit elemen-
tary school attendance area boundaries to provide identifying variation in public school quality.
Together with comprehensive transaction-level data on sales of homes and annual school-level data
on student achievement, this dynamic spatial regression discontinuity approach permits us to study
how homeowners’ valuations vary with broader economic conditions year-to-year.3
        Broadly we find that homeowners’ valuations are countercyclical – they value improvements in
public elementary school quality more during busts than in booms. For instance, between the peak
of the local housing market in 2007 and its nadir in 2009 we find that the implied valuation of
a five-percent improvement in school quality increased from a level indistinguishable from zero to
approximately 1.8 percent of a home’s sales price. Our results are robust to the choice of bandwidth,
the inclusion of various structural, educational, socioeconomic and geographic control variables, as
well as to various specification checks – and they do not appear to be driven by the selection of
which homes are sold in each year.
    1
     Using Census data, Costa and Kahn (2003) explore long-run decadal trends in the implicit pricing of climate
using a nationwide hedonic.
   2
     We focus on the valuation of school quality in acknowledgement of the importance of education in child develop-
ment.
   3
     Given the durability of the housing stock and the small flow of new homes in Los Angeles County (only 6.5
percent of the sales in our estimation sample were of homes built since 2000), we generally view year-to-year price
dynamics as representing changes in housing demand rather than supply. This permits us to identify changes in
homeowners’ valuations of hedonic characteristics from changes in home prices directly (Rosen, 1974). We consider
this assumption further in Section 5.


                                                         2
        Our findings are consistent with at least four explanations: first, that potential buyers “trade
down” from private to public schools during economic contractions; second, that the effects of
reduced household mobility during downturns raise the value of the option of enrolling children
in a high-quality public school; third, that households perceive the return to school quality to
be higher during a bust; and fourth, that home prices in the attendance areas of lower-quality
elementary schools (but close to higher-quality ones) get bid up during a boom due to “endogenous
gentrification” (Guerrieri, Hartley, and Hurst, 2012, 2013). A recent literature has explored how
household consumption patterns changed as access to credit decreased during the Great Recession
(Mian and Sufi, 2011; Chodorow-Reich, 2014; Jaimovich, Rebelo, and Wong, 2015; Ramcharan,
Verani, and Van Den Heuvel, 2016; Benmelech, Meisenzahl, and Ramcharan, Forthcoming). By
focusing on one key attribute of housing demand (namely local public school quality), our study
builds on this literature.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the econometric model,
the dynamic spatial regression discontinuity approach. Section 3 describes the data sources, sample
selection method, and estimation samples. Section 4 discusses the main results as well as various
specification checks. Section 5 offers potential interpretations for our findings. The final section
concludes.


2        Econometric Model

The typical hedonic pricing model explains the sales price of a home as a function of its charac-
teristics, both structural and geospatial (notably, for our purposes, the quality of the local public
elementary school). Under these assumptions, the price of home m in location n can be modeled
as:
                             ln(pm,n ) = β0 + βq · qn + βs · sm + βg · gn + m,n                                  (1)

where pm,n is the sales price, qn is a measure of local public school quality, sm is a vector of
structural characteristics and gn is a vector of other geospatial characteristics. In this formulation,
the primary coefficient of interest, βq , represents the approximate marginal percent change in the
sales price of a home due to a unit change in local public school quality.4
    4
    It should be stressed that any given household need not have children attending the local elementary school for
the housing market to assign a value to its quality. Even if the household has no school-age children (as 81.0% of Los


                                                          3
    But unbiased estimation of this coefficient relies on the assumption that the included observables
completely explain the observed variation in home prices. If repeated sales of homes (or, failing
that, frequent sales in each neighborhood) are observed however, identification may be improved
by including house (or neighborhood) fixed effects to non-parametrically control for unobserved
but time-invariant variation in factors affecting the sales price. In this neighborhood fixed effects
model:
              ln(pm,n,t ) = β0 + βq · qn,t + βs · sm,t + βg · gn,t + βn · 1n + βt · 1t + m,n,t                   (2)

1n is a vector of neighborhood fixed effects, and 1t is a vector of time dummies accounting for a
secular time trend in home prices.5 If variation in qn,t across time is uncorrelated with changes in
unobserved factors in neighborhood n which also affect sales prices, βq can be identified through
variation in qn,t across time within neighborhoods.
    Alternately, if there are sharp geographic breaks in local public school quality (e.g. boundaries
of elementary school attendance areas), one can improve identification by including fixed effects
representing the nearest discontinuity for each home and restricting the estimation sample to the
sales of homes nearest these discontinuities (i.e. choosing a tight “bandwidth”). In this spatial
regression discontinuity model:


                       ln(pm,n ) = β0 + βq · qn + βs · sm + βg · gn + βb · 1b + m,n                              (3)


1b is a vector of nearest boundary fixed effects. (That is, if the study area is partitioned into school
attendance areas and the boundaries between attendance areas are numbered from 1 to B, then each
element of the vector, 1b , is non-zero only for homes who share a closest boundary, b.) If variation
in qn across boundaries is not correlated with changes in unobserved factors across boundaries
which also affect sales prices, βq can be identified through variation in qn across boundaries within
nearby bandwidth areas.6
Angeles County households did in 2010), or if they do, but they attend a private, charter or magnet school (as 10.8%,
4.8% and 3.6%, respectively, of Los Angeles County students in Kindergarten through 12th grade did in 2009-10),
the household pays the market price for the home, which accounts for the preferences of all potential owners. The
capitalization of local amenities in home prices helps explain why even childless households may support spending
on public schools (Hilber and Mayer, 2009).
   5
     If the area under study is large and geographically diverse, a separate time trend for each subregion may be
more appropriate. When estimating these models in Section 4, we include time dummies for each of the 20 county
subdivisions of Los Angeles County defined by the U.S. Census Bureau in 2010.
   6
     All else equal, this suggests that choosing a tighter bandwidth will provide more plausibly valid identification.



                                                          4
       Our strategy combines these two approaches, taking advantage of both frequent sales in each
neighborhood and discontinuities in school quality across attendance area boundaries. This permits
us to see how the market valuation of school quality varies over time – that is, to estimate a different
βq for each time t. In this dynamic spatial regression discontinuity model:


               ln(pm,n,t ) = β0 + βq,t · qn,t · 1t + βs · sm,t + βg · gn,t + βb,t · 1b,t + m,n,t               (4)


βq,t is a vector of coefficients for public school quality (one for each time t) and 1b,t is a vector
of nearest boundary-time period fixed effects (i.e. a different non-parametric time trend for each
bandwidth area). So long as variation in qn,t across boundaries at time t is not correlated with
changes in unobserved factors across the boundaries within nearby bandwidth areas at time t
which also affect sales prices, each element of βq,t can be identified through variation in qn,t across
boundaries within nearby bandwidth areas at time t.7
       Because the dynamic spatial regression discontinuity model is our preferred approach in the
empirical analysis that follows, the potential threats to identification therein deserve special at-
tention. Specifically, what factors affecting a home’s sales price would be both unobserved by the
econometrician and likely to vary across an elementary school boundary within a given time period?
Though we account for a host of structural and neighborhood characteristics in our analysis, any
particular set of control variables is necessarily incomplete and so it remains possible that we may
attribute the positive effect of systematic, but unobserved, differences in homes or neighborhoods
to observed differences in school quality. A particular concern is that elementary school atten-
dance boundaries are not randomly drawn and thus may proxy for certain attributes. For example,
boundaries may coincide with other major breaks (e.g. a school district border, railroad tracks or
an elevated highway).8 In an effort to guard against this potential issue, we often exclude home
sales whose nearest elementary school boundary coincides with a district boundary and always
control for neighborhood characteristics using census data on socioeconomic characteristics at the
   7
     An implicit assumption is that households are myopic – that they do not anticipate changes in public school
quality. As Bishop and Murphy (2016) shows, this assumption does not bias hedonic estimates so long as changes
over time may be modeled as following a random walk with drift. Under this autoregressive model, the estimated
year-to-year transition parameter for our preferred measure of public school quality is 0.93 in Los Angeles County
between 2000 and 2013, suggesting that our results will (slightly) underestimate the implicit price of public school
quality improvements.
   8
     In explaining a series of attendance area boundary changes for the 2015-16 school year, the Los Angeles Unified
School District cited a need to “better balance enrollments among several neighboring schools” (Los Angeles Unified
School District, 2016).


                                                         5
block group-level.9


3        Data

Our sample draws on sales of single-family residences in Los Angeles County during the period
January 2000 to December 2013. Data on residential sales and structural characteristics were
provided by DataQuick (for 2000 to 2010) and CoreLogic (for 2011 to 2013).10 Records are excluded
from the sample if the sale is not an arms-length transaction, if the sales price is not reported, or
if the transaction cannot be matched to the assessor’s structural report.
        Each transaction is geocoded and assigned to a public elementary school according to attendance
area boundaries as of 2002 provided by Los Angeles County.11 We focus on elementary schools
due to the importance of early education in human capital development (Heckman and Carnerio,
2003); they also tend to be smaller than middle or high schools, and so they provide relatively more
variation to study. Our primary measure of elementary school quality, the Academic Performance
Index (API), comes from the California Department of Education. Biannually between 1999 and
2013, each school was assigned an API on the basis of student achievement in annual statewide
aptitude exams – a Base API at the beginning of the school year, and a Growth API at the end.
The index ranges in value from 200 to 1000, but schools were encouraged to maintain scores of at
least 800. Each transaction is assigned the Growth API reported for the school year ending in the
year the transaction closed.
        Because the state’s formula for API changes somewhat over time, magnitudes of differences
across schools are only strictly meaningful within a school year. This complicates our effort to
interpret changes in API over time particularly because, as Figure 2 shows, there has been a
pronounced compression in the distribution of API within Los Angeles County over the study
period. Does a year-to-year increase in API imply a meaningful improvement in school quality or
simply “grade inflation” due to changing evaluation criteria? While it’s impossible to empirically
    9
     Our identification strategy is more likely to hold in areas featuring more variation in our neighborhood controls
near elementary school area boundaries. In our .2 mile bandwidth estimation sample, the median (mean) bandwidth
area includes home sales in 4 (4.49) distinct census block groups.
  10
     CoreLogic purchased DataQuick in 2013. Structural data are accurate as of the most recent assessment.
  11
     While transaction year-specific attendance area boundaries would be preferable, geospatial data on elementary
school attendance area boundaries are limited, particularly in electronic formats and particularly for years past.
Fortunately anecdotal evidence suggests that the boundaries do not change often, and not very quickly when they
do (most often in response to major events, such as a school closing) (Black, 1999). Moreover if the boundaries we
use are imprecisely measured, that will only serve to attenuate our estimates toward zero.


                                                          6
disentangle these two interpretations, it’s important to note that the latter interpretation implies
that small improvements in API should be relatively more meaningful in more recent years. So if
year-to-year improvements are principally spurious, then small gains in API should, all else equal,
become increasingly valuable to homeowners.12
       API is an attractive summary measure of a school’s effectiveness, but school-to-school differ-
ences in API are likely correlated with other differences – in school conditions, funding, tax rates,
and neighborhood character. The dynamic spatial regression discontinuity design controls non-
parametrically for unobservable, time-varying local characteristics that do not change across the
elementary school attendance area boundary, but many features of the educational environment
other than school quality per se do. To address this concern, we regularly include the residence’s
property tax bill, the school’s student-teacher ratio, neighborhood-level socio-economic character-
istics and two distance measures – distance to employment centers and distance to the shoreline –
as additional control variables.13
       Summary statistics are presented in Table 1 for the whole sample and the restricted samples of
homes located within .3, .2 and .1 miles of a boundary, respectively. The restricted samples exclude
sales of homes whose nearest boundary coincides with a school district border, or whose nearest
boundary does not feature transactions observed on both sides.14 While the restricted samples
are only a fraction of the size of the full sample, the compositional differences between them are
slight.15 Moreover while the number of transactions varies over time (as shown in Figure 3), the
pattern is broadly consistent across all four samples. The trend of typical sales prices is also similar
across samples (seen in Figure 4), and generally congruent with the Case-Shiller Home Price Index
  12
     We would arrive at the same conclusion, incidentally, even if improvements were meaningful but homeowners
only cared about a school’s rank, not its absolute level of quality. We explore this possibility further in Section 4.
  13
     The property tax for each $1,000 of assess value for fiscal year 2015 is determined by geocoding each structure
into tax rate areas provided by the Los Angeles County Auditor-Controller. The student-teacher ratio as of the
2009-10 school year is calculated using data from the California Department of Education. The neighborhood-level
socioeconomic characteristics as of 2000 are measured by geocoding each structure into block groups provided by
the U.S. Census Bureau. The distance to employment centers is calculated as the employment-weighted average
distance to the 40 ZIP code areas with the highest average employment over the period 2000-2010 according to
County Business Patterns data.
  14
     We also exclude homes within .01 miles of a valid boundary to guard against possible geocoding errors., The
unrestricted sample, which includes variation across district boundaries, includes the school district’s per-pupil ex-
penditure level as an additional educational environment control variable. The district’s per-pupil expenditure as of
the 2009-10 school year is calculated using data from the National Center for Education Statistics.
  15
     Elementary school attendance areas tend to be smaller in more densely-populated parts of the county. Conse-
quently the restricted samples tend to be more representative of those areas, evidenced here by a slight tendency
toward lower-priced and smaller homes, lower quality schools, and poorer, more densely-populated, and more His-
panic, neighborhoods.


                                                          7
for the broader Los Angeles metropolitan area.


4     Results

On average during our study period, homeowners value improvements in local public school quality.
Table 2 presents regression results where the marginal effect of an improvement in elementary school
quality on sales price is not allowed to vary by transaction year. The estimates in the first column
reflect the typical hedonic model, while the second, third and fourth columns display estimates
for the spatial regression discontinuity model for homes within .3, .2, and .1 miles of a boundary,
respectively. (The fifth column shows estimates for the typical hedonic model using the restricted
sample of homes within .1 miles of a boundary.)16 Estimates for all five models report a significant
positive marginal effect for elementary school quality on sales price, though the estimates are
appreciably smaller for the three models that exploit the geospatial discontinuity around elementary
school attendance area boundaries. This does not appear to be entirely a consequence of sample
selection; the estimate for the fifth model, though statistically different from that of the first (at
the five-percent level), is much closer in magnitude to that than the estimates of the other three.
Rather, these findings signal the value of the spatial regression discontinuity approach – that failing
to control non-parametrically for local characteristics inflates estimates of homeowners’ valuation
of school quality improvements.
    Identification with this method relies on the assumption that homes on different sides of the
elementary school attendance area boundary are sufficiently similar and, to the extent that they are
not, that those differences are either observed or uncorrelated with differences in school quality. This
assumption cannot be directly tested, but Table 3 gives some suggestive evidence – the results of
tests of differences in means of observable characteristics across the boundary for the whole sample
as well as for each of the restricted samples. In general, the differences in characteristics other than
school quality become smaller and less significant as the bandwidth decreases. Unsurprisingly,
homes on the side of the boundary with better school quality tend to have higher sales prices than
those on the other side. But they also exhibit more bedrooms and bathrooms, larger living spaces,
younger buildings, and higher student-teacher ratios on average, as well as somewhat richer, less
  16
     Unless otherwise noted, coefficient estimate standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the elementary school-
year level throughout.



                                                          8
dense, more Asian, less Hispanic, better educated, more owner-dominant neighborhood populations
– though these differences tend to attenuate as the sample becomes more restricted. The significant
socioeconomic differences highlight that elementary school quality differences do influence where
households choose to live. But they also suggest that, even for the most restricted sample, it may
not be safe to assume that houses on either side of the boundary have identical neighborhood
characteristics. All regressions that follow include the full complement of neighborhood controls as
a result.
       Turning to our principal matter of interest, we find that while homeowners value improvements
in school quality on average, their valuation varies over time. In fact, we find that the valuation is
broadly counter-cyclical; it is higher around periods of economic contraction than it is around pe-
riods of expansion. Table 4 displays regression results where the marginal effect of an improvement
in elementary school quality on sales price is permitted to vary by transaction year. The estimates
in the first column reflect the typical hedonic model, while the second, third and fourth columns
display estimates for the spatial regression discontinuity model for homes within .3, .2, and .1 miles
of a boundary, respectively.17 (Figure 5 illustrates, for each model, the implied change in sales price
(for the mean-valued home) associated with a five-percent improvement in school quality (at the
mean) for each transaction year.) While the trend implied by the typical hedonic approach varies
more wildly than those for the other three, all four models suggest that the valuation was relatively
high around the 2001 recession, declined during the mid-decade expansion, rose rapidly during the
“Great Recession”, and plateaued during the current expansion. This trend is both economically
and statistically significant. Using the estimates for the spatial regression discontinuity model with
the .2 mile restricted sample, we find that the implied change in sales price (for the mean-valued
home) associated with a five-percent improvement in school quality (at the mean) increased from
a level indistinguishable from zero to a 1.8 percent increase between the peak of the local housing
market in 2007 and its nadir in 2009. And as Table 5 shows using the same estimates, the coefficient
estimates for the period 2006-2007 are indeed largely statistically different from those of the period
2000-2002 and those of the period 2009-2013.
       An immediate concern is that this apparent trend is driven by selection, not the business cycle.
We’ve already noted that the number of transactions fell significantly between 2005 and 2008, be-
  17
   Because these regressions include boundary-year fixed effects, the restricted samples now exclude sales of homes
whose nearest boundary does not feature transactions observed on both sides in the same year.



                                                        9
fore leveling off somewhat thereafter. But were the homes sold in any given year not representative
of the entire sample? Table 6 exhibits the results of tests of differences in means of observable
characteristics across transaction years for the whole sample. Beginning with Panel A, we observe
a boom-bust-recovery trend for sales prices, as well as a steady increase in API, as expected. But
among observable structural characteristics, there appears to be no systematic difference between
homes sold during expansions and those sold during contractions. Only building age exhibits a
discernible pattern, but the trend is independent of the business cycle; as the county’s housing
stock ages, the average home sold grows increasingly old. Looking now at Panels B and C, we find
no evidence of any variation in student-teacher ratio, per-pupil expenditures or property tax across
transaction years. We do observe some evidence that homes in lower socioeconomic status neigh-
borhoods (i.e. poorer, more Hispanic, less educated, more family-dominant) sell disproportionately
in 2005, 2006 and 2009, while homes in higher socioeconomic status neighborhoods change hands
disproportionately in 2007 and 2013. While these findings speak to the influence of the subprime
mortgage crisis on the local housing market, they do not line up with, and thus do not appear to
explain, the counter-cyclical pattern we observe in homeowners’ valuations of school quality.


4.1      Specification checks

To explore the robustness of our main result we perform a battery of specification checks. The main
results are presented in Table 6; each column represents a deviation from our baseline specification
(the dynamic spatial regression discontinuity approach using the .2 mile restricted sample presented
in Table 4). Additional supporting evidence is provided in the Web Appendix.
       The first three checks concern sample selection. One unique feature of Los Angeles County is
the predominance of the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD).18 To ensure our results are
not driven by the (possibly anomalous) experience of this large district, we try excluding all homes
within LAUSD from the regression. As the estimates in the first column show, the broad pattern
of our findings are maintained in the remaining 68 districts.
       Another feature of primary education in Los Angeles County is the prevalence of alternatives
to local public school, including both private schools and public choice options such as charter or
  18
    The second-largest school district in the country, LAUSD enrolled 43.4 percent of all students in Kindergarten
through 8th grade in Los Angeles County for the 2014-15 school year.




                                                       10
magnet schools.19 If our model is correct and the coefficient estimates are reflective of public school
quality valuations, the market price for local public elementary school quality should be relatively
higher in communities where these alternatives are less prominent. We test this proposition by
excluding all homes within 45 school districts (including LAUSD) in which more than 10 percent
of students in Kindergarten through 8th grade enroll in private schools, or more than 10 percent
employ a public choice option, from the regression. Consistent with our conjecture, as the results
in the second column reveal, almost all of our estimates grow larger under this restriction.20
       In the Web Appendix, we present estimates of our baseline specification using various sub-
samples as additional robustness checks. In particular, we recognize that one explanation for the
observed countercyclical trend would be if home prices declined during the downturn dispropor-
tionately in high foreclosure areas and if foreclosures are more common in low-quality elementary
school attendance areas. But as Figures A.2, A.3 and A.4 show, we find no evidence that our main
results are driven by selection on cultural background, socioeconomic status or geographical area,
respectively. Specifically, Figure A.3 shows that restricting the sample to high foreclosure areas
yields estimates broadly similar to our main results.
       The last three specification checks relate to measuring school quality and divining what’s salient
to homeowners.21 As we discussed in Section 2, one concern with using API is that the values may
not be directly comparable over time, and so a given improvement in values may imply different
changes in quality in different years. A related concern is that, if primary education is partially a
competitive positional good, households may care more about the rank of a school’s quality than
its level per se. To speak to both of these potential issues, we try using API decile rank (by year,
among elementary schools in Los Angeles County) as our measure of elementary school quality.
Looking at the third column of Table 6, we see that the pattern of our main findings is broadly
replicated using this rank-order approach.
       Alternately, there may be an issue concerning non-linearities in the estimated marginal effect
  19
     In the 2009-10 school year for instance, 10.8%, 4.8% and 3.6%, of students in Kindergarten through 12th grade
in Los Angeles County enrolled in private, charter and magnet schools, respectively.
  20
     This implies that expanding charter school options, though publicly-funded, may contribute to waning support
for traditional public schools. Avery and Pathak (2015) explores the distributional effects of school choice in greater
detail.
  21
     The salience of API itself does not appear to be at issue. While undoubtedly more households are familiar
with API as a measure of public school quality today than when it was first introduced in 1999, the non-monotonic
character of our estimated trend suggests that a secular increase in public awareness of API alone cannot explain our
main result.



                                                          11
of API – specifically because schools can “fail” (or, in the language of the California Department
of Education, be deemed in need of “program improvement”) in large part on the basis of their
API.22 If schools moving in and out of program improvement status are driving our results, then
it would not be appropriate to interpret our findings as representative of typical improvements in
school quality. As a specification check, we include program improvement status interacted with
year dummy variables as additional control variables. The results, shown in the fourth column,
are largely unchanged, consistent with the interpretation that households value changes in API
broadly, not simply as a means to avoid school failure.
       Finally, it remains possible that homeowners do not value school quality per se as much as
they value characteristics of schools that happen to be correlated with API – in particular, the
racial composition or economic background of the student body. The tendency for higher socioeco-
nomic status students to attend better schools (e.g. to have better qualified and more experienced
teachers) is well documented (Koski and Hahnel, 2008; Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor, 2011). But
this very correlation makes it difficult, econometrically, to account for this alternate explanation.23
Nonetheless we explore this possibility by calculating a “synthetic” API for each school in each year
representing the portion of the school quality measure explained by – or at least correlated with –
the socioeconomic characteristics of enrolled students.24 We then include this measure, interacted
with a vector of year dummies, as additional control variables, permitting us to test directly how
homeowners value the portion of API not explained by school demographics. The results are shown
in the fifth column of Table 6.25 Under this strict test, the countercyclical pattern of the coefficients
is still present, but most are no longer statistically significant. So while we cannot rule out the pos-
sibility that homeowner preferences for high socioeconomic status students, and not for improved
  22
      Schools are encouraged to maintain API of at least 800. Those that fall short are issued yearly growth targets.
If they fail to maintain adequate progress, the state (or federal government) may intervene, placing the school in
“program improvement.” Schools that remain in program improvement for several consecutive years risk various
sanctions, including closure.
   23
      Our neighborhood socioeconomic controls should control for some of this effect. But the census data, measured
at the block group-level, may not represent bandwidth areas well and, in any event, may not reflect the population
of enrolled students.
   24
      Specifically we perform year-specific regressions, using the estimation sample, of API on four school-level demo-
graphic variables: the share of enrolled students who identified as African American, as Asian, as Hispanic or Latino,
and the share who qualified for free or reduced-price meals. (Due to data limitations, the share of students who
qualified for free and reduced-price meals in 2001-2003 was interpolated from the shares reported in 2000 and 2004.)
The R2 of these regressions range from .65 to .81, reflecting the high degree of collinearity among these school-level
factors.
   25
      Due to the inclusion of a generated regressor, the coefficient estimate standard errors for this specification are
the result of 100 bootstrap replications.



                                                          12
school quality per se, contribute to the valuations we observe, that alternative interpretation does
not appear to account for our main finding of a countercyclical trend.


5         Discussion

Throughout we have assumed that year-to-year price variation reflects changes in housing demand
rather than supply. We now present evidence supporting this claim. Only 6.5 percent of the sales
in our estimation sample were of homes built since 2000. Moreover, Figure 6 shows estimates of
our baseline model using subsamples limited to neighborhoods of little recent construction and
to mountainous areas (as identified by Saiz (2010)). Restricting the estimation to these housing
supply-constrained areas produces, on balance, coefficient estimates of larger magnitude, suggesting
that business cycle fluctuations in residential construction do not principally account for our main
results.
         At least four explanations are consistent with the observed pattern. First is the possibility that
credit-constrained homeowners, in an effort to smooth consumption across the business cycle, are
“trading down” from private schools to public alternatives during contractions.26 We find limited
circumstantial evidence that private school enrollment was procyclical during our study period.
Figure A.5 shows the share of Los Angeles County students enrolled in private school between 2000
and 2013 for two grade ranges: Kindergarten through 5th grade and Kindergarten through 6th
grade.27 Though there is a secular trend of falling private school enrollment shares over the study
period, it does appear to accelerate somewhat during business cycle downturns – exactly when we
would expect substitution away from private school to be most pronounced.28
         A second explanation concerns the option value of local amenities. During periods of economic
contraction and home price uncertainty households may change homes less frequently than they
do during periods of expansion. Consequently households may be willing to pay relatively more
    26
     Jaimovich, Rebelo, and Wong (2015) observes similar substitution patterns among consumers in the accommo-
dation, apparel, restaurant, home furnishing and general merchandise sectors during the 2007-2012 period.
  27
     The vast majority of Los Angeles County elementary schools serve students from Kindergarten through either
5th or 6th grade.
  28
     Mian and Sufi (2011), Chodorow-Reich (2014), Ramcharan, Verani, and Van Den Heuvel (2016) and Benmelech,
Meisenzahl, and Ramcharan (Forthcoming) present a similar consumer credit mechanism, detailing how adverse
shocks to household credit channels during downturns work to drive down consumer spending broadly. In our setting,
this line of reasoning would manifest as the procyclical availability of easy credit working to bid up the capitalization
of school quality in home prices during expansions and depress it during contractions. But indeed our results show
the opposite pattern, and so appear inconsistent with this mechanism.



                                                           13
for local amenities (such as public school quality) during busts because the option value of these
amenities has increased. For example, a household which may have a child (or simply another
child) in the near future will put relatively more stock in the quality of the local elementary school
if they expect to live in the neighborhood for a few more years. Figure A.6, which shows the
median number of years Los Angeles County householders have lived in their current residence for
the years 2000 to 2013, provides some support for this explanation. While the median tenure for
owners eased down from 11 to 10 years during the period 2000 to 2006, it jumped to 13 years by
2009 and had only risen a year further by 2013. All else equal we would expect this trend to drive
a slow decline, a rapid increase and then a slow rise in homeowners’ valuation of local public school
quality – which is indeed largely what we find.
   A third possibility is that households perceive the return to school quality to be higher during
economic contractions. While there is some research linking graduate school enrollment decisions
to business cycle fluctuations, comparable analysis for elementary school is scant – in part because
primary education has long been universal (at least in the U.S.) and only recently have researchers
been able to observe differences in quality across schools consistently (Kniesner, Padilla, and Po-
lachek, 1978; Psacharopoulos et al., 1996; Johnson, 2013). But because the state of the business
cycle during early childhood will not have much bearing on conditions during the breadth of one’s
working years, it seems unlikely that parents put much stake in forecasts of economic growth more
than a decade out while making decisions concerning their children’s primary education.
   Finally we must allow that, despite choosing a tight bandwidth and including many structure,
school and neighborhood control variables, we may attribute the effect of systematic, but unob-
served, differences in households, homes or neighborhoods across the elementary school attendance
area boundary to observed differences in school quality. For instance, perhaps unobservable char-
acteristics of homes fuel a process of “endogenous gentrification” wherein higher-income residents
bid up home prices in lower-quality school attendance areas during booms (Guerrieri, Hartley, and
Hurst, 2012, 2013). We cannot fully test the likelihood of this concern, but in a recent examina-
tion of the hedonic approach, Billings (2015) evaluates the magnitude of this issue by additionally
controlling for residential building permits, which proxy for unobserved home renovations. Billings
concludes that the implied bias of unobserved structural differences in these studies is a “second-
order concern.”



                                                  14
6    Conclusion

In this paper, we show that homeowners’ valuation of local public school quality is countercyclical.
Moreover this variation is economically significant; between the peak of the local housing market
in 2007 and its nadir in 2009 we find that the implied valuation of a five-percent improvement
in school quality increased from a level indistinguishable from zero to approximately 1.8 percent
of a home’s sales price. We identify this result with a dynamic hedonic pricing model, exploiting
spatial discontinuities at elementary school attendance area boundaries to enhance identification.
Our findings are insensitive to a variety of specification checks, and do not appear to be driven
either by the selection of homes sold over time or by a secular increase in the salience of our chosen
measure of school quality. Instead we suspect that the observed countercyclical pattern stems
from the combination of two effects – consumers “trading down” from private to public schools
during contractions as well as the effects of reduced household mobility during downturns in raising
the value of the public school option – though further research on homeowner decision-making is
necessary to estimate their relative importance.




                                                   15
References

Avery, Christopher and Parag A. Pathak. 2015. “The distributional consequences of public school
  choice.” Tech. Rep. 21525, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Benmelech, Efraim, Ralf R. Meisenzahl, and Rodney Ramcharan. Forthcoming. “The real effects
  of liquidity during the financial crisis: Evidence from automobiles.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics URL http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2511181.

Billings, Stephen B. 2015. “Hedonic amenity valuation and housing renovations.” Real Estate
  Economics 43 (3):652–682.

Bishop, Kelly C. and Alvin D. Murphy. 2016. “Valuing time-varying attributes using the hedonic
  model: When is a dynamic approach neccessary?”

Black, Sandra E. 1999. “Do better schools matter? Parental valuation of elementary education.”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (2):577–599.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. 2016. “Inflation and prices.” URL http:
  //www.bls.gov/data/.

California Department of Education. 2016a. “API data files.” URL http://www.cde.ca.gov/ta/
  ac/ap/apidatafiles.asp.

———. 2016b. “CalWORKS data files (2003 and prior).” URL http://www.cde.ca.gov/ds/sh/
  cw/filesafdc.asp.

———. 2016c. “CBEDS data about schools and districts.” URL http://www.cde.ca.gov/ds/sd/
  sd/filescbedsorab.asp.

———. 2016d. “Enrollment by school.” URL http://www.cde.ca.gov/ds/sd/sd/filesenr.asp.

———. 2016e. “Program improvement data files.” URL http://www.cde.ca.gov/ta/ac/ay/
  tidatafiles.asp.

———. 2016f. “Public schools and districts data files.” URL http://www.cde.ca.gov/ds/si/ds/
  pubschls.asp.


                                              16
———. 2016g.           “Staff demographic data.”         URL http://www.cde.ca.gov/ds/sd/df/
  filesstaffdemo.asp.

———. 2016h.          “Student poverty FRPM data.”       URL http://www.cde.ca.gov/ds/sd/sd/
  filessp.asp.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. 2014.        “The employment effects of credit market disruptions:
  Firm-level evidence from the 2008-09 financial crisis.”       Quarterly Journal of Economics
  129 (1):1–59. URL http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/content/129/1/1.full.pdf?keytype=
  ref&ijkey=weZuGP7XFYLhdpU.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2011. “Teacher mobility, school
  segregation, and pay-based policies to level the playing field.” Education 6 (3):399–438.

Costa, Dora and Matthew Kahn. 2003. “The rising price of nonmarket goods.” American Economic
  Review 93 (2):227–232.

County of Los Angeles. 2016a. “Assessor parcels (2014).” URL http://egis3.lacounty.gov/
  dataportal/2015/03/10/assessor-parcel/.

———.       2016b.           “Elementary,      middle,    and   high    school    attendance     ar-
  eas     (2002).”             URL         http://egis3.lacounty.gov/dataportal/2011/11/30/
  elementary-middle-and-high-school-attendance-areas-2002/.

———. 2016c. “Tax rate area table (2014).” URL http://egis3.lacounty.gov/dataportal/
  2015/09/30/tax-rate-area-table-2014-auditor-controller/.

Education Data Partnership. 2016a. “Los Angeles County.” URL http://www.ed-data.org/
  county/Los-Angeles.

———. 2016b. “Los Angeles Unified.” URL http://www.ed-data.org/district/Los-Angeles/
  Los-Angeles-Unified.

Guerrieri, Veronica, Daniel Hartley, and Erik Hurst. 2012. “Within-city variation in urban decline:
  The case of Detroit.” American Economic Review 102 (3):120–126.




                                                 17
———. 2013. “Endogenous gentrification and housing price dynamics.” Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 100:45–60.

Heckman, James and Pedro Carnerio. 2003. “Human capital policy.” Tech. Rep. 9495, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Hilber, Christian A.L. and Christopher Mayer. 2009. “Why do households without children support
  local public schools? Linking house price capitalization to school spending.” Journal of Urban
  Economics 65:74–90.

Jaimovich, Nir, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong. 2015. “Trading down and the business cycle.”
  URL http://www.nirjaimovich.com/assets/tradingdown30aug2015-2.pdf.

Johnson, Matthew T. 2013. “The impact of business cycle fluctuations on graduate school enroll-
  ment.” Economics of Education Review 34:122–134.

Kniesner, Thomas J., Arthur H. Padilla, and Solomon W. Polachek. 1978. “The rate of return to
  schooling and the business cycle.” The Journal of Human Resources 13 (2):264–277.

Koski, William S. and Jesse Hahnel. 2008. “The past, present and possible futures of educational
  finance reform legislation.” In Handbook of Research in Education Finance and Policy, edited by
  Helen F. Ladd and Edward B. Fiske. Routledge New York, NY, 42–60.

Los Angeles Unified School District. 2016. “Frequently asked questions about boundary changes.”
  URL        http://www.laschools.org/employee/mpd/boundary-changes/faq-boundaries/
  one-faq?faq_id=1610068.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi. 2011. “House prices, home equity-based borrowing, and the U.S. house-
  hold leverage crisis.” American Economic Review 101 (5):2132–2156.

Psacharopoulos, George, Eduardo Velez, Alex Panagides, and Hongyu Yang. 1996. “Returns to
  education during economic boom and recession.” Education Economics 4 (3):219–230.

Ramcharan, Rodney, Stéphane Verani, and Skander J. Van Den Heuvel. 2016. “From Wall Street
  to main street: The impact of the financial crisis on consumer credit supply.” The Journal of
  Finance 71 (3):1323–1356. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12209.


                                               18
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. “Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure com-
  petition.” Journal of Political Economy 82 (1):34–55.

Saiz, Albert. 2010. “The geographic determinants of housing supply.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 125 (3):1253–1296.

S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC. 2016a. “S&P/Case-Shiller CA-Los Angeles home price index.” Re-
  trieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. URL https://research.stlouisfed.
  org/fred2/series/LXXRSA.

———. 2016b.      “S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. national home price index.”     Retrieved from FRED,
  Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. URL https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/
  CSUSHPINSA.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2015a. “National data, real gross domestic product, per-
  cent change from preceding period.” URL http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=
  9&step=1#reqid=9&step=3&isuri=1&904=2000&903=1&906=a&905=2016&910=x&911=0.

———. 2015b. “Regional data, GDP in current dollars, percent change from preceding period.”
  URL http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTableHtml.cfm?reqid=70&step=10&isuri=1&7003=200&
  7035=-1&7004=naics&7005=1&7006=31080&7036=-1&7001=2200&7002=2&7090=70&7007=-1&
  7093=percentchange.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2016a. “American FactFinder.” URL http://factfinder.census.gov/
  faces/nav/jsf/pages/download_center.xhtml.

———. 2016b.       “CBP datasets.”     URL http://census.gov/programs-surveys/cbp/data/
  datasets.html.

———. 2016c. “TIGER/Line shapefiles and TIGER/Line files.” URL https://www.census.gov/
  geo/maps-data/data/tiger-line.html.

U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Ocean
  Service, and National Geodetic Survey. 2016. “NOAA shoreline data explorer.” URL http:
  //www.ngs.noaa.gov/NSDE/.



                                               19
U.S. Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics. 2016a. “Local edu-
  cation agency (school district) finance survey (F-33) data.” URL http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/
  f33agency.asp.

———. 2016b. “Local education agency (school district) universe survey data.” URL http:
  //nces.ed.gov/ccd/pubagency.asp.

Zillow Real Estate Research. 2016. “Zillow data.” URL http://www.zillow.com/research/data/.




                                            20
          Figure 1: Case-Shiller Home Price Index for Los Angeles Metropolitan Area



                                                    250



                    Case−Shiller Home Price Index

                                                    200

                                                                                                                                        Los Angeles

                                                                                                                                        U.S.

                                                    150




                                                    100

                                                           2000    2002      2004        2006        2008        2010    2012


Note: The S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices for the U.S. and the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim metropoli-
 tan statistical area (each normalized so that 2000 is 100) are provided by FRED.



             Figure 2: Academic Performance Index of Los Angeles County Schools


                                                    1000
                    Academic Performance Index




                                                    800




                                                    600                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                           ●

                                                                                                                                           ●

                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                ●

                                                                                                                                                ●

                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●      ●

                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                    ●    ●                 ●    ●
                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                ●          ●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                         ●      ●
                                                                                                                                           ●

                                                                                                                    ●                           ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                ●               ●

                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                         ●                 ●
                                                                                                                         ●

                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                ●   ●

                                                                                                         ●   ●

                                                                                                             ●                      ●
                                                                                                                         ●          ●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                ●          ●
                                                                                                                    ●

                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                ●                               ●




                                                    400
                                                                                     ●                                   ●      ●
                                                                                                ●                                   ●
                                                                                                         ●          ●

                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                               ●                                    ●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                               ●

                                                                               ●                         ●




                                                                                                             ●




                                                                                                ●




                                                            2000      2002          2004             2006         2008       2010        2012


Note: Growth API for Los Angeles County elementary schools provided by the California Department of Educa-
 tion. The bottom and top of the box show the first and third quartiles, respectively, while the band shows the
 median. The whiskers show the most extreme data points within one-and-a-half inter-quartile ranges of the box.
 Dots represent outliers.



                                                                                                    21
                                         Figure 3: Count of Transactions by Estimation Sample




                                             60000



                                                                                                            All
                   Transactions




                                             40000
                                                                                                            <.3mi

                                                                                                            <.2mi

                                                                                                            <.1mi
                                             20000




                                                   0

                                                       2000     2002    2004    2006   2008   2010   2012


Note: Transaction data provided by DataQuick for 2000-2010 and CoreLogic for 2011-2013.




                                               Figure 4: Mean Sales Price by Estimation Sample



                                             700
                   Sales Price (Thousands)




                                             600

                                                                                                            All

                                             500                                                            <.3mi

                                                                                                            <.2mi

                                             400                                                            <.1mi




                                             300



                                                   2000       2002     2004    2006    2008   2010   2012


Note: Transaction data provided by DataQuick for 2000-2010 and CoreLogic for 2011-2013.




                                                                                  22
                           Figure 5: Homeowners’ School Quality Valuation Is Counter-Cyclical



                                     30
Change in Sales Price (Thousands)




                                     20

                                                                                            All
                                     10                                                     <.3mi

                                                                                            <.2mi

                                      0                                                     <.1mi



                                    −10



                                          2000   2002   2004   2006    2008   2010   2012

     Note: The implied change in sales price (for the mean-valued home) associated with a five-
      percent improvement in school quality (at the mean) for each transaction year (presented with
      95 percent confidence intervals) according to the regressions presented in Table 4.




                                                                  23
                                      Figure 6: Subsample Estimation by Local Housing Character



                                     20
Change in Sales Price (Thousands)




                                      0                                                     Baseline

                                                                                            Built Post−2000 < .01

                                                                                            Built Post−1990 < .01

                                                                                            Mountainous > .10
                                    −20




                                    −40
                                          2000   2002   2004   2006   2008    2010   2012

   Note: The baseline “<.2mi” specification is presented in Table 4. Transactions included in the low recent con-
    struction subsamples if the share of housing units in the block group, according to the American Community
    Survey (as of 2010), was less than the given value as of the given year. Transactions included in the mountainous
    subsample if Saiz (2010) identified the share of the tract (as of 2000) as greater than the given value.




                                                                         24
                                               Table 1: Summary Statisticsa

                                                         All               <.3mi              <.2mi              <.1mi
 Real sales price ($)                                  570,344            527,936            516,343            504,128
                                                      (693,435)          (645,990)          (673,663)          (504,044)
 Elementary school qualityb                              7.56               7.47               7.44               7.42
                                                        (1.08)             (1.10)             (1.10)             (1.10)
 Structure controls
   Bedrooms                                               3.2                3.1                3.1                3.1
                                                         (0.9)              (0.9)              (0.9)              (0.9)
   Bathrooms                                              2.1                2.0                2.0                2.0
                                                         (1.0)              (1.0)              (0.9)              (0.9)
   Living space (square ft.)                           1715.7             1630.4             1605.3             1585.9
                                                       (893.8)            (806.3)            (786.0)            (765.1)
   Building age                                          49.9               52.4               52.8               52.7
                                                        (22.9)             (22.2)             (22.3)             (22.6)
 Education controlsc
  Property tax (per $1,000 assessed value)               11.8              11.9               11.9               11.9
                                                        (0.8)              (0.9)              (0.9)              (0.9)
   Student-teacher ratio                                 20.7              20.6               20.6               20.6
                                                        (4.3)              (4.2)              (4.1)              (4.0)
   Per-pupil expenditure ($)                           11,907             12,152             12,145             12,113
                                                       (2,489)            (2,424)            (2,419)            (2,411)
 Socioeconomic controlsd
   Median household income ($)                          57,672             54,421             53,560             53,259
                                                       (26,716)           (24,396)           (23,945)           (23,708)
   Population per mi2                                    8,908              9,748             10,079             10,308
                                                        (6,323)            (6,381)            (6,518)            (6,626)
   Black                                                  0.10               0.10               0.11               0.11
                                                         (0.17)             (0.18)             (0.18)             (0.18)
   Asian                                                  0.12               0.12               0.12               0.12
                                                         (0.14)             (0.13)             (0.14)             (0.14)
   Hispanic                                               0.35               0.38               0.39               0.40
                                                         (0.27)             (0.27)             (0.27)             (0.28)
   High school graduate (25+)                             0.75               0.73               0.72               0.71
                                                         (0.20)             (0.20)             (0.21)             (0.21)
   College graduate (25+)                                 0.26               0.25               0.24               0.23
                                                         (0.19)             (0.18)             (0.18)             (0.18)
   Reside with own-children                               0.40               0.40               0.41               0.41
                                                         (0.12)             (0.12)             (0.12)             (0.12)
   Own residence                                          0.68               0.66               0.65               0.65
                                                         (0.23)             (0.23)             (0.23)             (0.23)
 Geographic controls
  Distance to employment centers (mi.)e                  20.8               20.0               19.9               19.9
                                                         (9.1)              (8.5)              (8.4)              (8.3)
   Distance to shoreline (mi.)                           15.1               14.2               14.0               14.0
                                                        (12.9)             (11.9)             (11.6)             (11.5)

 Observations                                          769,140            438,278            340,098            168,016
   a Means   (standard deviations) are reported.
   b Annual  elementary school quality as measured by the California Department of Education’s Growth Academic Performance
Index (in hundreds).
    c The property tax represents the tax bill per $1,000 of assessed value for fiscal year 2015. The student-teacher ratio is

measured at the elementary school-level as of school year 2009-10. Per-pupil expenditure is measured at the school district-level
as of school year 2009-10.
    d Socioeconomic controls are measured at block group-level as of 2000, and (except for household income and population

density) represent shares.
    e Distance to employment centers is calculated as the employment-weighted average distance to the 40 ZIP code areas with

the highest average employment over the period 2000-2010.


                                                                 25
                                 Table 2: Local Public School Quality Capitalization

                                      Dependent variable: Real sales price (ln $)a

                                                All             <.3mi         <.2mi         <.1mi           <.1mi
                             b
 Elementary school quality                     0.039***          0.015***      0.011***      0.008***        0.033***
                                              (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.003)
 Structure controls
   Bedrooms                                    -0.017***         -0.009***     -0.009***     -0.005***       -0.012***
                                              (0.001)           (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)         (0.002)
   Bathrooms                                   -0.003            -0.003        -0.017        -0.042***       -0.053***
                                              (0.011)           (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.005)         (0.005)
   Bathrooms2                                  0.005***          0.003**       0.005***      0.009***        0.013***
                                              (0.002)           (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)         (0.001)
   Living space (ln square ft.)                0.530***          0.488***      0.480***      0.467***        0.503***
                                              (0.005)           (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.006)         (0.006)
   Building age                                0.003***          0.001***      0.001***      0.001***        0.003***
                                              (0.000)           (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)
   Building age2                               -0.000***         -0.000***     -0.000***     -0.000***       -0.000***
                                              (0.000)           (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)
 Education controlsc                            X             X             X                  X              X
 Socioeconomic controlsd                        X                                                             X
 Geographic controlse                           X                                                             X
 Quarter-of-sale dummies                        X             X             X                  X              X
 County subdivision-year dummiesf               X             X             X                  X              X
 Boundary fixed effects                                       X             X                  X
 Number of boundaries                                       1,585         1,579              1,552
 Observations                                769,140      438,278        340,098            168,016        168,016
 Adjusted R2                                   0.75         0.77           0.76               0.75           0.72
 Memo item:
  A five-percent improvement in school quality (at the mean) corresponds to a...
                                              1.43%        0.56%          0.39%             0.30%           1.19%
                                              $8,283       $3,222         $2,267            $1,770          $6,935
  ...change in sales price (for the mean-valued home).g
    a
      Coefficient estimates (standard errors) are reported. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the
elementary school-year-level.
    b
      Annual elementary school quality as measured by the California Department of Education’s Growth Academic
Performance Index (in hundreds).
    c
      School controls include structure-level property tax assessment, elementary school-level student-teacher ratio,
and (for “All” and the latter “<.1mi”) school district-level expenditures per student.
    d
      Neighborhood controls include block group-level household income, population density, as well as share black,
Asian, Hispanic, high school and college graduate, residing with own children, and owning residence.
    e
      Geographic controls include second-order polynomials in distance to employment centers and distance to the
shoreline.
    f
      The U.S. Census Bureau divided Los Angeles County into 20 subdivisions for statistical purposes in 2010.
    g
      Between 2000 and 2013, the mean API among all schools in Los Angeles County was 726.5, and the mean sales
price of a single-family residence in the estimation sample was $580,597 (in 2015 dollars).




                                                           26
                      Table 3: Tests of Sample Differences Across Elementary School Boundariesa

                                                           Allb               <.3mi                <.2mi               <.1mi
 Real sales price (ln $)                                  0.046***             0.029***            0.028***             0.018*
                                                         (0.010)              (0.010)             (0.009)              (0.010)
 Elementary school quality                                 0.45***              0.43***             0.44***              0.44***
                                                          (0.02)               (0.02)              (0.02)               (0.02)
 Structure controls
   Bedrooms                                               0.033***             0.024***            0.022***             0.015*
                                                         (0.007)              (0.007)             (0.008)              (0.009)
   Bathrooms                                              0.061***             0.041***            0.039***             0.029***
                                                         (0.010)              (0.009)             (0.009)              (0.010)
   Living space (ln square ft.)                           0.031***             0.021***            0.021***             0.015***
                                                         (0.005)              (0.005)             (0.005)              (0.005)
   Building age                                            -0.71**              -0.90***            -1.06***             -0.86**
                                                          (0.33)               (0.32)              (0.33)               (0.36)
 School controls
   Property tax (per $1,000 assessed value)                -0.04***             0.00                0.01                 0.01
                                                          (0.01)               (0.02)              (0.02)               (0.02)
   Student-teacher ratio                                   0.695***            0.592***            0.565***             0.471***
                                                         (0.101)              (0.104)             (0.102)              (0.096)
   Per-pupil expenditure ($)                              -176.5***
                                                          (41.1)
 Neighborhood controls
  Median household income ($)                              2262***              1672***             1784***              1449***
                                                           (371)                (348)               (339)                (357)
   Population per mi2                                       -391***              -452***             -507***              -418***
                                                          (78.5)               (82.9)              (86.4)               (93.3)
   Black                                                  -0.009***            -0.005*             -0.005               -0.004
                                                         (0.002)              (0.003)             (0.003)              (0.003)
   Asian                                                   0.011***             0.007***            0.006***             0.004*
                                                         (0.002)              (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.002)
   Hispanic                                               -0.017***            -0.015***           -0.016***            -0.011***
                                                         (0.004)              (0.004)             (0.004)              (0.004)
   High school graduate (25+)                              0.019***            0.015***             0.015***             0.012***
                                                         (0.003)              (0.003)             (0.003)              (0.003)
   College graduate (25+)                                  0.015***            0.011***             0.011***             0.008***
                                                         (0.003)              (0.003)             (0.003)              (0.003)
   Reside with own-children                               -0.003               -0.004**            -0.004**             -0.001
                                                         (0.002)              (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.002)
   Own residence                                           0.020***            0.017***             0.016***            0.014***
                                                         (0.003)              (0.003)             (0.003)              (0.003)
 Geographic controls
  Distance to employment centers (mi.)                    -0.171               -0.064              -0.081               -0.040
                                                         (0.189)              (0.183)             (0.180)              (0.181)
   Distance to shoreline (mi.)                            -0.057               -0.059              -0.042               0.012
                                                         (0.270)              (0.265)             (0.260)              (0.261)

 Observations                                            645,694             438,278              340,098             168,016
     a Each cell shows the coefficient estimate (standard error) from a regression of each listed variable on a dummy variable –

1 if the house is on the side of the boundary with higher measured elementary school quality, 0 otherwise. All standard errors
are adjusted for clustering at the elementary school-year-level.
     b 118,829 observations included in Table 2 are excluded here because the nearest boundary does not feature transactions

observed on both sides.




                                                              27
                         Table 4: Local Public School Quality Capitalization from 2000 to 2013

                                         Dependent variable: Real sales price (ln $)a


                                                     All                 <.3mi                 <.2mi                 <.1mi
 Elementary school   qualityb ×...
   2000                                             0.054***              0.025***              0.018***              0.007
                                                   (0.004)               (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.009)
   2001                                             0.040***              0.021***              0.015***              0.023***
                                                   (0.004)               (0.005)               (0.005)               (0.007)
   2002                                             0.048***              0.032***              0.028***              0.031**
                                                   (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.007)               (0.012)
   2003                                             0.032***              0.016**               0.012                 0.014
                                                   (0.006)               (0.006)               (0.008)               (0.012)
   2004                                             0.001                 0.012**               0.010                 0.005
                                                   (0.006)               (0.006)               (0.006)               (0.008)
   2005                                             -0.038***             -0.000                0.003                 -0.006
                                                   (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.006)               (0.008)
   2006                                             -0.067***             0.004                 0.001                 0.003
                                                   (0.005)               (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.006)
   2007                                             -0.044***             -0.001                -0.004                -0.005
                                                   (0.006)               (0.007)               (0.009)               (0.010)
   2008                                             0.067***              -0.005                -0.004                -0.010
                                                   (0.008)               (0.010)               (0.011)               (0.016)
   2009                                             0.141***              0.020***              0.018***              0.016*
                                                   (0.009)               (0.006)               (0.006)               (0.009)
   2010                                             0.112***              0.016**               0.008                 0.000
                                                   (0.008)               (0.007)               (0.007)               (0.010)
   2011                                             0.137***              0.021***              0.024***              0.017*
                                                   (0.010)               (0.007)               (0.008)               (0.009)
   2012                                             0.133***              0.018**               0.018**                0.019
                                                   (0.011)               (0.008)               (0.007)               (0.014)
   2013                                             0.110***              0.024***              0.022***              0.033***
                                                   (0.010)               (0.006)               (0.007)               (0.009)
 Structure controlsc                                 X                     X                     X                     X
 Education controlsd                                 X                     X                     X                     X
 Socioeconomic controlse                             X                     X                     X                     X
 Geographic controlsf                                X                     X                     X                     X
 Quarter-of-sale dummies                             X                     X                     X                     X
 County subdivision-year dummiesg                    X
 Boundary-year dummies                                                      X                    X                     X
 Number of boundaries                                                     18,465              18,327                 17,459
 Observations                                      769,140               423,302              328,557               162,473
 Adjusted R2                                         0.76                  0.79                 0.78                  0.77
    a Coefficient estimates (standard errors) are reported. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the elementary

school-year-level.
    b Annual elementary school quality as measured by the California Department of Education’s Growth Academic Performance

Index (in hundreds).
    c Structure controls include number of bedrooms, living space and second-order polynomials in bathrooms and building age.
    d School controls include structure-level property tax assessment, elementary school-level student-teacher ratio, and (for

“All”) school district-level expenditures per student.
    e Neighborhood controls include block group-level household income, population density, as well as share black, Asian,

Hispanic, high school and college graduate, residing with own children, and owning residence.
    f Geographic controls include second-order polynomials in distance to employment centers and distance to the shoreline.
    g The U.S. Census Bureau divided Los Angeles County into 20 subdivisions for statistical purposes in 2010.




                                                                28
                                   Table 5: Estimated Counter-Cyclical Trend Is Statistically Significant

             2001       2002      2003      2004      2005      2006     2007       2008      2009       2010       2011      2012       2013

     2000    0.003     -0.010     0.005    0.008     0.015     0.017**   0.022**   0.022      -0.000     0.010     -0.006     -0.001     -0.004

     2001              -0.013     0.003    0.005     0.012     0.014     0.019     0.019      -0.003     0.007     -0.008     -0.003     -0.007

     2002                         0.016    0.018     0.025*** 0.028*** 0.032*** 0.032**       0.010      0.020**   0.005      0.010      0.006

     2003                                  0.002     0.009     0.012     0.016     0.016      -0.006     0.004     -0.011     -0.006     -0.010

     2004                                            0.007     0.009     0.014     0.014      -0.008     0.002     -0.014     -0.009     -0.012

     2005                                                      0.002     0.007     0.007      -0.015     -0.005    -0.020**   -0.015     -0.019**
29




     2006                                                                0.005     0.005      -0.017**   -0.007    -0.023**   -0.018     -0.021**

     2007                                                                          -0.000     -0.022**   -0.012    -0.028**   -0.023**   -0.026**

     2008                                                                                     -0.022     -0.012    -0.028**   -0.023     -0.026**

     2009                                                                                                0.010     -0.005     -0.000     -0.004

     2010                                                                                                          -0.015     -0.010     -0.014

     2011                                                                                                                     0.005      0.001

     2012                                                                                                                                -0.004


     Note: Each cell displays the difference in the regression coefficient on elementary school quality between the row year and the column year
      using the estimates for the “<.2mi” specification presented in Table 4.
                                     Table 6: Panel A – Testing the Difference of Means Across Transaction Years

                                            2000            2001             2002             2003            2004             2005            2006
     Real sales price (ln $)                -0.39***         -0.31***        -0.18***         -0.02             0.20***         0.37***         0.44***
                                           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)
     Elementary school quality              -1.17***         -0.85***        -0.54***         -0.19***         -0.17***        -0.03            0.08**
                                           (0.06)           (0.05)          (0.05)           (0.04)           (0.04)          (0.04)           (0.04)
     Structure controls
       Bedrooms                             -0.00            -0.03*           0.00            -0.01            -0.01            0.00            -0.01
                                           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)
      Bathrooms                              0.00            -0.01            0.00            -0.01            -0.02           -0.02            -0.06***
                                           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)
      Living space (ln square ft.)           0.01            -0.01            0.01            -0.01            -0.01           -0.01            -0.03***
                                           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
      Building age                          -5.32***         -4.48***        -3.69***         -2.49***         -2.25***        -1.82**          0.58
                                           (0.69)           (0.68)          (0.73)           (0.69)           (0.74)          (0.91)           (0.77)
     Observations                          14,370           13,938          15,365           16,093          15,730           15,367          12,272
30




                                            2007            2008             2009            2010            2011             2012             2013
     Real sales price (ln $)                0.47***          0.03            -0.19***        -0.15***         -0.18***        -0.13***         0.10***
                                           (0.02)           (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)
     Elementary school quality              0.36***          0.41***         0.48***         0.62***          0.79***         0.86***          0.87***
                                           (0.04)           (0.04)          (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)
     Structure controls
       Bedrooms                             0.01             0.03            -0.03           -0.07***         0.05**          0.07***          0.03
                                           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)
      Bathrooms                             0.05             0.02            -0.07***        -0.09***         0.07***         0.10***          0.10***
                                           (0.03)           (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)
      Living space (ln square ft.)          0.03**           0.01            -0.03***        -0.03***         0.02*           0.04***          0.04***
                                           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
      Building age                          0.61             0.31            3.24***          5.47***         5.57***         6.32***          7.65***
                                           (0.80)           (0.84)          (0.81)          (0.72)           (0.70)          (0.70)           (0.67)
     Observations                           7,530           7,247           9,256            8,721           9,427           10,545           10,223

     Note: Each cell shows the coefficient estimate (standard error) from a regression of each listed variable on a dummy variable – 1 if the transaction
      occurred in the given year, 0 otherwise – using the .2 mile restricted sample. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the elementary school-
      year-level.
                                                 Panel B – Testing the Difference of Means Across Transaction Yearsa

                                                        2000             2001            2002             2003            2004             2005            2006
     Education controls
      Property tax (per $1,000 assessed value)           -0.02           -0.05           -0.04            -0.02           0.03             0.03             0.04
                                                        (0.04)          (0.04)          (0.04)           (0.04)          (0.04)           (0.04)           (0.04)
      Student-teacher ratio                               0.19           0.21             0.20             0.02           -0.06            -0.59            -0.41
                                                        (0.19)          (0.19)          (0.20)           (0.21)          (0.25)           (0.36)           (0.31)
      Per-pupil expenditure ($)                          -3.75          -25.21          -27.04             0.62          -19.59           -93.47            11.52
                                                       (104.40)        (106.29)        (105.48)         (105.06)        (105.83)         (111.90)         (109.44)
     Socioeconomic controls
       Median household income ($)                      569.14          495.74         1114.06           392.66         -1364.25*        -1788.32**       -2713.92***
                                                       (903.84)        (855.86)        (889.40)         (898.02)        (817.03)         (808.88)         (818.74)
      Population per mi2                                44.90           79.16           -46.48           -34.17           54.20            84.07           350.57
                                                       (202.66)        (208.25)        (206.23)         (206.47)        (203.85)         (238.43)         (214.44)
      Black                                              -0.00           -0.01           -0.01            -0.01           -0.00            0.01             0.02*
                                                        (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)
      Asian                                              0.01            0.01             0.01            0.00            -0.00            -0.01            -0.01**
                                                        (0.01)          (0.00)          (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)
     Observations                                      14,370           13,938          15,365           16,093          15,730           15,367          12,272
31




                                                        2007            2008             2009            2010             2011            2012             2013
     Education controls
      Property tax (per $1,000 assessed value)          -0.02             -0.00           0.11**         0.03             -0.01           -0.02            -0.06*
                                                       (0.04)            (0.04)         (0.05)          (0.04)           (0.04)          (0.03)           (0.03)
      Student-teacher ratio                              0.09             -0.14           0.70***        -0.15            -0.09           0.02             0.15
                                                       (0.20)            (0.29)         (0.12)          (0.24)           (0.21)          (0.21)           (0.20)
      Per-pupil expenditure ($)                        84.68            -203.32*         98.77          38.02            55.59           74.26            61.09
                                                      (108.62)         (115.85)        (103.37)        (105.70)         (105.82)        (107.22)         (107.17)
     Socioeconomic controls
       Median household income ($)                    1962.29**          724.11        -1841.60**      -1143.37          667.92         1070.50           3135.02***
                                                      (948.93)         (847.90)        (797.80)        (861.66)         (946.80)        (983.51)         (1027.25)
      Population per mi2                               -268.03          -666.27***      213.01          314.48           74.73           -89.43            -425.39**
                                                      (205.67)         (202.14)        (207.41)        (215.40)         (213.44)        (199.09)          (203.94)
      Black                                              -0.01            -0.01*          0.01            0.00             0.01            0.01              -0.01
                                                        (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)             (0.01)
      Asian                                              0.00             -0.00          -0.01           -0.00            -0.01           -0.00              0.01
                                                        (0.00)           (0.00)         (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.00)             (0.01)
     Observations                                       7,530           7,247           9,256            8,721           9,427           10,545           10,223

     Note: Each cell shows the coefficient estimate (standard error) from a regression of each listed variable on a dummy variable – 1 if the transaction occurred in the
      given year, 0 otherwise – using the .2 mile restricted sample. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the elementary school-year-level.
                                                Panel C – Testing the Difference of Means Across Transaction Yearsa

                                                      2000             2001             2002            2003             2004             2005            2006
     Socioeconomic controls (cont.)
       Hispanic                                        -0.01           -0.01            -0.01            -0.00           0.01             0.01              0.03**
                                                      (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)
      High school graduate (25+)                        0.01            0.01             0.01             0.00           -0.01            -0.01            -0.02***
                                                      (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)
      College graduate (25+)                            0.01            0.01            0.01              0.00           -0.01            -0.02**          -0.02***
                                                      (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)
      Reside with own-children                         -0.00           -0.00            -0.00            -0.00            0.01             0.01**           0.01**
                                                      (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)
      Own residence                                    -0.00            0.00            0.00             -0.00           -0.01            -0.00            -0.01
                                                      (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)
     Geographic controls
      Distance to employment centers (mi.)             -0.35           -0.34            -0.18            0.04            0.45             0.99*            0.37
                                                      (0.38)          (0.37)           (0.40)           (0.40)          (0.46)           (0.55)           (0.50)
      Distance to shoreline (mi.)                      -0.70           -0.57            -0.30            -0.08           0.66             1.52*            0.67
                                                      (0.53)          (0.52)           (0.57)           (0.57)          (0.66)           (0.79)           (0.71)
     Observations                                     14,370          13,938           15,365          16,093           15,730           15,367          12,272
32




                                                      2007             2008            2009             2010            2011             2012             2013
     Socioeconomic controls (cont.)
       Hispanic                                        -0.03***        -0.01             0.03***         0.02             0.00           -0.01            -0.03***
                                                      (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
      High school graduate (25+)                        0.02***         0.01*           -0.02***        -0.01*           -0.00            0.00             0.02***
                                                      (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
      College graduate (25+)                            0.02***        -0.00            -0.02***        -0.01             0.00            0.01             0.03***
                                                      (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
      Reside with own-children                         -0.01***        -0.00            0.01***         0.01             -0.00           -0.01            -0.02***
                                                      (0.01)          (0.00)           (0.01)          (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)
      Own residence                                    0.00             0.02**          0.00            -0.00             0.00           -0.00             0.01
                                                      (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
     Geographic controls
      Distance to employment centers (mi.)             -0.58           1.19**           -0.03           -0.06            -0.54           -0.62*           -0.62
                                                      (0.40)          (0.52)           (0.44)          (0.43)           (0.38)          (0.38)           (0.38)
      Distance to shoreline (mi.)                      -0.58           1.70**           0.15            -0.18            -0.77           -0.92*           -0.82
                                                      (0.55)          (0.74)           (0.65)          (0.60)           (0.53)          (0.51)           (0.51)
     Observations                                     7,530            7,247           9,256            8,721           9,427           10,545           10,223

     Note: Each cell shows the coefficient estimate (standard error) from a regression of each listed variable on a dummy variable – 1 if the transaction occurred in the
      given year, 0 otherwise – using the .2 mile restricted sample. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the elementary school-year-level.
                       Table 6: Counter-Cyclical Trend Is Robust to Various Specification Checks

                                          Dependent variable: Real sales price (ln $)a


                                      Exclude           Exclude Private                           Program            Synthetic
                                                                              API Deciled
                                      LAUSDb           or Choice >10%c                          Improvemente           APIf
 Elementary school qualityb ×...
   2000                                 0.023***             0.038***             0.005**                                0.008
                                       (0.007)              (0.010)             (0.002)                                (0.010)
   2001                                 0.005                0.030***            0.007***                               0.016**
                                       (0.007)              (0.008)             (0.002)                                (0.007)
   2002                                 0.016**              0.029***             0.010***                               0.022*
                                       (0.007)              (0.011)             (0.003)                                (0.012)
   2003                                 -0.005               0.009                0.004*             0.014*              0.005
                                       (0.010)              (0.014)             (0.002)            (0.008)             (0.011)
   2004                                  0.006               0.011               0.002              0.011*              0.008
                                       (0.007)              (0.009)             (0.002)            (0.006)             (0.008)
   2005                                 -0.005               0.002                0.001             0.006               -0.002
                                       (0.007)              (0.008)             (0.002)            (0.007)             (0.007)
   2006                                 -0.004               0.003               -0.000              0.001              -0.003
                                       (0.008)              (0.008)             (0.002)            (0.007)             (0.007)
   2007                                  0.003               0.014               -0.002             -0.001              -0.011
                                       (0.009)              (0.012)             (0.002)            (0.010)             (0.009)
   2008                                  0.020               0.037**              0.000              0.004              -0.030**
                                       (0.013)              (0.015)             (0.003)            (0.012)             (0.012)
   2009                                  0.024***            0.022*               0.005***           0.032***           -0.004
                                       (0.008)              (0.012)             (0.002)            (0.008)             (0.008)
   2010                                  0.010               0.028**              0.003*             0.001              -0.009
                                       (0.010)              (0.011)             (0.002)            (0.008)             (0.008)
   2011                                  0.018**             0.027**              0.006***           0.022**             0.002
                                       (0.009)              (0.011)             (0.002)            (0.009)             (0.007)
   2012                                  0.011               0.032**              0.005***           0.016**             0.011
                                       (0.008)              (0.013)             (0.002)            (0.008)             (0.011)
   2013                                  0.017**             0.029***             0.006***           0.021***            0.004
                                       (0.008)              (0.010)             (0.002)            (0.008)             (0.008)
 Structure controlsc                      X                   X                    X                 X                   X
 Education controlsd                      X                   X                    X                 X                   X
 Socioeconomic controlse                  X                   X                    X                 X                   X
 Geographic controls                      X                   X                    X                 X                   X
 Quarter-of-sale dummies                  X                   X                    X                 X                   X
 Boundary-year dummies                    X                   X                    X                 X                   X
 Number of boundaries                   9,805               4,240               18,327             14,222             18,321
 Observations                          181,321              72,114              328,557            242,224            328,400
 Adjusted R2                             0.81                0.74                 0.78              0.81                0.78
    a Coefficient estimates (standard errors) are reported. All specification checks represent deviations from the baseline “<.2mi”

specification presented in Table 4. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the elementary school-year-level (except
for the last specification, where standard errors are the result of 100 bootstrap replications).
    b This specification excludes all homes within the Los Angeles Unified School District.
    c This specification excludes homes in 45 (out of a total of 69) school districts (including LAUSD) in which more than 10

percent of K-8 students enroll in private schools, or more than 10 percent of K-8 students employ an educational choice option
(e.g. charter, magnet).
    d This specification uses decile ranks (calculated annually among all Los Angeles County elementary schools) of the California

Department of Education’s Growth Academic Performance Index as the measure of elementary school quality.
    e This specification includes the lack of “program improvement” status interacted with a vector of year dummies as additional

control variables.
    f This specification includes a “synthetic” Academic Performance Index interacted with a vector of year dummies as addi-

tional control variables. (This value is calculated from a year-specific regression, using the estimation sample, of API on four
school-level demographic variables: the share of enrolled students who identified as African American, as Asian, as Hispanic
or Latino, and the share who qualified for free or reduced-price meals.) The number of observations differs from that of the
baseline regression due to limited cases of missing school-level demographic data.


                                                               33
Web Appendix




     34
                              Figure A.1: Los Angeles Metropolitan Area GDP Growth


                                                         7.5



                    Annual Percent Change                5.0



                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                        Los Angeles

                                                                                                                        U.S.
                                                         0.0



                                                        −2.5



                                                        −5.0
                                                               2000   2002   2004    2006    2008     2010     2012


Note: Estimated annual percent changes in current dollars of GDP for the U.S. and the Los Angeles-Long Beach-
 Anaheim metropolitan statistical area are provided by the BEA.




                    Figure A.2: Subsample Estimation by Cultural Background




                                                         10
                    Change in Sales Price (Thousands)




                                                          5
                                                                                                                      Baseline

                                                                                                                      Black > .10
                                                          0
                                                                                                                      Asian > .10

                                                                                                                      Hispanic > .25
                                                        −5



                                                        −10


                                                               2000   2002   2004   2006    2008    2010     2012


Note: The baseline “<.2mi” specification is presented in Table 4. Transactions included in each subsample if the
 share of the population residing in the block group (as of 2000) was greater than the given value.




                                                                                            35
                    Figure A.3: Subsample Estimation by Socioeconomic Status



                                                          40




                     Change in Sales Price (Thousands)    20

                                                                                                           Baseline

                                                                                                           Income < 40,000
                                                           0
                                                                                                           High School Graduate < .60

                                                                                                           Monthly Foreclosures > .0005

                                                         −20




                                                         −40
                                                               2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012


Note: The baseline “<.2mi” specification is presented in Table 4. Transactions included in the low income (alter-
 nately, high school graduate) subsample if the share of the population residing in the block group (as of 2000)
 was less than the given value. Transactions included in the high foreclosure subsample if the rate of monthly
 foreclosures in the zip code during the transaction year, as reported by Zillow, was greater than the given value.


                                                 Figure A.4: Subsample Estimation by Geographic Area
                     Change in Sales Price (Thousands)




                                                          40




                                                                                                                         Baseline

                                                           0                                                             Beach Cities

                                                                                                                         South Central

                                                                                                                         High Valleys

                                                         −40




                                                               2000   2002   2004   2006   2008     2010    2012


Note: The baseline “<.2mi” specification is presented in Table 4. Transactions included in the: beach cities sub-
 sample if the home was located in Agoura Hills, Malibu, Santa Monica, South Bay Cities, Torrance or Palos
 Verdes; south central subsample if the home was located in South Gate, East Los Angeles, Inglewood, Compton,
 Long Beach or Lakewood; and high valleys subsample if the home was located in the Antelope Valley or Santa
 Clarita Valley.



                                                                                           36
         Figure A.5: Share of Los Angeles County Students Enrolled in Private School




                   Percent         12




                                   11                                                               K−5

                                                                                                    K−6



                                   10




                                        2000   2002   2004    2006        2008    2010     2012


Note: Enrollment data provided by the California Department of Education.




                Figure A.6: Median Tenure for Los Angeles County Householders




                                   13




                                   11
                   Years in Unit




                                                                                                  Owners
                                    9                                                             All



                                    7




                                    5

                                        2000   2002   2004   2006        2008    2010    2012


Note: Household tenure data provided by the U.S. Census Bureau – the decennial census for 2000, and the Amer-
 ican Community Survey for 2005-2013.




                                                                    37
