NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PARENTAL RESOURCES AND COLLEGE ATTENDANCE:
EVIDENCE FROM LOTTERY WINS
George Bulman
Robert Fairlie
Sarena Goodman
Adam Isen
Working Paper 22679
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22679

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016, Revised July 2017

We thank Scott Carrell, Oded Gurantz, Brad Hershbein, Nate Hilger, Lance Lochner, Paco
Martorell, Benjamin Marx, and seminar participants at the 2016 NBER Summer Institute
Education Meeting, 2016 All California Labor Economics Conference, 2016 Annual Conference
on Taxation, 2017 NBER Labor Studies Program Meeting, American University, Census Bureau,
George Mason University, Stanford University, Urban Institute, University of Bonn, University
of California at Santa Cruz, University of Illinois, and the University of Nevada at Reno for
helpful comments and suggestions. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Board, National
Bureau of Economic Research, or U.S. Department of the Treasury.˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by George Bulman, Robert Fairlie, Sarena Goodman, and Adam Isen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Parental Resources and College Attendance: Evidence from Lottery Wins
George Bulman, Robert Fairlie, Sarena Goodman, and Adam Isen
NBER Working Paper No. 22679
September 2016, Revised July 2017
JEL No. I23
ABSTRACT
We examine more than one million children whose parents won a state lottery to trace out the
effect of financial resources on college attendance. The analysis links the universe of federal tax
records to federal financial aid records and leverages substantial variation in the size and timing
of lottery wins. The results reveal that, while the per-dollar effect is modest (i.e., about 0.6
percentage point for every $100,000 of winnings), the relationship between win size and
attendance is only weakly concave, with a high upper bound for amounts that greatly exceed the
cost of college. The effects are smaller among lower-SES households, are not sensitive to how
early in adolescence the resource shock occurs, and persist through each of the four years after
high school. Finally, while additional resources reduce financial aid, attendance patterns are not
moderated by this crowd-out. Overall, the results imply that households derive consumption
value from college and that, in the current policy environment, financial constraints alone do not
inhibit college attendance.
George Bulman
Department of Economics
University of California
1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
gbulman@ucsc.edu
Robert Fairlie
Department of Economics
Engineering 2 Building
University of California at Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
rfairlie@ucsc.edu

Sarena Goodman
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th & Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551
sarena.f.goodman@frb.gov
Adam Isen
Office of Tax Analysis
U.S. Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20220
adam.isen@gmail.com

I.

Introduction
Despite a large college wage premium and increased focus on inequality of opportunity, the

relationship between household financial resources and college-going is not well understood. In
theory, absent financial frictions, the decision to attend college should primarily reflect its net
return. And, a longstanding objective of U.S. higher education policy has been to abate or remove
such frictions from this decision. Yet, empirically, there are substantial and persistent gaps in
college attendance by socioeconomic background, with many households citing cost as a major
factor in the decision not to attend (Federal Reserve Board, 2017), suggesting that resources may
directly influence college-going. If so, households must still be financially constrained, must
derive consumption value from college beyond its human capital benefits, or both.1
Understanding how household resources influence the decision to attend college is a critical
step to developing sound policy, but it requires overcoming the inherent identification challenge
that resources and schooling decisions are correlated with children’s ability levels, household
preferences, and other factors. Recent quasi-experimental work strives to find settings in which
changes in income or wealth can be isolated, but the resulting estimates have varied greatly in
magnitude, resulting in uncertainty around answers to several key questions.2 First, how much
does, on average—and can, at maximum—altering household resources affect college-going?
Second, is attendance more sensitive for lower- or higher-SES households, and is the availability
of resources more important at certain ages? And, finally, to what extent are the effects of resources
moderated by offsetting reductions in financial aid?3
These financial constraints may bind at the time of the college decision or limit earlier investment in children that is
complementary with college-going. Higher education subsidies would not alleviate the latter.
2
Early studies considered cross-sectional and time variation in income (e.g., Acemoglu and Pischke, 2001; Blanden
and Gregg, 2004), while more recent work has exploited differences generated by job loss (Coelli, 2011; Pan and Ost,
2014; Hilger, 2016), tax credits (Manoli and Turner, 2016; Bastian and Michelmore, 2016), casino revenue (Akee and
Copeland, 2010), land grant lotteries (Bleakley and Ferrie, 2016), oil revenue (Loken, 2010), and housing prices
(Lovenheim, 2011; Lovenheim and Reynolds, 2013). A number of these studies find attendance effects as large as 1
percentage point per $1,000 of income, while others find effects of less than 1 percentage point per $100,000. This
wide range of estimates could reflect differences in the responsiveness of the affected populations, the levels of
resource change, or other aspects of the research designs. Related studies with a similarly diverse set of findings
consider the effect of income and job loss on cognitive development, health, and employment (e.g., Blau, 1999;
Maurin, 2002; Bratberg, Nilsen, and Vaage, 2008; Oreopoulos, Page, and Stevens, 2008; Ananat et al., 2011; Rege,
Tella, and Votruba, 2011; Dahl and Lochner, 2012; Aizer et al., 2016; and Cesarini et al., 2016).
3
Policymakers might be particularly interested in whether borrowing constraints, in light of existing financial aid and
educational tax credit policies, still hinder households from investing in human capital; therefore, analysis should
explicitly account for how these policies interact with changes in resources.
1

2

To shed light on these questions, this study examines college outcomes for 1.5 million children
whose households won a state lottery between 2000 and 2013. Specifically, we leverage the
universe of federal tax records to identify individuals who won as little as $600 (the federal
reporting minimum) to tens of millions of dollars over this period, match winners to their children,
measure these children’s college attendance and financial aid (via linked federal financial aid
records), and place estimates in the context of household characteristics and post-win labor supply
and investment.4 The empirical analysis leverages the substantial variation in win size and timing.
Our primary outcome of interest is the transition to college from high school, and comparisons are
drawn between children from households with larger and smaller wins and, to account for
potentially unobserved differences between these groups, whether their parents win the lottery
before or after their predicted graduation year.5 Lottery wins in this design are balanced across a
rich set of household characteristics.
The estimates reveal several core findings. First, small-to-moderate increases in resources,
which should ease most immediate financial constraints, have little effect on attendance. For
example, the estimated effect of lottery wins averaging $50,000 on enrollment is not statistically
significant and rules out an increase of as little as 0.4 percentage point (p.p.).6 Second, the
relationship is not highly concave, and the size of the effect continues to grow at amounts greatly
exceeding the cost of college, preliminary indications that households may value college in a more
complex fashion than simply an investment in human capital. Specifically, while the per-dollar
effect of a win is not large (0.6 p.p. per $100,000), attendance increases by an average of 5 p.p. in
response to lottery wins between $300,000 and $1,000,000 and by more than 10 p.p. in response
to wins of $1,000,000 or more. These effects are concentrated at four-year colleges and persist for

Survey data indicate that a substantial fraction of households play the lottery each year, with Gallup Polls indicating
as many as half. In Section VI, we use survey and tax data to assess how lottery players and winners compare to the
general population and find, at most, modest differences. We also show that the household earnings response to lottery
wins over time is in line with the predicted response to an ordinary wealth shock in a standard lifecycle model.
5
Studies examining the effects of lotteries on labor supply, health, and cognitive development have taken various
approaches for controlling for potentially unobserved differences among winners (e.g., see Imbens, Rubin, and
Sacerdote (2001), Lindahl (2005), Hankins, Hoekstra, and Skiba (2011), Powdthavee and Oswald (2014), Apouey and
Clark (2015), Cesarini et al. (2015, 2016)). Notably, Cesarini et al. (2015, 2016), using Swedish lotteries, can observe
those who play and do not win in some cases and otherwise can explicitly control for a household’s probability of
experiencing a win.
6
We also find that moderate-sized wins have little or no effect on whether children attend a two-year college, on
whether children attend a public or private college, and on persistence in college.
4

3

several years after high school graduation. Finally, the results point to a very high upper bound.
Thus, large changes in resources can fundamentally alter a child’s educational trajectory.
We extend the analysis to explore the role of financial constraints, to examine the importance
of financial aid crowd-out, and to shed light on competing uses of resources. First, we investigate
if there is heterogeneity in responsiveness across household economic well-being and find that
effects are, if anything, smaller among households with lower earnings and households with less
savings (i.e., investment income). Second, we find no evidence that earlier resource shocks have
larger effects, either in general or for lower-SES households in particular. Third, since additional
resources reduce eligibility for need-based financial assistance, we examine whether aid crowdout is suppressing the response. Namely, we develop a test that exploits the fact that lottery wins
that occur in the tax year prior to filing federal financial aid forms are treated as income, which is
heavily penalized in financial aid formulas, while wins that occur prior to that year are treated as
wealth, which is not. This exercise reveals no evidence that offsetting reductions in aid are
moderating attendance effects. Finally, we find that, within our design, households decrease labor
supply, increase savings, and are more likely to allocate money towards housing. Interestingly,
lower-SES households exhibit smaller reductions in earnings and smaller increases in savings,
suggesting that they are more likely to use additional resources for (non-college) consumption.
This study is the first to use data on the universe of lottery winners in the United States to
examine any outcome and the first to exploit variation among lottery winners to examine the
effects of household financial resources on college attendance. Relative to prior work, a research
design using lotteries is well-suited to estimate the role of resources: the size of the shock is salient
to the household, and, unlike in settings where factors that might affect educational outcomes help
generate a study’s identifying variation, lottery income generally does not load other factors that
confound interpretation. Several features of our design, beyond both the breadth and scope of the
data as well as the use of lottery wins for identifying variation, allow us to advance the literature
and to help resolve the uncertainty among disparate existing estimates and potential mechanisms.
First, there is extremely wide variation in the size of lottery wins, enabling us to paint a rich picture
of the magnitude of additional resources needed to generate significant changes in college
outcomes and to examine the degree of concavity and the upper bound.7 Likewise, the diversity of
In particular, to examine concavity, we observe similar households receiving vastly different-sized resource shocks
and thus do not need to (unrealistically) assume that there is no treatment heterogeneity by socioeconomic background.
7

4

household types affected and the variation in the timing of wins (relative to a child’s age) allows
us to draw more-refined comparisons within a single context to ascertain which household types
are most sensitive to additional resources, to investigate the relative importance of differently
timed shocks, and to estimate the role of corresponding changes in need-based financial
assistance.8 We are also able to examine alternative margins of household response, such as
earnings and savings, and to consider heterogeneity in the marginal propensity to consume across
households to help contextualize the findings across other types of spending. Finally, our full
collection of evidence enables us to argue that our main results are consistent with households
deriving consumption value from college and are not consistent with households facing binding
constraints that either make college unaffordable or limit complementary investment.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the administrative data used for
analysis. Section III details the empirical design and the underlying assumptions. Section IV
describes the results, robustness, and extensions (including an investigation of heterogeneity and
financial aid). Section V discusses the mechanisms most consistent with the results. Section VI
explores issues of external validity and the relation of our findings to the prior literature. Section
VII concludes.
II.

Sample Construction and Characteristics
The sample is formed by merging administrative records from two sources. First, we use the

universe of federal tax records for the U.S. population to identify 1.5 million individuals who
graduated from high school between 1999 and 2013 and had a parent with a state-reported lottery
win. Their individual tax records are linked to their federal financial aid records and their parents’
tax records. Throughout the analysis, all dollar amounts are adjusted for inflation and denoted in
real 2010 dollars.
To construct the sample, we identify any individual with a state lottery win reported on the
third-party reporting Form W-2G for the purposes of tax withholding. This form is first available
in 1999. All prizes in excess of $600 must be reported by the relevant state agency to the IRS and
indicate the state and year of the lottery. The first calendar year that we observe an individual
In addition, observing the calendar year in which a win occurs allows us to examine whether the year in which
financial resources become salient should be taken into account in the design of policies seeking to improve college
affordability (e.g., student aid offers and education tax credits).
8

5

receiving lottery income is designated as the “win year,” and is used to classify household
treatment.9 In a small fraction of cases, assumptions are required to identify the exact timing or
amount of an individual’s first win.10 These ambiguous cases are excluded from the baseline
sample, but we show that the estimates are essentially unchanged when they are included.
To form “households,” lottery winners are linked to their full set of tax records back to 1996
(the first year such data are available), which includes identifying information for any dependents
they claimed on their Form 1040 over that window. This approach offers an advantage over
previous lottery studies that rely on matching win amount data from lottery agencies with outcome
data from other sources – a process that is likely to introduce measurement error. Parent-child
matches are only included if the child is claimed both prior to the win and to turning 19 years old.11
These links will include birth parents, step parents, and adoptive parents who are financially
responsible for a child and whose income and assets are likely to be considered for the purposes
of educational grants and loans provided by the federal government and academic institutions. (We
also present results using birth parents as determined by Social Security Administration records.)
A primary outcome of interest is whether children transition immediately to college after high
school, which we derive from several sources. We measure annual attendance with Form 1098-T
data, a mandatory third-party reporting form filed by post-secondary institutions that is available
beginning in 1999. High school graduation cohort is approximated from each child’s exact
birthdate (available via social security card applications), the state in which the child was born,

Because we cannot observe whether lottery income received in 1999 is part of a multi-year payout stemming from
an earlier win, we only include wins in the analysis that occurred in 2000 or later. The first win year is preferred
because: 1) subsequent wins could be endogenous to the size of the initial win and hence contaminate the assignment
of win size and 2) using subsequent wins would lead to the misclassification of treatment status whereby some parents
whose later win occurred after their child graduated from high school will also have won before their child graduated
from high school. A very small fraction of households have substantial lottery wins in the years after their first win,
so subsequent wins are unlikely to significantly bias the estimates. For example, less than 4 percent of households win
$10,000 or more in the four years after their initial win. Likewise, the probability that a household experienced a large
win prior to the first observable year, 1999, is small. To verify this, we note that only a small fraction of those with
wins in the second half of the sample period experienced a large win in the first half. Similarly, restricting attention to
first wins that occurred in the second half of the sample period generates similar estimates to using the full sample.
10
This occurs when an individual is observed receiving supplemental income that matches their win amount in the
year prior to state reporting (suggesting that they were collecting the win before it was reported by the state), when an
individual has multiple wins in the same year and it is unclear which occurred first, and when a win is paid out over
multiple years and thus needs to be converted to an annualized equivalent and may not be fully observed during the
data window.
11
Claiming children after a win could be endogenous to the extent that tax filing is influenced by lottery wins, and
claiming children aged 19 and over is correlated with whether or not they are attending college.
9

6

and the corresponding school entry age laws for that state.12 Because Form 1098-T is filed by
calendar (tax) year and not by academic year, children with 1098-Ts for their predicted high school
graduation year are classified as transitioning to college immediately.
We also examine the characteristics of colleges children attend as well as their financial aid
receipt. For the former, Form 1098-T data are linked to college characteristics maintained by the
National Center for Education Statistics Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System,
including whether the college is a two- or four-year and public, private, or for-profit institution.
For the latter, colleges that participate in Title IV programs (e.g., Pell Grant, subsidized and
unsubsidized Stafford Loans) are required to report student-level federal aid application and
disbursement to the Department of Education, which we match via social security number to each
child. These data contain an array of federal financial aid information for each academic year,
including application for aid (i.e., filing a FAFSA), amount of subsidized loans, amount of
unsubsidized loans, Pell Grant receipt and amount, and expected family contribution.
The baseline analysis restricts the sample to children from families that experienced a lottery
win within six years of their expected high school graduation year (though we evaluate the
robustness of the estimates to alternative windows). As shown in Table 1, the resulting population
includes nearly 1.5 million children whose households experienced a win, with 44 percent of those
wins occurring prior to their expected high school graduation year. Approximately 35 percent of
our sample attends college in their expected high school graduation year and approximately 22
percent attends a four-year college. Table 1 also shows that the size of the wins varies widely.
About 96,000 children are from households that win over $10,000, nearly 14,000 are from
households that win over $100,000, and 1,300 are from households that win over $1,000,000.
Finally, we draw on a number of child, parent, and household characteristics to test for balance
in the research design, to include as controls, and to examine heterogeneity. Many of these
The outcome is measured for all children and not for high school graduates only (where graduating may be
endogenous to financial resources and college plans). Note that the estimates will be attenuated by students who
graduate in a year other than the predicted year, if at all. For example, students who dropped out, who are held back,
or who move to a state with a different school entry age would not attend college in the expected year. Because these
forms of measurement error are potentially endogenous, the predicted year of graduation represents the best available
exogenous measure of treatment. For these reasons, our calculated proportion that attend college in the year of
expected high school graduation will also be lower than figures the Department of Education publishes of the
immediate college enrollment rates of recent high school completers. To capture students who graduate a year late,
which is the likely alternative to graduating as predicted (among non-dropouts), we consider an alternative definition
of attendance that also includes attendance in the following year.
12

7

variables (e.g., wages, adjusted gross income, filing status, number of dependents, marital status)
are reported on Form 1040 and other tax forms, while demographic information (e.g., gender,
citizenship) comes from social security records. Characteristics are based on pre-win years, as
post-win characteristics may be endogenous to the win.13 To examine heterogeneity by household
economic well-being, the sample is split by adjusted gross income and the presence of savings
(using investment income as a proxy). The presence of an interest-bearing mortgage is used as a
proxy for homeownership. We also examine several of these measures, which are based on thirdparty reporting forms (e.g., W-2, 1099, 1099-int, and 1099-div), as outcomes (e.g., wages,
investment income, homeownership). Table 2 indicates that, prior to a lottery win, the average
household in the sample has wages of approximately $52,000, and 57 percent file as married. The
homeownership rate is about 56 percent, and slightly less than half of the households report interest
or dividends.
III.

Empirical Strategy
Our empirical framework exploits within-state-year variation in both win size and timing.

While the majority of the variation stems from the randomized process behind a lottery win,
comparisons across win size alone would require an assumption that winners of different-sized
payouts are not different along unobserved dimensions correlated with wins and attendance. In our
setting, variation in the payout may also be an artifact of the type of lottery played and when the
lottery is played, two factors for which it is difficult to control directly. (We are unaware of any
state that collects data on the specific day and type of lottery tickets purchased by each individual,
as tickets are sold by a variety of stores and are often paid for in cash.) Moreover, prior literature
has documented differences in the types of households that play particular lotteries (Oster, 2004),
and, within our data, there are observable differences in household characteristics by win size.
To abstract from this assumption, we leverage variation in the timing of wins. Specifically, we
focus on outcomes that occur within a particular time frame relative to high school graduation and
use the experiences of children who were “too old” at the time of the win to absorb unobserved
differences between households that experience larger and smaller wins. For example, whether a

Form 1040 is first available in 1996, and the first cohort of interest is 1999, so household characteristics are based
on three pre-win years.
13

8

child transitions to college immediately from high school cannot be affected by wins that occur in
the years after high school graduation.14 Results from this design are similar to those from a design
that relies solely on win size but includes household control variables.
Finally, our sample includes wins as high as tens of millions of dollars; thus, how we choose
to parameterize win size is important. For example, the effect of each dollar will necessarily
decrease at some level, and a linear functional form will place the most weight on the largest
wins.15 The main strategy addresses this issue via a flexible “step function” approach that
categorizes wins into bins and thereby allows effects to vary across win ranges without imposing
a strong functional form assumption. A second strategy, which we also implement, relies upon a
continuous measure of wins but estimates, and then restricts attention to, the range of wins over
which the relationship appears to be linear (i.e., over which there is no evidence of concavity). For
the main strategy, we classify wins according to five thresholds: $10,000, $30,000, $100,000,
$300,000, and $1,000,000. (We show that the results are not sensitive to these thresholds.)
The baseline step function specification is:
𝑦𝑖,𝑐,𝑠,𝑦 = 𝛿𝑠,𝑦 + 𝛿𝑐 + 𝑿𝑖 𝛾 + 𝜃𝑃𝑟𝑒𝐻𝑆𝐺𝑖 + ∑ 𝛼𝑗 (𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒ℎ = 𝑗) + ∑ 𝛽𝑗 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝐻𝑆𝐺𝑖 (𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒ℎ = 𝑗) + 𝜀𝑖,𝑐,𝑠,𝑦
𝑗

𝑗

The unit of observation is a child i in a high school cohort c in state s and win year y. The
specification includes state-by-year of win and expected year of high school graduation cohort
fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the parent winner level. 𝑿𝑖 is a vector of 15 pre-win
household and child characteristics that we include incrementally.16 The 𝛼𝑗 coefficients absorb
fixed differences across households that experience different-sized wins, with wins between $600
and $10,000 serving as the omitted group (though, in practice, the exact range of the omitted group

It is unclear if, and to what extent, children whose parents won in the year that they graduate can respond. A win in
the fall is certainly too late to change a student's decision about whether or not to enroll in a four-year college for that
year. If the win occurs earlier in the year, it may nonetheless be too late for a student to take the necessary steps to
enroll in college (e.g., taking the SAT or ACT and meeting application deadlines) and the student may have made
other arrangements such as taking a job or enlisting in the military. Thus the preferred specification excludes wins that
occur in the year of graduation, but we demonstrate our results are not sensitive to its inclusion in Section IVb.
15
Issues with imposing linearity on the effects of income have been noted by Loken, Mogstad, and Wiswall (2012).
We show that a linear specification results in estimates that are sensitive to the range of win sizes considered.
16
These characteristics include log wages, log adjusted gross income, claiming of the mortgage interest tax deduction,
claiming of the self-employment tax deduction, the presence of interest and dividends, the presence of earnings from
the Social Security Administration (including disability), whether a 1040 is missing for the household in any of the
three years prior to winning the lottery (from which we derive these controls), household filing status, the number of
children in the household, and parent and child gender and citizenship.
14

9

is unimportant). The coefficient 𝜃 accounts for fixed differences between children who graduate
before and after their parents experience a win. The key parameters of interest are the 𝛽𝑗
coefficients, which reflect the differential outcomes for children whose parents win a lottery of a
given size relative to children whose parents won a small lottery while accounting for fixed
differences between these groups.17 A number of outcomes, each with a temporal component, are
examined, including several variants of college attendance (e.g., sector-specific, level-specific,
different horizons relative to high school graduation), financial aid application and receipt, and
parent labor force and saving outcomes.
Before turning to the main results, we examine whether the comparisons relied upon for
identification appear to successfully isolate changes in resources. Specifically we test for balance
by estimating our baseline step function specification with 15 different exogenous pre-win
characteristics on the left hand side. Table 2 presents the results across each characteristic,
including adjusted gross income, self-employment status, homeownership, and the presence of
savings. Among the 15 variables we consider, only 2 are jointly significant across win sizes at the
10 percent level (self-employment and child gender), and among the 5 win size bins, none are
jointly significantly different across the 15 variables. An F-test across all win size bins and
variables (the resulting 75 coefficients) is not significant (p-value=0.5098). Altogether, beyond
statistical noise, there do not appear to be meaningful differences in observable child and
household characteristics, lending credence to the validity of the design.
IV.

The Effects of Household Financial Resources

a. College Attendance
To preview the empirical results, Figure 1 offers a graphical depiction of pre- and post-lottery
win attendance averages. For resource shocks of less than $100,000, any differences in attendance
by timing are small. In contrast, for larger wins, the differences are substantial, with the size of the
gap increasing in the amount. Note that children from households that experience larger wins are

The design estimates the effect of lottery wins that occur, on average, a couple of years before high school graduation
and does not hold constant subsequent endogenous changes in financial resources leading up to graduation, such as
those due to labor supply or consumption, neither do we explicitly take into account the prior amount of household
resources (which would require strong assumptions about homogeneity across households); thus, the estimates do not
necessarily recover the structural relationship between financial resources and college enrollment.
17

10

somewhat more likely to attend college, highlighting an identification challenge that, as shown in
Table 2, our design allows us to address without the inclusion of household controls.
We turn next to our formal estimates of the effect of different-sized lottery wins on attendance
at any college, a four-year college, and a two-year college in the year of high school graduation.
Table 3 presents estimates for attendance at any college. The estimates reveal that moderate-sized
shocks have little effect on attendance. Wins between $10,000 and $30,000 and between $30,000
and $100,000 produce small, insignificant estimates that rule out effects exceeding approximately
one-half p.p.. For wins between $100,000 and $300,000, the response is larger—on the order of 1
to 2 p.p.—and is marginally significant. Above this level, there are more meaningful responses.
Wins between $300,000 and $1,000,000 increase attendance by approximately 5 p.p., and very
large wins exceeding $1,000,000 increase attendance by approximately 10 p.p.. Table 4 presents
results for four-year college attendance, which closely mirror those for any college attendance and
are slightly more precise. For both outcomes, the estimates are stable to the inclusion of controls
for household, parent, and child characteristics.
Table 5 presents results for two-year college attendance. The estimates are close to zero and
insignificant for all win levels. For some win sizes, the interpretation of these zeroes is difficult,
as there may be offsetting responses underlying them. Specifically, among larger wins, for which
there was an increase in four-year enrollment, the zeroes may represent the net effect of competing
margins: some children may be induced to attend a two-year college instead of no college, while
others may be induced to attend a four-year college instead of a two-year college. For smaller wins,
which did not affect four-year attendance, the zeroes have a more straightforward interpretation:
even when we zoom in on schools that are relatively less expensive and less selective, modest
shocks to resources have no material effect on attendance. Given that enrollment responses appear
to be driven by adjustments along the four-year margin, for brevity, the remaining analyses will
focus on four-year attendance. The results are similar when the outcome of interest is any college.
The estimates thus far represent average effects for ranges of wins, abstracting from strong
functional form assumptions. However, they suggest that the effect is not very concave in the size
of the win. To explore this further, we first estimate a variant of the baseline specification, whereby
we increase the number of bins more than tenfold, and fit a Lowess plot over the estimates (Figure

11

2).18 The effect appears to be approximately linear until win sizes reach about $5,000,000, after
which the effect of marginal winnings is limited. They also indicate an upper bound of
approximately 20 p.p..
We then, in Table 6, specify win size continuously by interacting the amount of the win with
whether the win occurred prior to high school graduation. (Wins are scaled by $100,000 for ease
of interpretation.) The first column tests for concavity by including a linear and quadratic term and
imposing various caps on the largest win size included in the sample. Note that the challenge of
imposing a specific functional form on lottery wins is reflected in the sensitivity of the estimates
to the range included in the analysis.19 Consistent with the figure, the coefficient on the quadratic
term when restricting attention to wins of less than or equal to $5,000,000 is indistinguishable from
zero, suggesting little concavity in this region.20 When focusing on wins within the linear region
(capped at $5,000,000), the estimated linear effect on attendance is approximately 0.6 p.p. per
$100,000.
From the results thus far, it appears unlikely that a large fraction of students are deterred from
attending college due to binding borrowing constraints. Additional resources of $30,000 to
$100,000 should be large enough to place at least some college within reach for most households,
but they generate little change. It is also clear that the effects are not highly concave. For example,
wins averaging $500,000 generate only a fraction of the effect observed for the largest wins. In
light of these empirical findings, subsequent analysis considers how the effects differ across
households of different means, whether initial changes in enrollment persist beyond the first year
after high school, the role of offsetting financial aid, and household responses along other margins.
Before turning to these other analyses, we first explore the robustness of the results.
b. Robustness
In this section, we examine the sensitivity of our results to the timing of lottery wins relative
to the year of a child’s high school graduation and consider alternate sample restrictions, alternate
measures of college attendance, and other variants of our specification. We begin by amending the
Bins are selected as follows: increments of $5,000 up to $100,000, $25,000 up to $500,000, $100,000 up to
$1,000,000, and $500,000 up to $5,000,000. Effect sizes are estimated relative to small wins of less than $1,000.
19
The effects must become concave at some level and must be bounded since enrollment cannot exceed 100 percent.
Thus, per-dollar effects are necessarily modest for very large lottery wins. Because least squares places the greatest
weight on very large wins, including them will necessarily result in small estimated effects.
20
We also estimate the degree of concavity attempting to take into account, not only the size of the win, but also the
household’s permanent income during childhood (using parents’ pre-lottery average AGI multiplied by 18 as a proxy).
This exercise, which loads treatment heterogeneity, suggests even more linearity (up to $10,000,000 in resources).
18

12

specification to estimate the effects separately for wins that occur in each year before and after a
child graduates from high school. This exercise has several purposes. A by-year specification
reduces to an event-study framework, which helps substantiate the timing assumed in the baseline
specification and the validity of the design. The estimates should reveal a jump in attendance
outcomes for lottery wins that occurred prior to graduation and not for wins that occurred when
children were older. The exercise also provides a comparison of the relative effect sizes across the
treatment years, which we revisit when we examine heterogeneity. Finally, the exercise delivers
estimates for wins that occur in the year of graduation, which speak to the effectiveness of policies
that reduce the cost of college, or the salience of that cost, when students are in their final semester
of high school (or have already graduated).
Figure 3 plots the results for large lottery wins, defined as those that exceed $100,000 in the
top panel and $300,000 in the bottom (given that smaller wins did not significantly affect collegegoing in the main specification), and reveals that students who graduate in any of the six years
following a lottery win experience positive and significant enrollment effects. In addition,
estimates are insignificant for wins that occur during the year of high school graduation or any of
the six subsequent years. This pattern of results affirms the timing implied by the main
specification and, because there is a steep drop-off in year zero, suggests that the year in which
policies that seek to improve college affordability become salient to households is highly relevant.
(Of course, there may be a difference between an unexpected change in income in the year of high
school graduation and a subsidy that is anticipated in advance.)
We also sequentially reduce the window of lottery win years before and after graduation (Table
A1). The resulting estimates reveal that moderate-sized lottery wins, even within narrow windows,
do not appear to affect college-going. This finding suggests that the lack of large effects for
resource shocks of this size is not due to households spending down lottery wins prior to when
they would be used for college. In addition and consistent with Figure 3, large wins continue to
have large effects on college-going, even in narrow windows of timing.
The pattern and magnitude of the results is robust to a number of alternative methods of
classifying lottery win sizes, constructing key variables, and defining the sample (more fully
described in Appendix 1). The first set of these results is presented in Table A2 and demonstrate
that estimates are stable when: restricting attention to children who are linked to their birth parent
by Social Security birth records; adjusting for predicted taxes based on each household's pre-win
13

annual income and composition (since realized taxes are endogenous); using alternative omitted
win ranges as the control group; defining college attendance within one year of graduation as the
outcome (to capture students who graduate a year later than predicted); and weighting the sample
by population average characteristics. Likewise, the estimates are largely unaffected by the
inclusion of lottery wins that occurred during the year of high school graduation and wins that
could not be definitively classified in terms of size or timing. Restricting attention to withinhousehold comparisons of siblings based solely on variation in the timing of wins results in
estimates that are similar in magnitude (column 9).21 However, because this exercise discards 74
percent of the sample – i.e., all one-child households and the majority of two-child households –
the resulting estimates are much less precise and are heavily weighted toward households with
many children or children born many years apart. 22
Table A3 presents estimates for narrower bins, which also reveal no evidence of positive
effects for wins of less than $100,000 with and without the inclusion of controls for household
characteristics. On the other hand, and consistent with Figure 2 and Table 6, a bin for wins
exceeding $3,000,000 yields an effect of approximately 15 p.p., implying a high upper bound.
Some colleges may not submit enrollment data to the IRS for students whose grants meet or
exceed tuition billed, as they are not eligible for tax credits. Thus, non-classical measurement error
could bias the estimates to overstate the effects of additional resources, particularly among lowerSES households (who are most likely to receive full scholarships).23 To mitigate these concerns,
we verify that the results are robust to restricting attention to colleges that appear to report
attendance for all students (see Table A4).24 Further, an alternative construction of enrollment that
relies on either Form 1098-T or students who are observed receiving federal grant aid, as reported
to the Department of Education, generates a similar pattern of results.

The point estimates show increases of 1, 5, and 9 p.p. for the three largest win ranges. When college attendance is
defined as occurring in either the calendar year of high school graduation or the following calendar year, the estimated
effects are 1, and 5, and a statistically significant 14 percent.
22
Variation in a model with lottery winner fixed effects requires that at least one child in the household must graduate
before and after the win. This eliminates all one-child households, two-thirds of two-child households, and nearly half
of three-child households. The average number of children per household in the resulting sample grows by 50 percent.
23
Note that children from lower-income households would be more susceptible to such measurement error, yet
subsequent results reveal that the effects we detect are driven by children from higher-income households.
24
Specifically, we omit colleges that appear not to report (or appear to under-report) students that receive full grant
aid (i.e., do not pay tuition). To verify this approach, we identify colleges that have stated explicitly that they do not
file a Form 1098-T for students with full scholarships, and confirm that our method correctly identifies these colleges.
21

14

Finally, we examine how our estimates compare to those from a design that is based
exclusively on differences in lottery win sizes. Such a design requires the assumption that children
from households with different win sizes have similar propensities to attend college, which does
not seem to be the case in Figure 1 but may hold after controlling for observable household
characteristics. Indeed, Table A5 indicates that the estimates from an across size design with a rich
set of control variables are quite similar to those in Table 4.
c. Enrollment in Later Years and College Quality
Also of interest is whether resource shocks affect enrollment beyond the first year of college
and intensive margin outcomes such as the type and quality of college attended. We first look to
see whether the initial increase in enrollment is evident in later years, which, while we cannot
examine it directly with tax data, would be consistent with lottery wins inducing students to not
only enroll but also persist through college completion. Table 7 presents the effects of lottery wins
on enrollment in each of the first four years after high school graduation as well as the cumulative
change. For each successive year, children in the control group who could have been affected by
a win are excluded (i.e., if their parents’ win occurred before we observe that school year). For
wins of less than $100,000, there is no evidence of higher enrollment rates in any year or in total
years of college attendance. The effects of the largest wins are large and significant through the
first three to four years after high school graduation. Thus, it is not the case that there is a temporary
change in first year college enrollment that rapidly fades, although this result could be due to
increased persistence in school or new enrollees at later ages. This generates an average increase
in total years of college enrollment of 0.32 and 0.53 years of college for the largest two win ranges,
respectively.
Turning to college composition, because wins of less than $100,000 do not result in changes
in attendance on the extensive margin, any effects along the intensive margin for these win sizes
have a straightforward interpretation. The extensive margin enrollment increases generated by
larger wins complicate the interpretation of estimates at those levels, as potentially weaker
marginal students have been added to the pool of college matriculates. With that said, Table A6
does not reveal a clear shift in the composition of colleges attended for wins of less than $100,000
in terms of sector (i.e., the lack of an effect on total enrollment is not masking offsetting changes
in private and public college attendance rates). Likewise, when we examine college quality
(measured by the later-life earnings of attendees), we find no significant changes. Thus, there is
15

no evidence of extensive or meaningful intensive margin effects for wins of this size. The estimates
indicate that the increases in enrollment for wins between $100,000 and $1,000,000 are
concentrated at public colleges, while wins exceeding $1,000,000 increase enrollment at both
private and public colleges.
d. Heterogeneity
Households of varying means might differ in their responsiveness to resource shocks, which
could lend insight into the mechanisms that generate the main results, especially whether
borrowing constraints are a prominent factor. Table 8 presents estimates after splitting the sample
into households with annual incomes above and below the sample median (about $45,000) and
with and without interest and dividends (a proxy for savings), all measured prior to the win. The
estimates do not reveal statistically significant changes in enrollment in response to lottery wins
of less than $100,000 for any of these subgroups, including the lower-SES households. On the
other hand, the effects of larger wins is concentrated among households with greater prior
resources.25 (Table A8 decomposes the sample into income terciles and the lowest-income group
is again the least responsive; see additional heterogeneity discussion in Appendix 2.)
We can jointly reject that the responsiveness between lower- and higher-SES households
across lottery win sizes is the same. For clearer exposition, two variants of this test are included in
Table A9. The first interacts a dummy variable for higher-income (or saving) households with the
interaction of a continuous measure of lottery winnings in the segment of the win distribution
where the effect appears to be linear (i.e., wins over $5,000,000 are excluded) and whether the win
occurred prior to the year of high school graduation. The second interacts the above dummies with
the interaction of whether or not the household experienced a win exceeding $100,000 and whether
the win occurred prior to high school graduation. Both tests indicate that higher-SES households
are more responsive.26 Additionally, even when both income and savings are included in the

Estimates for two-year college attendance also do not reveal larger effects for lower-SES households (see Table
A7). That is, the null effects for two-year college attendance do not appear to be obscuring positive effects for
households that are most constrained.
26
The difference in responsiveness is much too large to be explained by the modest difference by SES in family size.
On the other hand, these heterogeneity results are consistent with our examination of complier characteristics, which
reveals they are more likely to come from higher income and positive savings households and from two-parent
households (results available upon request). We estimate complier characteristics within the binary wins framework
(assuming those with wins under 100k or wins over 100k but after the year of high school graduation are in the control
group) and solve for their characteristics using the characteristics of the always-takers in the control group and the
share of the treatment group attending college that is comprised of always-takers.
25

16

specification (column 3), neither coefficient is negative. Altogether, the main results are not driven
by households that are the most likely to be financially constrained.
We next consider whether there is heterogeneity by the timing of the win. If parental inputs
complementary to college-going are important (e.g., if there is dynamic complementarity or certain
critical periods for investment), then earlier-timed resource shocks could produce larger effects.
We consider a specification that includes a time trend interacted with an indicator for whether the
win occurred prior to graduation (i.e., treatment) and each of two summary measures of wins: a
continuous measure defined only over the linear region (as earlier) and an indicator variable for
wins over $100,000 (Columns 1 and 2 of Table A10). In both cases the coefficient on the trend is
statistically indistinguishable from zero, suggesting little difference in the size of the effect across
the year of the win prior to high school graduation.
We also examine if there is evidence that a resource shock even earlier in childhood results in
larger effects, as earlier wins may allow greater investment during a particularly formative time in
a child’s lifecycle. We explore this question by expanding the sample to include children from
households that won the lottery up to 14 years prior to their year of expected high school graduation
(as far as the data will allow). Again, both triple interaction terms are insignificant (Columns 3 and
4 of Table A10).
Finally, we combine an investigation of heterogeneity by SES and time and test whether there
is any evidence that earlier wins generate relatively larger responses among lower-income
households, which would be expected if borrowing constraints in early childhood were particularly
inhibitive. We use both the baseline sample of up to six years prior to high school graduation and
the expanded sample from the exercise above. The results, presented in the second panel of Table
A10, reveal no evidence that earlier wins are more important for lower-income households.
e. Federal Financial Aid
The size of the estimates thus far may be blunted by the potentially important role that financial
aid plays in college accessibility. In particular, if additional resources crowd out need-based
assistance, we might not expect particularly large attendance responses to small-to-moderate
lottery wins or among lower-SES households, which are eligible for the most aid. To examine this
question, we exploit a unique feature of financial aid formulas, whereby the year in which the win
occurs considerably influences the amount of aid for which a prospective student is eligible.

17

Before doing so, we first descriptively examine whether there are broad changes in financial
aid within our design. (This analysis is descriptive in nature because financial aid outcomes are
endogenous to, among other things, college attendance, composition of attendees, aid application,
and parental responses to lottery wins that affect income and asset holdings.) Unsurprisingly,
estimates reveal that the largest lottery wins reduce FAFSA application rates (despite higher rates
of attendance), and wins of all sizes increase the average expected family contribution (i.e., the
EFC, which is a key metric used in determining aid eligibility) and reduce loan and grant amounts
(Table A11).27
To investigate if crowd-out of aid is moderating attendance, we leverage a useful institutional
feature of the primary formulas used for financial aid determination – that the marginal effective
tax rate for parents’ income can be quite high (20 to 50 cents on the dollar) whereas the effective
tax rate for assets is far lower (several cents on the dollar) (Dynarski, 2004).28 These rates imply a
substantially different loss of aid depending on whether or not the win occurred in the year before
high school graduation, a critical year on which financial aid eligibility and generosity is based for
the first year of college (the “FAFSA Year”).29 To exploit this feature, we re-estimate attendance
and Pell Grant receipt (as a representative aid outcome), first excluding and then restricting
attention to wins that occurred the year before a child graduates from high school. As shown in
Table 9, when lottery wins that occur in the FAFSA Year are excluded, Pell Grant reductions are
small, but the attendance estimates are unaffected. When attention is restricted to the FAFSA Year,
the crowd-out of Pell Grants is large, but the attendance estimates are generally unchanged. The
bottom panel replicates the exercise, restricting attention to below median income households. The
results are even more striking: despite even greater reductions in grant aid for wins that occur in

While additional forms of financial aid may be available to students, e.g., state or institutional grants, the majority
is distributed through Federal programs (College Board, 2015). It is likely that institutional and state aid are crowded
out by lottery wins as well, as they tend to use the same (or similar) eligibility formulas that the Federal government
uses. Regression analyses using the restricted-access 2007-8 and 2011-2 NPSAS reveal a precisely-estimated negative
relationship between expected family contribution and freshman year state and institutional aid: -0.016 (.002).
28
There are two formulas used to determine aid eligibility, the Federal Methodology (FM) and the Institutional
Methodology (IM). The FM, used by the Federal Government and most colleges, relies exclusively on information
from the FAFSA, while the IM, used by some private colleges, relies on the FAFSA and supplementary information
such as home equity. Both formulas treat assets much more favorably than income: the FM assesses parental income
up to 47 percent and assets up to 6 percent, and the IM assesses parental income up to 46 and 5 percent, respectively.
29
A simple comparison in a myopic model focusing on the first year of college, or a more sophisticated comparison
over a full four year window of college attendance (properly discounted) reveal a difference in simulated crowd-out
that is an order of magnitude larger or twice as large, respectively, if the win occurred in the year before high school
graduation.
27

18

the FAFSA year among more financially constrained households, there is no change in estimated
attendance effects.
Still, effects in the FAFSA Year may not be fully comparable to effects in all other years if
there is treatment heterogeneity in the timing of the win. (Note that the prior results on timing are
not prima facie consistent with such heterogeneity.) To consider this possibility, we test for a
differential effect in the FAFSA year after adding a linear time trend interacted with the interaction
of amount of the win and whether the win occurred before high school graduation. The results are
presented in Table 10. The differential effect is small and statistically insignificant in all cases for
the FAFSA Year, even when allowing for treatment heterogeneity in time (via the time trend
interaction). Likewise, for lower-income households, there is no evidence that the attendance
effects are attenuated by financial aid crowd-out, with and without controlling for a time trend in
the treatment effect.30 Altogether, these results imply that while a reduction in financial aid is a
natural byproduct of winning the lottery, crowd-out is not altering children’s attendance decisions
on average and does not explain the heterogeneous responses observed across the population.31
f. Alternative Household Responses
Households may respond along other dimensions, including parents’ earnings and labor
supply, savings, homeownership, geographic mobility, and children’s labor supply. In addition to
estimating these alternate spending priorities, we differentiate the responses by household SES and
conduct an accounting exercise to back out unobserved changes in consumption. For consistency
and to contextualize the attendance results, these outcomes are examined within the same
framework as attendance, focusing on the year a child graduates from high school.
The results presented in Table 11 reveal evidence of reduced earnings, and, for larger resource
shocks, a reduction on the extensive margin of labor supply. Interestingly, though prior literature
has suggested that self-employment increases after such shocks (e.g., Holtz-Eakin et al. 1994;
Lindh and Ohlsson 1996), we find little effect on self-employment earnings. Perhaps the (implied)
increase in leisure among lottery winners offsets the relaxation of financial frictions. Large wins
also generate increases in our measure of savings (i.e., interest and dividends), but the effects of
lottery wins for homeownership are more nuanced. For those without a mortgage prior to winning,
To more flexibly allow for treatment heterogeneity by timing of the win, the same exercise is repeated for above
median income households, who are less subject to financial aid crowd-out, and those estimates can be subtracted
from the estimates for below median income households. Again, the estimates are not statistically significant.
31
These results do not necessarily imply that college enrollment is unaffected by (anticipated) financial aid.
30

19

there is an increase in having a mortgage even for moderate-sized wins, with the size of the effect
increasing to 25 p.p. for very large wins. For those with mortgages already, households appear to
use large wins to pay them off. All told, homeownership appears to be a significant spending
priority. Households with large wins also move to slightly wealthier neighborhoods and those with
modestly higher rates of college-going. However, when neighborhoods are classified on the basis
of mobility by county (Chetty and Hendren, 2016), there is no evidence that these moves are to
areas with greater upward mobility.
Having established average responses, we implement an accounting exercise to better
understand differences in effects by SES and what they might imply about differences in the
marginal propensity to consume. Specifically, we test for heterogeneity in the effects on earnings
and savings, under the assumption that the residual of earnings and savings responses to lottery
wins is a consumption response.32 In addition to smaller increases in college-going, we find that
lower-SES households have both a smaller earnings reduction and smaller savings increase,
suggesting that such households consume a higher fraction of their lottery winnings (Table A12).
Several caveats apply to these results. First, we have ignored the role of housing, which has both
consumption and investment qualities. Lower-SES households are much less likely to have a
mortgage prior to their lottery win, and as expected given the stark differences we found by
whether there was a mortgage in the pre-period, we find they are more likely to have acquired a
mortgage and less likely to have paid one off. To address this issue, we estimate regressions where
we include both differential effects of lottery wins by SES and differential effects of lottery wins
by the presence of a mortgage to hold constant any differential effects due to the latter. The results,
also in Table A12, continue to show smaller earnings reductions and savings increases. Second,
the exercise could be confounded by differential investment returns within the class of investments
we use to construct our savings proxy or the failure to include alternative classes of investments
that might be more prevalent among lower-SES households. As discussed in Appendix 3, we do
not find evidence consistent with these issues and conclude that they are unlikely to overturn the
results. In sum, the available evidence indicates that lower-SES households appear to consume a
higher fraction of lottery winnings, which is consistent with findings in other literature on
Specifically, one can simply assume a consumption response = winnings + earnings response – savings response.
For the purposes of this exercise, we are interested in the level effect on earnings, not the relative effect (which could
be a proxy for the increase in leisure). Separately, we find mixed evidence on the effect on relative earnings, and if
anything, a larger relative decrease for earnings among lower-SES households.
32

20

differential marginal propensities to consume by financial well-being (e.g., Keynes, 1936; Parker
et al., 2013).
Finally, we examine labor market effects for the children themselves. Results for children’s
labor supply indicate that lottery wins are associated with reduced earnings, with the effects
increasing in the size of the win (see Table A13). This is consistent with a higher fraction of
children enrolling in college courses rather than being employed (though the effects could also
reflect increased consumption of leisure). Interestingly, the reduction in labor supply primarily
occurs on the intensive margin (working less) rather than on the extensive margin of not working
at all.33,34
V.

Potential Mechanisms
This section revisits the nature of the relationship between household resources and college

attendance. We describe the two leading (non-mutually exclusive) mechanisms that might explain
why additional resources influence attendance and whether our findings are consistent with each.35
First, households may face financial frictions—such as a lack of access to credit or aversion to
debt—that restrict college access for children who would otherwise earn high returns. In this case,
the effect on college-going would likely be concave in the size of the resource shock, with even
moderate increases leading to economically significant increases in attendance. But, the results are
only weakly concave, and moderately sized shocks do not significantly affect college going rates.
Further, we might expect the most financially constrained households to be the most responsive.
Yet, low-earning and low-saving households seem, if anything, less responsive than other
households, which held even when we attempted to account for both together (Table A9, column
3), and reductions in financial aid that might result from the lottery win and adversely affect
This is consistent with the finding in Keane and Wolpin (2001) that relaxing borrowing constraints does not change
attendance decisions but does cause students to work less while they are enrolled.
34
We also find some evidence that children whose parents won before they graduated from high school go on to have
higher earnings in early adulthood (though the results are too imprecise to be conclusive). We examine the earnings
of 27 years olds as a compromise between selecting an age that is correlated with later-life earnings and restricting the
size of the sample. Note that, by this point, all children in the sample will be “post-win,” although comparisons are
still derived by the timing of the wins relative to high school graduation.
35
We assess each explanation in isolation. While there are other potential mechanisms, they are unlikely to be primary
explanations for the relationship we obtain. For example, additional resources could increase attendance by insuring
against the risk of college investment. The results are not prima facie consistent with such an explanation, as effects
would likely be larger among lower-SES households than higher-SES households, but we cannot rule out that
complementarity between parental resources and children’s attendance is a factor (though we would again expect
similar heterogeneity responses).
33

21

constrained households the most do not appear to explain this difference. Finally, even when there
is little enrollment response (both for smaller wins and among lower-SES households), parents
appear to reduce their labor supply, which would be unusual if households were very financially
constrained. In sum, a “financial frictions” explanation does not appear to fit the overall pattern of
results.
Note that a variant of this mechanism—that households face financial constraints, but they
bind earlier by limiting parental investment in children that is complementary with college-going
(or require lead time for children to increase their preparation for college)—also appears to be
largely inconsistent with our results.36 For this explanation to hold, we would expect earlier lottery
winnings to have larger effects, particularly among more constrained households. Yet, even when
we expand the sample to include a wide range of win timing prior to high school graduation, the
effects are relatively stable, and earlier resource shocks are no more important for lower SES
households.
Second, households may derive some consumption value from college, much as they do other
normal goods. In addition to financial frictions being unable to explain our results, there are also
particular predictions from this channel that are consistent with our findings. Namely, we would
expect to see college attendance increasing in financial resources, with a high upper bound that is
achieved at values that far exceed the cost of college, which is indeed what we find. Further, the
largest responses should be concentrated among those who value college most. While theory is
agnostic on this dimension, there is some evidence this applies to higher-SES households (e.g.,
Federal Reserve Board, 2017), which is also consistent with our accounting exercise (Table A12)
that suggests lower-SES households derive relatively more marginal utility from (non-college)
consumption.37

We note three caveats: 1) we cannot test for very early life constraints, 2) while earlier wins may allow greater
complementary investment in early childhood, which might be a particularly formative time, the additional resources
from a lottery win may be more likely to be spent down by high school graduation, thus creating offsetting effects,
and 3) one piece of evidence that could be consistent with constraints inhibiting high return investment complementary
with college is the finding that lottery winner’s move to modestly wealthier and more educated neighborhoods.
However, the effect on neighborhood could also be due to a consumption story (or possibly both) and appears too
small to explain more than a fraction of the main effect (namely, even under the strong assumption that children adopt
the same college-going rate as those from their neighborhood, such neighborhood effects could explain only a fraction
of the primary estimates).
37
The larger response among higher-SES households could also be driven by potential complementarities between
consumption value and prior ability and preparation (e.g., academic readiness).
36

22

VI.

External Validity and Relation of Findings to Prior Literature
Thus far, we have provided strong evidence supporting the validity of our results within the

context of our study. In this section, we discuss and address two natural concerns related to external
validity – namely, the extent to which the study population resembles the overall population, and
whether families treat lottery winnings similarly to resources from other sources. Then, we
consider how our findings contrast with those from frontier studies in this area.
First, we evaluate the representativeness of the population of study. Survey data and tax records
are used to compare lottery players with non-players and lottery winners with the tax-filing
population. As detailed in Appendix 4, survey data indicate that up to 50 percent of the population
plays the lottery and that lottery players are similar to non-players. For example, in the Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX), lottery-playing families closely resemble non-playing families along
demographic, earnings, and labor force dimensions (see Table A14). Relative to parents with
lottery wins in the sample, average tax-filing parents who have children of the same age in the tax
data have higher average earnings and are less likely to be married, though there is significant
common support and these differences are small (see Table A15).38 Children of lottery winners are
less likely to attend college, though the difference again is small (about 4 p.p.) and they are similar
in gender composition and citizenship. In sum, while we cannot fully rule out differences in
behavior and preferences between winners and the general population, lottery players represent a
substantial fraction of the population and lottery winners appear to be only modestly different in
terms of observable characteristics, with substantial heterogeneity within the group. In addition,
the pattern and magnitude of results are extremely similar when the sample of lottery-winning
families is weighted to be representative of the tax-filing population (Table A2).
Second, we examine whether households appear to treat lottery wins differently than wealth
from other sources and, as some anecdotes suggest, consume their winnings quickly. While this
narrative deviates from standard economic models and we are aware of no systematic evidence of
this phenomenon, we indirectly examine it by investigating the persistence of the effect of lottery
winnings on parents’ earnings. If this phenomenon were occurring, one might expect any earnings
reduction (and presumed increase in leisure) to quickly dissipate as lottery wins are depleted.
Note that lottery wins are censored by reporting requirement for amounts below an arbitrary reporting cutoff of
$600. As we artificially increase the cutoff above that amount, the sample increasingly resembles the rest of the
population. In earlier analysis, we show that the main results are not sensitive to the cutoff that is used.
38

23

Figure 4 presents an event-study framework relative to the timing of the win, which reveals a
modest but persistent reduction in earnings in each year subsequent to the win among families with
large wins. This pattern is inconsistent with the narrative that lottery income is spent particularly
rapidly and is instead in line with a measured response, consistent with the predictions of a standard
lifecycle model for ordinary wealth shocks.
It is also worth exploring how our estimates compare to those recovered in frontier studies
within the literature. We have uncovered a modest per-dollar effect of lottery wins on collegegoing but one that is only weakly concave with a high upper bound. In general, these results are
not consistent with many recent quasi-experimental studies that find that modest changes in
household income (or wealth) have potentially large effects on human capital investment (e.g.,
Coelli, 2011; Lovenheim, 2011; Pan and Ost, 2014; Manoli and Turner, 2016; Bastian and
Michelmore, 2016). Instead, our findings are most consistent with the negligible or modest effects
estimated in Bleakley and Ferrie (2016), Cesarini et al. (2016), and Hilger (2016).39 While
Bleakley and Ferrie (2016) and Cesarini et al. (2016) focus on different outcomes and find little
response when they examine an early 19th century Georgia land lottery and recent Swedish
lotteries, respectively, their settings have fewer very large payouts that, in our context, are required
to generate measurable effects.40 Examining a context more similar to ours, Hilger (2016) finds
that parental job loss only modestly reduces college-going, with smaller responses among lower
income households, which he interprets as evidence that borrowing constraints are not binding and
that households derive consumption value from college.41 Our results are consistent with these
conclusions as our per-dollar effect size for a pure resource shock is within the range of his implied
magnitude (from the pecuniary effect of a job loss). But, within this setting, we are also able to
document the degree of concavity of the response, that children from lower-SES households given
additional resources are less responsive, that financial aid crowd-out does not appear to moderate
responsiveness, and that lower-income households appear to have a greater marginal propensity to
consume.

Cameron and Taber (2004) also find little evidence of borrowing constraints using quasi-experimental methods and
structural estimation, and Carneiro and Heckman (2002) argue that the current policy environment results in a small
fraction of households being constrained from attending college.
40
The latter’s main finding of no effect on children’s intermediate development outcomes is also consistent with our
finding that the effects are not driven by complementary parental inputs.
41
Hilger (2016) notes that modest effects, particularly for low-income families, could stem from parents allocating a
small share of marginal income to finance their children’s college and offsetting effects of need-based financial aid.
39

24

VII.

Conclusion

This paper estimates the effect of household resources on college outcomes. It is the first study
to exploit the universe of lottery wins in the United States, and to leverage an extremely wide range
of resource shocks across a diverse population of households to examine changes in college-going.
The analysis reveals several important results. Additional financial resources, including those at
levels sufficient to cover college costs, have at most a modest effect on attendance. However, the
effects are not highly concave and continue to increase for large resource shocks, reaching a high
upper bound at win amounts far exceeding the cost of college. We also find that additional income
generates similar effects across years prior to a student’s high school graduation. The effects are
concentrated at four-year institutions and are not temporary, as we observe significant increases in
enrollment for several years after high school graduation. Low-earning and low-saving households
are not more responsive than wealthier households, and there is no evidence that financial aid
dampens the response. Finally, winning parents also decrease labor supply and increase housing
consumption and savings, with some evidence that lower-income households have a higher
marginal propensity to consume. These findings provide valuable context for interpreting existing
studies of college access.
In the current policy environment, parental financial frictions alone do not appear to hinder
attendance for a significant fraction of households. This conclusion has several implications. First,
the current set of subsidies available for higher education may be sufficient to incent college
investment and overcome any market failures stemming from financial frictions. However, to the
extent that parents are not fully altruistic towards their children, our results are consistent with
children facing binding borrowing constraints.42 Second, redistribution of income towards lowerSES households is likely to be an inefficient method of closing enrollment gaps, unless the
transfers are far larger than what could conceivably operate through the tax system. Policies
seeking to raise educational attainment may need to turn to features that address other potential
obstacles in the transition to college (e.g., information, college and career counseling, remedial
This would be consistent with the college price effects literature that often finds large effects (Dynarski, 2003; Kane,
2003; Kane, 2007; Deming and Dynarski, 2010; Fack and Grenet, 2015; Castleman and Long, 2016; Denning, 2017).
While we cannot test this directly, the finding that financial aid crowd-out does not influence enrollment suggests one
of three possibilities: lower-SES parents do provide support to their children, which makes up for the deleterious
effects of the removal of financial aid; these parents do not provide support but the removal of financial aid has little
effect on college-going; or informational frictions about the operation of the financial aid system exist.
42

25

programs).43 Third, the results raise a new question of why increasing the resources of lower-SES
households appears to be especially ineffective. Such households may have weaker preferences
for post-secondary education, larger academic or informational constraints, different norms about
who is responsible for financing higher education (Sallie Mae, 2015), and other financial priorities
that inhibit their responsiveness. Future work should explore which channels operate and how
policy can remedy these gaps.

Our results are also not inconsistent with an under-investment in schooling deriving from financial frictions in
combination with other features, raising the possibility that policies that relax both financial constraints and, for
example, informational frictions may still be effective.
43

26

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2001. “Changes in the Wage Structure, Family
Income, and Children's Education.” European Economic Review 45: 890-904.
Aizer, Anna, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2016. “The Long-Run Impact
of Cash Transfers to Poor Families.” American Economic Review 106(4): 935-971.
Akee, Randall K. Q., William E. Copeland, Gordon Keeler, Adrian Angold and E. Jane Costello.
2010. “Parents’ Incomes and Children's Outcomes: A Quasi-Experiment Using Transfer
Payments from Casino Profits.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(1): 65-118.
Apouey, Benedicte and Andrew E. Clark. 2015. “Winning Big But Feeling No Better? The Effect
of Lottery Prizes on Physical and Mental Health.” Health Economics 24(5): 516-538.
Bastian, Jacob and Katherine Michelmore. 2016. “The Long-Term Impact of the Earned Income
Tax Credit on Children’s Education and Employment Outcomes.” Working paper.
Bleakley, Hoyt and Joseph P. Ferrie. 2016. “Shocking Behavior: Random Wealth in Antebellum
Georgia and Human Capital Across Generations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(3):
1455-1495.
Blanden, Jo and Paul Gregg. 2004. “Family Income and Educational Attainment: A Review of
Approaches and Evidence for Britain.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 20(2): 245-263.
Blau, David M. 1999. “The Effect of Income on Child Development.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 81(2): 261–76.
Cameron, Stephen V. and Christopher Taber. 2004. “Estimation of Educational Borrowing
Constraints Using Returns to Schooling.” Journal of Political Economy 112(1): 132–82.
Carneiro, Pedro and James Heckman. 2002. “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in PostSecondary Schooling.” The Economic Journal 112: 705–734.
Castleman, Ben and Bridget Terry Long. 2016. “Looking Beyond Enrollment: The Causal Effect
of Need-Based Grants on College Access, Persistence, and Graduation.” Journal of Labor
Economics 34(4): 1023-1073.
Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Robert Ostling. 2015. “The Effect
of Wealth on Individual and Household Labor Supply: Evidence from Swedish Lotteries.”
NBER Working Paper No. 21762.
Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Robert Ostling, and Bjorn Wallace. 2016. “Wealth, Health, and
Child Development: Evidence from Administrative Data on Swedish Lottery Players.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(3): 1455-1495.
Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren. 2016. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
Mobility II: County-Level Estimates.” NBER Working Paper No. 23002.

27

Coelli, Michael B. 2010. “Parental Job Loss and the Education Enrollment of Youth.” Labour
Economics 18: 25-35.
College Board, 2015. “Trends in Student Aid”. Trends in Higher Education Series.
Dahl, Gordon B. and Lance Lochner. 2012. “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” American Economic Review 102(5): 1927-1956.
Deming, David and Susan Dynarski. 2010. “College Aid.” in Targeting Investments in Children:
Fighting Poverty When Resources are Limited.
Denning, Jeffrey T. 2017. “College on the Cheap: Consequences of Community College Tuition
Reductions.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Dynarski, Susan. 2003. “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on College
Attendance and Completion.” American Economic Review 93(1): 279-288.
Dynarski, Susan M. 2004. “Tax Policy and Education Policy: Coordination or Collision?” Tax
Policy and the Economy 18.
Fack, Gabrielle and Julien Grenet. 2015. “Improving College Access and Success for Low-Income
Students: Evidence from a Large Need-Based Grant Program.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 7(2): 1-34.
Federal Reserve Board. 2017. “Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2016.”
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2016-report-economic-well-being-ushouseholds-201705.pdf
Hankins, Scott, Mark Hoekstra, and Paige Marta Skiba. 2011. “The Ticket to Easy Street? The
Financial Consequences of Winning the Lottery.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93: 961–
969.
Hilger, Nathaniel G. 2016. “Parental Job Loss and Children's Long-Term Outcomes: Evidence
From 7 Million Fathers' Layoffs.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(3): 247–
283.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian and Harvey S. Rosen. 1994. “Entrepreneurial Decisions
and Liquidity Constraints.” RAND Journal of Economics 25(2): 334-347.
Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote. 2001. “Estimating the Effect of
Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of
Lottery Players.” American Economic Review 91(4): 778–794.
Kane, Thomas. 2003. “A Quasi-Experimental Estimate of the Impact of Financial Aid on CollegeGoing.” NBER Working Paper No. 9703.
Kane, Thomas J. 2007. “Evaluating the Impact of the D.C. Tuition Assistance Grant Program.”
Journal of Human Resources 42(3): 555-582.
Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2001. “The Effect of Parental Transfers and Borrowing
Constraints on Educational Attainment.” International Economic Review 42(4): 1051-1103.
28

Kearney, Melissa S. 2005. "State Lotteries And Consumer Behavior." Journal of Public
Economics 89: 2269-2299.
Keynes, John Maynard. (1936). The general theory of employment, interest, and money.
Lindahl, Mikael. 2005. “Estimating the Effect of Income on Health and Mortality Using Lottery
Prizes as an Exogenous Source of Variation in Income.” Journal of Human Resources 40(1):
144–168.
Lindh, Thomas and Henry Ohlsson. 1996. “Self-Employment and Windfall Gains: Evidence from
the Swedish Lottery.” Economic Journal, 106(439): 1515-1526.
Loken, Katrine. 2010. “Family Income and Children's Education: Using the Norwegian Oil Boom
as a Natural Experiment.” Labour Economics 17(1):118-129.
Loken, Katrine V., Magne Mogstad, and Matthew Wiswall. 2012. “What Linear Estimators Miss:
The Effects of Family Income on Child Outcomes.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 4(2): 1-35.
Lovenheim, Michael F. 2011. “The Effect of Liquid Housing Wealth on College Enrollment.”
Journal of Labor Economics 29(4): 741-771.
Lovenheim, Michael F. and C. Lockwood Reynolds. 2013. “The Effect of Housing Wealth on
College Choice: Evidence from the Housing Boom.” Journal of Human Resources 48(1): 1-35.
Manoli, Dayonand and Nicholas Turner. 2016. “Cash-on-Hand & College Enrollment: Evidence
from Population Tax Data and Policy Nonlinearities.” NBER Working Paper No. 19836.
Maurin, Eric. 2002. “The Impact of Parental Income on Early Schooling Transitions: A ReExamination Using Data over Three Generations.” Journal of Public Economics 85(3): 301–32.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. “The Intergenerational Effects
of Worker Displacement.” Journal of Labor Economics 26(3): 455-483.
Oster, Emily. 2004. “Are All Lotteries Regressive? Evidence from the Powerball.” National Tax
Journal 57: 179-87.
Pan, Weixiang and Ben Ost. 2014. “The Impact of Parental Layoff on Higher Education
Investment.” Economics of Education Review 42: 53–63.
Parker, Jonathan, Nicholas Souleles, David Johnson, and Robert McClelland. 2013. "Consumer
Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008." American Economic Review, 103(6):
2530-53.
Powdthavee, Nattavudh and Andrew J. Oswald. 2014. “Does Money Make People Right-Wing
and Inegalitarian? A Longitudinal Study of Lottery Winners.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 7934.
Sallie Mae. 2015. “How America Pays for College.” Sallie Mae’s National Study of College
Students and Parents.
Shea, John. 2000. “Does Parents' Money Matter?” Journal of Public Economics 77: 155-184.
29

Figures and Tables

30

Figure 1: College Attendance Within One Year of High School Graduation
by the Amount and Timing of the Lottery Win

< $10K

$10K-$30K

$30K-$100K

$100K-$300K

$300K-$1M

> $1M
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Shock Pre-HS Graduation

0.4

0.5

0.6

Shock Post-HS Graduation

Note: This figure presents the average rate of attending any college for children who graduate before and after their parent wins a
lottery. Attendance rates are adjusted for cohort fixed effects. Win sizes are adjusted to 2010 dollars and are classified according to
six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, and 1,000,000 dollars.

31

10
0
-20

-10

Attendance Effect (p.p.)

20

30

Figure 2: Four-Year College Attendance: LOWESS Plot of Lottery Win Effects

0

2,500,000

5,000,000

7,500,000

Lottery Win Amount
bandwidth = .8

Note: This figure presents a LOWESS plot fitted to the effects of lottery wins on four-year college attendance in the year of high
school graduation. The effects are in percentage points and are plotted for increments of $5,000 up to $100,000, $25,000 up to
$500,000, $100,000 up to $1,000,000, and $500,000 up to $5,000,000. Effect sizes are estimated relative to small wins of less than
$1,000.

32

Figure 3a: Estimated Effects on Four-Year Attendance for Lottery Wins > $100,000
by Timing of Win Relative to High School Graduation

Percentage points
10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Year of Win Relative to High School Graduation

Figure 3b: Estimated Effects on Four-Year Attendance for Lottery Wins > $300,000
by Timing of Win Relative to High School Graduation

Percentage points

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Year of Win Relative to High School Graduation

Note: This figure presents the percentage point change in four-year college attendance as a function of the timing of the win relative
to the year of high school graduation. The graphed estimates account for state-by-year of win fixed effects, cohort fixed effects,
parent wages, adjusted gross income, filing status (joint or single), gender, citizenship, missing returns, mortgage payments, social
security income, self-employment income, household number of children, and child gender, citizenship, and an indicator for social
security birth match to parent. All student and parent controls are based on pre-win measures. In the bottom panel, wins between
$100,000 and $300,000 are excluded. Dashed lines depict the 95 percent confidence interval.

33

Figure 4: Parental Earnings Before and After Lottery Wins

$30,000

$10K - $30K

$30K - $100K

$30,000

$20,000

$20,000

$20,000

$10,000

$10,000

$10,000

$0

$0

$0

-$10,000

-$10,000

-$10,000
-$20,000

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

2

Years Since Win

$30,000

3

4

5

-$20,000

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

Years Since Win

$10,000

$10,000

$0

$0

-$10,000

-$10,000

0

1

2

Years Since Win

4

5

-$20,000

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

2

Years Since Win

3

4

5

$30,000
$20,000

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1

3

$1M+

$300K - $1M

$20,000

-$20,000

2

$100K - $300K

$30,000

3

4

5

-$20,000

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

2

Years Since Win

3

4

5

Note: These figures present changes in parental earnings in the years before and after a lottery win relative to households with wins
of less than 10,000 dollars. Estimates are presented for each of five larger win groups, corresponding to cutoffs of 30,000 dollars,
100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, and 1,000,000 dollars or more. Year 0 is the year during which the win occurred and thus is likely
to represent partial treatment.

34

Table 1: Summary Statistics: Lottery Wins and College Attendance
Win Size Distribution

Income Shock 600 to 10,000

Number
Students
1,365,498

Median
Win
$1,189

Mean
Win
$2,047

Subsequent
Win >10k
0.03

Income Shock 10,000 to 30,000

62,239

$11,900

$15,252

0.04

Income Shock 30,000 to 100,000

19,608

$50,000

$52,152

0.04

Income Shock 100,000 to 300,000

10,318

$153,421

$169,383

0.04

Income Shock 300,000 to 1,000,000

2,301

$525,000

$568,269

0.04

Income Shock 1,000,000 or more

1,298

$2,082,322

$7,704,497

0.03

Mean
0.44
0.35
0.22
0.14

Std. Dev.
0.50
0.48
0.41
0.35

Timing and Attendance
Win Pre High School Graduation
Attend Any Coll: Year of HS Grad
Attend 4-Yr Coll: Year of HS Grad
Attend 2-Yr Coll: Year of HS Grad

Note: This table presents summary statistics for the lottery wins that affect each student, the fraction of students affected, and
average college attendance rates. Column 1 of the top panel presents the number of students affected by wins in each of six size
ranges: 600 to 9,999 dollars, 10,000 to 29,999 dollars, 30,000 to 99,999 dollars, 100,000 to 299,999 dollars, 300,000 to 999,999
dollars, and 1,000,000 dollars or more. Columns 2 and 3 present the median and mean of these wins. Column 4 presents the
fraction of students whose parents experience total wins exceeding 10,000 dollars in the four years after the initial win. College
attendance in the bottom panel is for the year of predicted high school graduation.

35

Table 2: Lottery Wins and Covariate Balance
Covariate

Mean

Win size (dollars)
30-100k 100-300k 300k-1mil
Children’s characteristics
-0.0022
0.0061
-0.0125
0.0420∗
(0.0041)
(0.0073) (0.0099)
(0.0216)
-0.0005
0.0010
-0.0015
-0.0014
(0.0016)
(0.0030) (0.0036)
(0.0079)
Parent and Household characteristics
0.0019
0.0061
0.0010
0.0071
(0.0045)
(0.0081) (0.0107)
(0.0231)
-0.0028
-0.0004
-0.0018
0.0090
(0.0025)
(0.0047) (0.0059)
(0.0121)
0.0096∗∗ 0.0013
-0.0025
0.0126
(0.0043)
(0.0077) (0.0106)
(0.0226)
0.0253∗
0.0385
0.0149
0.0673
(0.0140)
(0.0256) (0.0334)
(0.0709)
0.0045
0.0122
0.0119
0.0304
(0.0044)
(0.0079) (0.0104)
(0.0225)
0.0002
-0.0001
-0.0015
0.0037
(0.0006)
(0.0011) (0.0014)
(0.0033)
0.0121
0.0065
0.0221
-0.0418
(0.0091)
(0.0163) (0.0226)
(0.0471)
0.0089
0.0030
0.0182
0.0107
(0.0104)
(0.0183) (0.0276)
(0.0558)
0.0011
0.0125∗
0.0178∗
0.0097
(0.0037)
(0.0068) (0.0093)
(0.0200)
0.0029
-0.0013
-0.0079
0.0177
(0.0022)
(0.0041) (0.0053)
(0.0111)
-0.0036
-0.0012
0.0051
-0.0180
(0.0026)
(0.0046) (0.0065)
(0.0144)
0.0031
0.0020
0.0120
0.0267
(0.0044)
(0.0080) (0.0104)
(0.0221)
0.0011
-0.0001
0.0097
0.0172
(0.0044)
(0.0079) (0.0107)
(0.0230)
0.1652
0.8210
0.7748
0.3142
10-30k

Male

(1)

0.511

Citizen

(2)

0.964

Male

(3)

0.533

Citizen

(4)

0.913

Birth Parent

(5)

0.633

Num Children

(6)

3.454

Married

(7)

0.569

Missing 1040

(8)

0.030

Ln(Wages)

(9)

51,791

Ln(AGI)

(10)

60,467

Self Employed

(11)

0.203

SSA Income

(12)

0.071

College

(13)

0.088

Mortgage

(14)

0.560

Invest Income

(15)

0.487

F-test p-value

1mil or more
-0.0496∗
(0.0274)
-0.0027
(0.0082)
-0.0491∗
(0.0298)
0.0042
(0.0155)
0.0114
(0.0286)
-0.0009
(0.0826)
0.0219
(0.0270)
-0.0005
(0.0030)
0.0360
(0.0614)
0.0419
(0.0614)
0.0502∗∗
(0.0252)
-0.0036
(0.0123)
-0.0294
(0.0196)
0.0010
(0.0275)
0.0051
(0.0281)
0.3693

F-test p-value
0.0848
0.9918

0.6141
0.8563
0.3610
0.2698
0.2186
0.7602
0.5544
0.8943
0.0474
0.2388
0.2714
0.6559
0.9176
0.5098

Note: This table applies the empirical design to household characteristics as the dependent variable to test for balance. Each
row represents a separate variable. The specification includes state by year of win and student cohort fixed effects. Household
characteristics are based on the three years prior to the lottery win. Whether an individual is married is derived from filing
status, number of children is derived from children ever claimed as a dependent, and income and investments are derived from
the Form 1040. F-tests of joint significance for each covariate are presented at the bottom of every column and across win sizes
at the end of every row. An F-test for the joint significance of all covariates across all win sizes is presented at the bottom of the
last column. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

36

Table 3: Any College Attendance in Year of High School Graduation
(1)
-0.0022
(0.0041)

(2)
-0.0032
(0.0039)

(3)
-0.0033
(0.0038)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0101
(0.0073)

-0.0120∗
(0.0069)

-0.0100
(0.0067)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0169∗
(0.0101)

0.0113
(0.0095)

0.0109
(0.0093)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0559∗∗∗
(0.0217)

0.0518∗∗
(0.0207)

0.0590∗∗∗
(0.0200)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.1039∗∗∗
(0.0279)

0.0984∗∗∗
(0.0272)

X
1,461,262
.341

X
X
1,461,262
.341

0.0928∗∗∗
(0.0267)
X
X
X
1,461,262
.341

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Child and Family Controls
Parental Controls
State by Year and Cohort
Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on attending any college in the year of high school graduation. Students for whom the win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. Column 1 includes state by
year of win and cohort fixed effects. Column 2 adds parental controls, including wages, adjusted gross income, filing status
(joint or single), gender, citizenship, missing returns, mortgage payments, social security income, and self-employment income.
Columns 3 adds student and family controls, including gender, citizenship, number of children, and an indicator for social security birth match to parent. All student and parent controls are based on pre-win measures. Win sizes are classified according
to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding 1,000,000
dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1
percent respectively.

37

Table 4: Four-Year College Attendance in Year of High School Graduation
(1)
-0.0016
(0.0035)

(2)
-0.0024
(0.0034)

(3)
-0.0025
(0.0034)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0075
(0.0062)

-0.0089
(0.0060)

-0.0075
(0.0059)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0188∗∗
(0.0091)

0.0147∗
(0.0087)

0.0143∗
(0.0086)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0539∗∗∗
(0.0195)

0.0514∗∗∗
(0.0189)

0.0566∗∗∗
(0.0185)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.1184∗∗∗
(0.0257)

0.1138∗∗∗
(0.0247)

X
1,461,262
.215

X
X
1,461,262
.215

0.1097∗∗∗
(0.0246)
X
X
X
1,461,262
.215

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Child and Family Controls
Parental Controls
State by Year and Cohort
Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment in the year of high school
graduation. Students for whom the win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. Column 1 includes
state by year of win and cohort fixed effects. Column 2 adds parental controls, including wages, adjusted gross income, filing
status (joint or single), gender, citizenship, missing returns, mortgage payments, social security income, and self-employment
income. Columns 3 adds student and family controls, including gender, citizenship, number of children, and an indicator for
social security birth match to parent. All student and parent controls are based on pre-win measures. Win sizes are classified
according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding
1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10,
5, and 1 percent respectively.

38

Table 5: Two-Year College Attendance in Year of High School Graduation
(1)
-0.0023
(0.0030)

(2)
-0.0025
(0.0029)

(3)
-0.0026
(0.0029)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0043
(0.0054)

-0.0049
(0.0053)

-0.0042
(0.0053)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0025
(0.0074)

-0.0043
(0.0073)

-0.0044
(0.0072)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0076
(0.0160)

0.0057
(0.0159)

0.0082
(0.0159)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

-0.0005
(0.0227)

-0.0016
(0.0229)

X
1,461,262
.139

X
X
1,461,262
.139

-0.0036
(0.0226)
X
X
X
1,461,262
.139

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Child and Family Controls
Parental Controls
State by Year and Cohort
Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on two-year college enrollment in the year of high school
graduation. Students for whom the win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. Column 1 includes
state by year of win and cohort fixed effects. Column 2 adds parental controls, including wages, adjusted gross income, filing
status (joint or single), gender, citizenship, missing returns, mortgage payments, social security income, and self-employment
income. Columns 3 adds student and family controls, including gender, citizenship, number of children, and an indicator for
social security birth match to parent. All student and parent controls are based on pre-win measures. Win sizes are classified
according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding
1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10,
5, and 1 percent respectively.

39

Table 6: Four-Year College Attendance: Linear Estimates and Test For Concavity
(1)
Quadratic
Range: 0 to 50 million

Range: 0 to 25 million

Range: 0 to 10 million

Range: 0 to 5 million

Range: 0 to 2.5 million

Range: 0 to 1 million

Range: 0 to 500k

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k)

0.003338∗∗∗
(0.000659)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k) 2

-0.0000100∗∗∗
(0.0000024)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k)

0.005205∗∗∗
(0.000938)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k) 2

-0.000025∗∗∗
(0.000006)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k)

0.007079∗∗∗
(0.001656)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k) 2

-0.000048∗
(0.000026)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k)

0.007133∗∗∗
(0.002384)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k) 2

-0.000049
(0.000082)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k)

0.006362∗
(0.003360)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k) 2

0.000026
(0.000262)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k)

0.005155
(0.005178)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k) 2

0.000523
(0.000879)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k)

0.002671
(0.008221)

Pre-HS Grad * Win Amt ($100k) 2

0.001473
0.003037)

(2)
Linear
0.000743∗∗
(0.000311)

0.001632∗∗∗
(0.000446)

0.004082∗∗∗
(0.000765)

0.005948∗∗∗
(0.001209)

0.006655∗∗∗
(0.001760)

0.008476∗∗∗
(0.002590)

0.006374∗
(0.003752)

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment in the year of high school
graduation. A quadratic in win amount is used to test for concavity over various income shock ranges. Students for whom
the win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed
effects, cohort fixed effects, parent wages, adjusted gross income, filing status (joint or single), gender, citizenship, missing
returns, mortgage payments, social security income, self-employment income, household number of children, and child gender,
citizenship, and an indicator for social security birth match to parent. All student and parent controls are based on pre-win
measures. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1
percent respectively.

40

Table 7: Persistence of Four-Year College Attendance Effects
(1)
Year 0
-0.0016
(0.0035)

(2)
Year 1
-0.0033
(0.0039)

(3)
Year 2
-0.0024
(0.0041)

(4)
Year 3
-0.0027
(0.0047)

(5)
Year 4
-0.0031
(0.0054)

(6)
Total
-0.0369
(0.0240)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0075
(0.0062)

0.0003
(0.0068)

0.0021
(0.0072)

0.0071
(0.0082)

0.0015
(0.0095)

-0.0116
(0.0419)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0188∗∗
(0.0091)

0.0231∗∗
(0.0099)

0.0314∗∗∗
(0.0105)

0.0248∗∗
(0.0118)

0.0207
(0.0134)

0.1072∗
(0.0593)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0539∗∗∗
(0.0195)

0.0365∗
(0.0204)

0.0327
(0.0218)

0.0507∗∗
(0.0244)

0.0495∗
(0.0281)

0.3219∗∗∗
(0.1221)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.1184∗∗∗
(0.0257)
1,461,262
.215

0.1127∗∗∗
(0.0290)
1,292,594
.243

0.1388∗∗∗
(0.0307)
1,135,772
.239

0.1458∗∗∗
(0.0341)
916,781
.239

0.1014∗∗∗
(0.0381)
710,403
.221

0.5294∗∗∗
(0.1716)
710,403
1.17

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment in the years after high
school graduation and in total. Year 0 refers the calendar year in which a student is expected to graduate from high school
based on his or her state and date of birth. Years 1 to 4 correspond to the subsequent calendar years. Students for whom the
win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. Students who could endogenously change their enrollment
decision are excluded in each column (e.g. the children of parents who won in Year 1 and Year 2 are excluded when estimating
the change in enrollment in Year 3). The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win
sizes are classified according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars,
and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical
significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

41

Table 8: Four-Year College Attendance: Heterogeneity by Household Resources
(1)
Lower
Income
0.0030
(0.0043)

(2)
Higher
Income
-0.0059
(0.0053)

(3)
No Invest
Income
-0.0039
(0.0041)

(4)
Invest
Income
0.0000
(0.0054)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0088
(0.0077)

-0.0115
(0.0093)

-0.0122∗
(0.0072)

-0.0042
(0.0097)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0111
(0.0116)

0.0319∗∗
(0.0125)

-0.0043
(0.0116)

0.0329∗∗
(0.0129)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0282
(0.0259)

0.0631∗∗
(0.0264)

0.0536∗∗
(0.0263)

0.0473∗
(0.0272)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.0370
(0.0372)
730,632
.133

0.1387∗∗∗
(0.0318)
730,630
.292

0.0704∗∗
(0.0355)
749,071
.134

0.1379∗∗∗
(0.0334)
712,191
.298

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment in the year after high school
graduation. The results are presented for students from households with above and below median income and those with and
without investment income (as measured by interest and dividend income). Students for whom the win occurs prior to high
school graduation are potentially affected. The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects.
Win sizes are classified according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000
dollars, and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent
statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

42

Table 9: College Attendance and Federal Aid: Critical FAFSA Year
(1)
(2)
Non-FAFSA Year
Attend 4-Yr Pell Grants
-0.0020
-$53.47
(0.0038)
(40.56)

(4)
FAFSA Year
Attend 4-Yr Pell Grants
0.0002
-$461.95∗∗∗
(0.0058)
(55.23)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0055
(0.0067)

-$103.08
(71.17)

-0.0149
(0.0102)

-$817.47∗∗∗
(91.43)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0193∗
(0.0099)

-$108.10
(93.86)

0.0158
(0.0149)

-$556.27∗∗∗
(121.91)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0521∗∗
(0.0211)

$261.11
(200.69)

0.0594∗
(0.0339)

-$613.61∗∗
(252.73)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.1057∗∗∗
(0.0273)
1,317,523
.215

-$514.94∗∗
(258.46)
1,317,523
$1,577.16

0.1673∗∗∗
(0.0489)
961,290
.215

-$1,295.88∗∗∗
(240.61)
961,290
$1,577.16

All Households

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

(3)

(5)
(6)
Non-FAFSA Year
Attend 4-Yr Pell Grants
0.0048
-$54.18
(0.0046)
(102.62)

(8)
FAFSA Year
Attend 4-Yr Pell Grants
-0.0030
-$965.16∗∗∗
(0.0070)
(144.42)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0098
(0.0082)

-$259.90
(183.33)

-0.0044
(0.0129)

-$1,791.89∗∗∗
(239.59)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0127
(0.0126)

-$129.53
(270.01)

-0.0057
(0.0197)

-$1,353.28∗∗∗
(351.55)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0199
(0.0272)

$401.76
(563.83)

0.0568
(0.0445)

-$1,505.48∗∗
(743.53)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.0355
(0.0402)
657,385
.133

-$1,593.27∗∗
(811.50)
657,385
$3,531.71

0.0464
(0.0748)
469,214
.133

-$2,841.31∗∗∗
(947.44)
469,214
$3,531.71

Low Income Households

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

(7)

Note: Estimates show changes in the rate of four-year college attendance and receiving federal grants for all households (top
panel) and households with below median income (bottom panel). The first two columns exclude lottery wins in the critical
FAFSA year (the year prior to high school graduation) and the next two columns only include the critical FAFSA year and postgraduation control years. Pell grants are scaled by baseline attendance to reflect per-student changes. The specifications include
state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win sizes are classified according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars,
30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the
winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

43

Table 10: Four-Year College Attendance: Critical FAFSA Year With Time Trends

All Households
FAFSA Year * Win Amt ($100k)
FAFSA Year * Win > $100k
Observations
Mean Dep
Low Income Households
FAFSA Year * Win Amt ($100k)
FAFSA Year * Win > $100k
Observations
Mean Dep

(1)
(2)
Without Time Trend
0.0015
(0.0027)
0.0034
(0.0139)
1,460,890 1,461,262
.215
.215

(3)
(4)
With Time Trend
0.0019
(0.0037)
0.0187
(0.0188)
1,460,890 1,461,262
.215
.215

(5)
(6)
Without Time Trend
0.0014
(0.0036)
0.0124
(0.0184)
730,526
730,628
.133
.133

(7)
(8)
With Time Trend
0.0034
(0.0046)
0.0265
(0.0241)
730,526
730,628
.133
.133

Note: Estimates show changes in the rate of four-year college attendance for all households (top panel) and households with
below median income (bottom panel). The estimates measure whether the critical FAFSA year has a differential effect on
college attendance with and without controlling for time trends in the effect of income. The number of years between the win
and the year of high school graduation is interacted with the win amount (in hundreds of thousands of dollars) and with an
indicator for the win exceeding $100,000. The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects.
Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent
respectively.

44

45

0.0021
(0.0056)
0.0008
(0.0073)
-0.0501∗∗∗
(0.0168)
-0.2401∗∗∗
(0.0237)
1,461,262
.824

Earnings
-$435.22
(408.37)
-$1,594.93∗∗
(703.14)
-$904.11
(1,050.67)
-$6,694.80∗∗∗
(2,124.24)
-$26,287.33∗∗∗
(3,604.14)
1,461,262
$51,281.80

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

$927.07
(770.96)
1,390,302
$2,086.84

-$201.55
(504.01)

-$313.72
(228.89)

$107.44
(164.23)

(3)
Self Employ
Earnings
$60.80
(89.35)

$18,177.40∗∗∗
(1,876.93)
1,461,262
$428.92

$762.31∗∗∗
(219.83)

$267.42
(172.57)

$145.88∗
(85.31)

(4)
Investment
Income
-$23.73
(41.24)

0.2640∗∗∗
(0.0463)
643,511
.028

-0.1634∗∗∗
(0.0293)
817,751
.910

-0.0874∗∗∗
(0.0218)

-0.0049
(0.0092)

0.0941∗∗∗
(0.0134)
0.1336∗∗∗
(0.0309)

0.0128∗
(0.0071)

(6)
Mortgage
(prior=1)
0.0076∗
(0.0042)

0.0404∗∗∗
(0.0079)

(5)
Mortgage
(prior=0)
0.0081∗∗
(0.0040)

$10,990.25∗∗∗
(2,205.51)
1,390,355
$51,427.58

$1,025.37
(1,179.12)

$617.34
(530.38)

$252.69
(390.75)

(7)
Zip Code
Income
$101.83
(227.80)

0.0263∗∗∗
(0.0059)
1,369,923
.287

0.0058∗
(0.0031)

0.0000
(0.00)

0.0013
(0.0010)

(8)
Zip Code
Coll Rate
-0.0005
(0.0006)

0.0155
(0.0166)
1,383,768
.006

0.0093
(0.0105)

-0.0016
(0.0051)

0.0020
(0.0038)

(9)
County
Mobility
0.0023
(0.0021)

Note: This table presents alternate parental responses to lottery wins, including earnings, employment, self-employment, investment, having a mortgage, and zip code characteristics. Mortgage results are differentiate between those who have mortgages and may pay them off and those who do not have mortgages and may buy a house. Zip code income
is the average zip code level adjusted gross income and zip code college attendance rate is the proportion of 17-year-old residents of the zip code that attend four-year colleges
in the year of their expected high school graduations. The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win sizes are classified according to
six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The
symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

Observations
Mean Dep

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

(2)
Any
Work
-0.0014
(0.0031)

(1)

Table 11: Parental Responses to Income Shocks

Appendix

46

Appendix 1: Robustness to Alternative Designs, Samples, and Outcomes

This section examines the robustness of the estimates to alternate windows of the lottery win relative to high
school graduation, methods of determining parent-child matches, adjustment of lottery wins for taxes, and
definition of win size ranges for treatment and control groups. Results are also presented for an alternate
method of measuring college attendance, employing an across win size design, and differentiating by college
sector and quality.
Table A1 presents estimates using lottery wins that occur in varying bandwidths around a student’s
predicted year of high school graduation. This exercise has two primary benefits. First, we examine whether
the lack of large effects for modest resource shocks is due to households spending down lottery wins prior
to when they would be used for college. We find this is not the case. Additionally, by restricting attention to
households whose parents won a lottery close to the year of their child’s graduation, it deals with the concern
about comparability of the treatment and control groups in the time dimension. For example, households
who win a lottery when their children are 17 and 19 may be more similar in terms of unobservables than
households that win when their children are 16 and 20. We get similar results with smaller bandwidths,
suggesting this is not an issue.
Table A2 considers an array of alternative sample and specification choices. The first column presents
the estimates when children are matched to parents based on Social Security Card Applications to focus on
birth parents. The primary disadvantage of this approach is that data are first available in 1983, so the sample
is significantly smaller. An additional concern is that a birth parent may no longer be involved in a child’s
life by the time of high school graduation. This disconnect could differentially attenuate the estimates
for children from socioeconomic groups with higher rates of divorce or absentee parents. However, the
estimates have a similar pattern to those generated when matches are based on claimed children, with little
or no effect for wins by birth parents of less than $100,000, and effects exceeding 10 percentage points for
wins of $1,000,000 or more. The predicted after-tax value of each lottery win is estimated by taking each
household’s pre-win tax return, adding the lottery win, and computing the estimated reduction in the win
due to taxes. This simulated tax liability approach avoids the issue of endogenous labor supply responses
to earnings. The resulting win amounts are mechanically smaller and thus some wins are now classified
in a smaller win range. As a result, the effects for each win range are slightly larger than for the pre-tax
estimates. as shown in column 2.
47

The estimates throughout the paper exploit comparisons between larger and smaller lottery wins (and
account for fixed differences between these households using unaffected, older children). The small win
control group used in the main specification consists of wins of less than $10,000, which average about
$2,000. There is a fundamental trade-off between increasing the minimum win included in the control range.
A higher cutoff may result in households that are more similar to those with large lottery win households
(in terms of observable characteristics), but the control group is treated by a more substantial win and thus
could attenuate the relative treatment effect of larger wins. Thus columns 3 through 5 of Table A2 present
estimates for three alternative control ranges where the lower and upper bound are adjusted. Since the $600
dollar reporting threshold for the IRS is arbitrary, we increase the lower bound to $1,000 and then $5,000
in columns 3 and 4, resulting in larger win households as the control group. Conversely, we use only the
smallest wins of less than $1,000 as controls in column 5. While these alternatives dramatically change the
size of the sample (since small wins are common), they have essentially no effect on the point estimates:
wins of less than $100,000 remain insignificant, and larger wins have effects of 2, 5, and 12 percentage
points respectively.
Some students may graduate from high school a year later than is predicted by their date and state of
birth. This can occur if, for example, a student starts a year late by choice, is held back during their schooling,
or moves to a state with a later entry age prior to starting school. Thus, we consider an alternative, more
broadly defined measure of children’s transitions to college that includes attendance in either the calendar
year of high school graduation or the following year. This will, however, also capture students who graduate
as expected and enroll one year later. The resulting estimates on four-year college attendance in column 6
are similar to those based on calendar year, with somewhat larger effects for the largest lottery wins.
In some cases it is not possible to determine with certainty the year or size of an individual’s first
lottery win and thus assumptions must be made in order for the winner to be included. These individuals
are omitted from the baseline sample presented in the paper, as they may introduce measurement error, but
estimates that include them are presented in column 7 of Table A2. This sample includes cases in which
it is not possible to determine which of multiple wins in the same year occurred first, so we assume the
largest win is the first win. Second, the sample includes cases in which a win is paid out over multiple years
(which constitute a couple percent of all wins) by predicting their lump sum equivalent. For wins that may
be truncated by the last observed year of data, we project the expected number of years that payments would
be received. Projections are based on annual payouts that occur early in our observed period and thus for
48

which we have a relatively complete picture of the typical pattern of payouts. We note that it is sometimes
the case that lottery winners have the choice between one-time and annual payouts and that they may have
different totals. Finally, the year of some lottery wins may not be accurately reported, which we identify
by the presence of supplemental income in the year prior to state reporting that is equal in size to the win.
Including each of these cases results in a sample that is 15 percent larger, and estimates that are similar to
those for the baseline sample. Specifically, we find no effect for moderate wins, and effects of 2, 7, and 10
percentage points for the largest lottery win ranges. Columns 8 includes wins that occurred in the year of a
child’s high school graduation, for which it is not clear if a win is too late to have an effect. This results in
slightly attenuated estimates, which is consistent with misclassifying treatment status.
Column 9 presents estimates while including winner fixed effects. This approach does not exploit
variation across larger and smaller wins. Instead, the variation stems solely from children born before and
after a lottery win within the same family. The primary challenge of this approach is that it can only leverage
children from households for whom the win occurs after one child graduates from high school and before
another graduates. This approach drops all one child households, 67 percent of two child households, and
43 percent of three child households. As a result, the average child in the sample comes from a household
with 2.8 children graduating during the period of interest rather than 1.9 children for the full sample. Thus
the resulting estimates are based on a sample that is only 26 percent of the size of the full sample and does
not exploit any of the variation in lottery win size. The standard errors from this approach are substantially
larger. Finally, column 10 weights the sample of lottery winners to reflect the characteristics of the population of households with children of college-going age. Because lottery winners are generally similar to the
population, this results in no meaningful change in the estimates.
There are a sufficient number of individuals with smaller lottery wins to generate precise estimates
for narrower win ranges in the step function specification. Table A3 presents estimates for 10 win ranges
relative to the smallest wins (compared to 5 in our main analysis). The resulting estimates reveal that there is
no pattern of positive effects for wins of less than $100,000 that is being obscured by the specific choice of
cutoffs. The table also presents a separate estimate for very large wins exceeding $3,000,000, which reveals
even larger point estimate than those for wins greater than $1,000,000, which is consistent with the lack of
concavity discussed in Section III.
As detailed in the text, enrollment estimates based on the Form 1098T could be biased upward by
income shocks due to the possibility that some colleges may not submit forms for students receiving full
49

grant aid. This would be most likely to generate upward bias for students from lower income households
who receive the most grant aid. Table A4 presents two approaches for addressing this concern. (Note that we
diverge from the rest of the robustness exercises and present results for any attendance instead of four-year
attendance – in this exercise 1) because there is difficulty in inferring the school level from the Federal aid
data and thus classifying the attendance level for the students we can only observe via this method, and 2)
because it is probably more likely that grant aid would fully cover tuition at community colleges and so we
would want to be as general as possible in how we measure attendance to examine whether fully covered
students are biasing our results.) Columns 2 sets attendance to 0 for all students attending colleges that seem
most likely to not be filing 1098Ts for students receiving full scholarships. These colleges are identified
as having close to 0 percent of students with 1098Ts that show grants equaling total tuition billed. This
approach will necessarily attenuate estimates since all attendance, including causal increases, can no longer
contribute to the estimated response. Nonetheless, the estimates reveal effects that have a similar pattern to
those for the full sample, and are scaled downward in a way that is proportional to the fraction of attendance
omitted from the analysis. Column 3 omits these students from the sample and generates similar results. As
an alternative to these approaches, we exploit the fact that the Department of Education financial aid data
reveal students who are receiving federal grants. These students are those most likely to be omitted by the
Form 1098T. Thus we construct a new measure where a student is classified as enrolled if they have a Form
1098T or are observed receiving federal grant aid. Column 4 presents the resulting estimates, which reveal
a similar pattern of college enrollment effects.
As detailed in Section III, a design based on comparisons across lottery win sizes requires the assumption that there are no unobservable differences that affect the outcome of interest. Because only children
who graduate from high school after the lottery win are treated by the income shock, attention is restricted
to these children. Thus the sample is approximately half of the size of the full sample, as shown in Table
A5. This across size design controls for state-by-year fixed effects, cohort effects, and a rich set of parent,
child, and household characteristics. The resulting estimates of the effect of income on four-year attendance
are discussed in Section III and are quite similar to those in the primary specification.

50

Appendix 2: Heterogeneity by Household Financial Status and Financial Aid Outcomes

This section supplements the heterogeneity estimates by household earnings and savings presented in Table
8. Table A7 presents analogous estimates for two-year college attendance. They reveal that the null average
effect for two-year attendance does not obscure larger effects for children with the least access to household
financial resources. Table A8 divides households into the bottom, middle, and top third of earnings among
lottery winners. This division isolates the effects for the lowest earning households who are most likely to
be eligible for need-based grants and aid. Table A9 presents the result of a formal test of the difference in
income effects for lower and higher income households. The interaction of having above median household
income or above median savings with the size of the lottery win prior to graduation is statistically significant
when wins are measured either as a continuous variable or an indicator for the win exceeding $100,000.
Table A10 presents a formal test for whether earlier or later wins have larger effects on college enrollment outcomes. Using a sample restricted to wins within 6 years of a student’s high school graduation
(columns 1 and 2) and wins extending as far back as 14 years prior to graduation (columns 3 and 4) does not
reveal evidence of increasing or decreasing effects. The bottom panel tests whether earlier income shocks
are disproportionately more important for households with below median income and reveals no evidence
that this is the case.
The modest effects for lower-income households highlights the need for a close examination of the
role of financial aid offset. A brief discussion of this issue is presented in Section IV. Estimates of the effect
of lottery wins on financial aid must be interpreted carefully. Specifically, the estimated effect of lottery
wins may reflect changes in enrollment and FAFSA filing on the extensive margin and may reflect changes
in the composition of students who attend. Column 1 of Table A11 presents estimates of FAFSA filing. This
reveals that rates of filing decreased for the largest wins despite higher rates of college attendance. Conditional on filing, the expected family contribution increases for each win size. Conditional on attendance,
winning households tend to receive lower levels of grant aid, take out smaller levels of subsidized loans, and
the winners of large lotteries take out lower levels of unsubsidized loans.

51

Appendix 3: Household Propensity to Consume

This section considers how lottery wins affect household labor supply and consumption. Table A12 examines if lower- and higher-income households experience differential changes in labor market earnings and
investment. While the percentage reduction in earnings is larger for lower-income households, the magnitude is smaller. However, there is little evidence of greater savings by these households. In conjunction,
these estimates and the more modest college attendance effects suggest that lower-income households are
spending a larger fraction of their lottery wins on non-college consumption.
There are several potential concerns with attempting to identify differences in the marginal propensity
to consume across households. First, within the class of investment income we use to proxy for savings,
lower-SES households may earn a lower average return, which would understate the magnitude of their
savings. However, when we parse investment income into interest income and dividend income, the results
imply larger effects for higher-SES households for each investment type, although the effects are not all
statistically significant (results available upon request). Second, our measure does not include alternative
investments (e.g., real estate, business investment, retirement accounts, paying off non-mortgage debt) that
could be more prevalent among lower-SES winners (e.g., if such households previously faced borrowing
constraints in these markets), though these investments could easily be more prevalent among higher-SES
households as well. While investments in real estate, sole proprietorships, or pass-throughs and contributions
to some tax advantage retirement accounts are not subject to uniform third party reporting, we examine
income responses from the Form 1040 and W-2 (results available upon request), and find no evidence of
larger increases in Schedule C or F income or IRA or 401-k contributions.
Finally, while we cannot observe overall debt or the paying off of old debt (or taking on new debt) in
the data, we note that lower-SES households in the United States have, on average, less mortgage and student
loan debt, have less credit card debt, and slightly lower credit card balances on delinquent accounts (e.g.,
https://www.valuepenguin.com/average-credit-card-debt), though interest rates on credit card debt may be
higher for such households. An alternative approach to understanding if unobserved debt can explain the
results is to approximate the amount of debt that would need to be paid off to offset the observed changes in
savings and earnings. Back of the envelope calculations reveal that the amount of debt needed to offset these
changes is implausibly high. Overall, the available evidence indicates that lower-SES households consume
a higher fraction of lottery winnings.
52

Table A13 presents the effect of household lottery income on children’s labor market outcomes in the
year that they graduate from high school and at age 27. The estimates reveal statistically significant reductions in earnings after high school on the extensive margin for each of the three largest win ranges. At age
27, earnings estimates are positive and reasonably large in magnitude, but are too imprecisely estimated to
be statistically significant. The lack of precision is due in large part to the limited number of treated children
observed at this age. We note that interpreting these estimates as the causal effect of greater education is
potentially problematic due to the fact that there could be other mechanisms by which the timing of parents’
lottery wins could affect children’s labor market outcomes.

53

Appendix 4: Characteristics of Lottery Players and Lottery Winners

To investigate whether families that play the lottery differ from the general population, we analyze microdata
from 10 years (Quarter 1 of 2005 to Quarter 4 of 2014) of Consumer Expenditure Surveys (CEX). Within the
CEX, we find that approximately 1 out of every 4 families report purchasing lottery tickets and those that do
spend an average of roughly $250 on tickets. Families that purchase tickets do not differ substantially from
families that do not along several demographic, income, and labor force dimensions (Table A14). Among
those we consider, the only dimension along which they noticeably differ is income, with playing families
generally earning more income than non-playing families. These differences, however, are not large. Across
a wide range of other characteristics – including race, highest education, family size, and age of children –
we do not find large differences between families that do and do not play the lottery.
It has been noted that the CEX likely underreports lottery playing (Kearney 2005), and higher levels
of lottery playing are found in other surveys. For example, estimates from the 1998 NORC National Survey
on Gambling indicate that 51 percent of adults report playing the lottery in the past year (Kearney 2005).
Additionally, a Gallup Poll on gambling conducted in 1999 reported that 57 percent of adults buy at least one
lottery ticket each year. Finally, recent data from a California Lottery Commission survey (2015) indicate
that 64 percent of Californians play the lottery each year, which implies that it is not only the states that are
otherwise known for their high gambling rates and casino presence (e.g., Nevada, Louisiana, New Jersey)
that drive national participation estimates.
In addition to comparing players and non-players, we examine the characteristics of winners and
non-winners using tax data. We select a random sample of non-winners with children of the same age in
order to generate a suitable group for comparison. Parent-child matches and household characteristics are
constructed in the same way as for lottery winners. The resulting summary statistics are presented in Table
A15 and are discussed in Section VI.

54

Table A1: Four-Year College Attendance: Alternative Bandwidths Before and After Graduation
(1)
6 Years
-0.0016
(0.0035)

(2)
5 Years
-0.0010
(0.0037)

(3)
4 Years
-0.0004
(0.0040)

(4)
3 Years
-0.0012
(0.0044)

(5)
2 Years
-0.0010
(0.0052)

(6)
1 Year
0.0024
(0.0073)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0075
(0.0062)

-0.0090
(0.0065)

-0.0090
(0.0070)

-0.0158∗∗
(0.0077)

-0.0155∗
(0.0092)

-0.0197
(0.0128)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0188∗∗
(0.0091)

0.0183∗
(0.0095)

0.0180∗
(0.0102)

0.0102
(0.0113)

0.0088
(0.0134)

0.0097
(0.0184)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0539∗∗∗
(0.0195)

0.0465∗∗
(0.0206)

0.0529∗∗
(0.0220)

0.0583∗∗
(0.0247)

0.0595∗∗
(0.0292)

0.0475
(0.0405)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.1184∗∗∗
(0.0257)
1,461,262
.215

0.1397∗∗∗
(0.0273)
1,289,589
.215

0.1435∗∗∗
(0.0294)
1,087,709
.214

0.1142∗∗∗
(0.0313)
857,883
.214

0.1502∗∗∗
(0.0377)
598,923
.214

0.1894∗∗∗
(0.0558)
312,407
.213

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment in the year of high school
graduation. Each column includes a different bandwidth of years around the lottery win, with column 1 including students who
graduate within 6 years of the lottery win, column 2 including students who graduate within 5 years of the lottery win, etc.
Students for whom the win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. The specifications include stateby-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win sizes are classified according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000
dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner
level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

55

Table A2: Four-Year College Attendance: Alternate Samples and Robustness Checks
(1)
Soc. Sec.
Parent
-0.0051
(0.0047)

(2)
Tax
Adjusted
-0.0085∗
(0.0046)

(3)
Control
1,000-10,000
-0.0019
(0.0036)

(4)
Control
5,000-10,000
-0.0029
(0.0042)

(5)
Control
600-1,000
-0.0017
(0.0040)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0041
(0.0082)

0.0051
(0.0067)

-0.0074
(0.0062)

-0.0050
(0.0066)

-0.0087
(0.0064)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0265∗∗
(0.0120)

0.0233∗∗
(0.0117)

0.0176∗
(0.0091)

0.0154∗
(0.0094)

0.0188∗∗
(0.0092)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0711∗∗∗
(0.0260)

0.0622∗∗∗
(0.0220)

0.0547∗∗∗
(0.0195)

0.0565∗∗∗
(0.0196)

0.0507∗∗∗
(0.0195)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.1036∗∗∗
(0.0329)
914,841
.254

0.1584∗∗∗
(0.0336)
1,461,262
.215

0.1180∗∗∗
(0.0258)
1,138,097
.212

0.1200∗∗∗
(0.0258)
222,840
.217

0.1195∗∗∗
(0.0257)
416,035
.224

(6)
Attend Within
Two Years
-0.0021
(0.0038)

(7)
No Sample
Restrictions
0.0014
(0.0032)

(8)
Include
Grad Yr
-0.0024
(0.0033)

(9)
Household
Fixed Effect
-0.0098
(0.0095)

(10)
Population
Weighted
-0.0011
(0.0037)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0016
(0.0067)

-0.0040
(0.0058)

-0.0076
(0.0058)

-0.0240
(0.0178)

-0.0069
(0.0066)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0209∗∗
(0.0096)

0.0225∗∗∗
(0.0085)

0.0097
(0.0084)

0.0064
(0.0243)

0.0194∗∗
(0.0098)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0555∗∗∗
(0.0204)

0.0670∗∗∗
(0.0174)

0.0415∗∗
(0.0179)

0.0514
(0.0552)

0.0533∗∗∗
(0.0210)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.1373∗∗∗
(0.0274)
1,461,262
.268

0.0983∗∗∗
(0.0230)
1,691,357
.216

0.1067∗∗∗
(0.0240)
1,617,679
.216

0.0893
(0.0695)
377,252
.215

0.1186∗∗∗
(0.0257)
1,461,262
.216

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment for alternate samples and
specification choices. The columns in the top panel presents: (1) a sample that includes only individuals who are linked to the
parent winner through social security birth records; (2) estimates after adjusting lottery wins for federal income taxes; (3) to (5)
which use alternative control groups in the following ranges: 1,000 to 10,000 dollars, 5,000 to 10,000 dollars, and 600-1,000
dollars. The columns in the bottom present: (6) attendance in the calendar year of high school graduation or the year after; (7) a
sample that eliminates all sample restrictions (e.g. including individuals who appear to have won the lottery prior to the date on
the W2G as revealed by a matching income amount in the prior year); (8) inclusion of wins that occur in a student’s graduation
year; (9) lottery winner fixed effects; and (10) weighting the sample to represent the population. Note that social security birth
match records are first available for the 1983 cohort, not 1980, so the resulting sample is smaller. Students for whom the win
occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and
cohort fixed effects. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10,
5, and 1 percent respectively.

56

Table A3: Four-Year College Attendance: Narrower Win Ranges For Income Shocks
(1)
No
Controls
0.0024
(0.0019)

(2)
With
Controls
-0.0010
(0.0023)

Win 3-10k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0045∗
(0.0024)

-0.0021
(0.0023)

Win 10-20k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0007
(0.0044)

-0.0021
(0.0042)

Win 20-30k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0049
(0.0065)

-0.0084
(0.0062)

Win 30-50k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0017
(0.0105)

0.0046
(0.0100)

Win 50-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0039
(0.0122)

-0.0110
(0.0115)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0249∗∗
(0.0125)

0.0168
(0.0118)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0525∗∗∗
(0.0203)

0.0526∗∗∗
(0.0191)

Win 1.0m-3.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0912∗∗∗
(0.0344)

0.0761∗∗
(0.0325)

Win 3.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.1558∗∗∗
(0.0387)
1,461,262
.219

0.1552∗∗∗
(0.0375)
1,461,262
.219

Win 1-3k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on college enrollment in the year of high school graduation.
Students for whom the win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. The specification in column 1
includes state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Column 2 adds parent wages, adjusted gross income,
filing status (joint or single), gender, citizenship, missing returns, mortgage payments, social security income, self-employment
income, household number of children, and child gender, citizenship, and an indicator for social security birth match to parent.
All student and parent controls are based on pre-win measures. Win sizes are classified according to nine cutoffs: 1,000 dollars,
3,000 dollars, 10,000 dollars, 20,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 50,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars,
and 3,000,000 dollars or more. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical
significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

57

Table A4: Any College Attendance: Alternative Measures
(1)
Baseline
-0.0022
(0.0041)

(2)
Set to
Zero
-0.0019
(0.0038)

(3)
Set to
Missing
-0.0006
(0.0042)

(4)
Form 1098T or
Fed Grant Aid
-0.0030
(0.0041)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0101
(0.0073)

-0.0064
(0.0068)

-0.0083
(0.0075)

-0.0121∗
(0.0073)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0169∗
(0.0101)

0.0173∗
(0.0095)

0.0148
(0.0105)

0.0155
(0.0102)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0559∗∗∗
(0.0217)

0.0470∗∗
(0.0209)

0.0561∗∗
(0.0229)

0.0464∗∗
(0.0217)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.1039∗∗∗
(0.0279)
1,461,262
.341

0.0919∗∗∗
(0.0275)
1,461,262
.269

0.1027∗∗∗
(0.0303)
1,308,674
.300

0.0941∗∗∗
(0.0279)
1,461,262
.355

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: This table presents estimates based on alternate methods of measuring college attendance, as some colleges may not file
a Form 1040 for students receiving full grant aid. Column 1 presents estimates for all colleges. Column 2 sets enrollment to 0
for students attending colleges identified as being most likely not to file. Column 3 omits all students attending these colleges.
Column 4 presents estimates from the union of 1098-T and federal aid enrollment reports. The specifications include stateby-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win sizes are classified according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000
dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner
level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

58

Table A5: Across Win Size Design: Four-Year College Attendance

Win 10-30k

(1)
0.0090∗∗∗
(0.0027)

(2)
-0.0019
(0.0026)

(3)
-0.0030
(0.0026)

Win 30-100k

0.0094∗
(0.0049)

-0.0025
(0.0047)

-0.0038
(0.0046)

Win 100-300k

0.0607∗∗∗
(0.0072)

0.0299∗∗∗
(0.0068)

0.0242∗∗∗
(0.0067)

Win 300k-1.0m

0.0851∗∗∗
(0.0164)

0.0518∗∗∗
(0.0157)

0.0496∗∗∗
(0.0154)

Win 1.0m or more

0.1433∗∗∗
(0.0212)

0.0904∗∗∗
(0.0200)

X
643,711
.223

X
X
643,711
.223

0.0830∗∗∗
(0.0200)
X
X
X
643,711
.223

Child and Family Controls
Parental Controls
State by Year and Cohort
Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment in the year of high school
graduation. The sample is restricted to children for whom the win occurred prior to high school graduation and thus may
be affected. Column 1 includes state by year of win and cohort fixed effects. Column 2 adds parental controls, including
wages, adjusted gross income, filing status (joint or single), gender, citizenship, missing returns, mortgage payments, social
security income, and self-employment income. Columns 3 adds student and family controls, including gender, citizenship,
number of children, and an indicator for social security birth match to parent. Win sizes are classified according to six cutoffs:
10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are
clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

59

Table A6: Four-Year Attendance by College Type
(1)
Private
0.0031
(0.0022)

(2)
Public
-0.0058∗∗
(0.0030)

(3)
For-Profit
0.0011∗
(0.0007)

(4)
Avg Earn
-$155.14
(211.77)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0060∗
(0.0036)

0.0004
(0.0053)

-0.0018
(0.0012)

-$438.39
(374.05)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0029
(0.0056)

0.0170∗∗
(0.0078)

-0.0011
(0.0016)

$683.31
(526.37)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0108
(0.0119)

0.0333∗∗
(0.0167)

0.0098∗∗
(0.0044)

$2,798.71∗∗
(1,119.81)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.0487∗∗∗
(0.0176)
1,461,262
.072

0.0657∗∗∗
(0.0223)
1,461,262
.137

0.0039
(0.0057)
1,461,262
.006

$5,055.47∗∗∗
(1,527.29)
1,461,262
$17,893.18

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment by sector and average
earnings. Students for whom the win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. The specifications include
state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win sizes are classified according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars,
30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the
winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

60

Table A7: Two-Year College Attendance: Heterogeneity by Household Resources
(1)
Lower
Income
-0.0017
(0.0038)

(2)
Higher
Income
-0.0026
(0.0044)

(3)
No Invest
Income
0.0004
(0.0038)

(4)
Invest
Income
-0.0049
(0.0044)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0027
(0.0070)

-0.0078
(0.0080)

-0.0055
(0.0069)

-0.0020
(0.0082)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0001
(0.0102)

-0.0057
(0.0101)

0.0054
(0.0099)

-0.0098
(0.0105)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0163
(0.0225)

0.0020
(0.0218)

0.0045
(0.0227)

0.0111
(0.0222)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.0233
(0.0396)
730,632
.098

-0.0150
(0.0275)
730,630
.178

0.0042
(0.0372)
749,071
.104

-0.0048
(0.0285)
712,191
.176

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on two-year college enrollment in the year after high school
graduation. The results are presented for students from households with above and below median income and those with and
without investment income (as measured by interest and dividends). Students for whom the win occurs prior to high school
graduation are potentially affected. The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win
sizes are classified according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars,
and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical
significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

61

Table A8: Four-Year College Attendance: Heterogeneity by Household Resources
(1)
Income
Tercile1
0.0000
(0.0051)

(2)
Income
Tercile2
0.0035
(0.0056)

(3)
Income
Tercile3
-0.0079
(0.0067)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0138
(0.0091)

-0.0034
(0.0097)

-0.0117
(0.0120)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

0.0020
(0.0142)

-0.0138
(0.0144)

0.0467∗∗∗
(0.0152)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

0.0347
(0.0314)

0.0671∗∗
(0.0338)

0.0425
(0.0312)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

0.0520
(0.0466)
487,088
.121

0.1050∗∗
(0.0438)
487,088
.178

0.1495∗∗∗
(0.0369)
487,086
.336

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment in the year after high
school graduation. The results are presented for students from households in three income terciles (where Tercile 1 is the lowest
and Tercile 3 is the highest). Students for whom the win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. The
specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win sizes are classified according to six cutoffs:
10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are
clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

62

Table A9: Four-Year College Attendance: Heterogeneity Tests
Linear Specification
Above Med Inc * Win Amt ($100k) Pre-HS Grad

(1)
0.0065∗∗∗
(0.0024)

Has Invest Inc * Win Amt ($100k) Pre-HS Grad
Observations
Mean Dep

1,460,890
.215

Binary Specification
Above Med Inc * Win > $100k Pre-HS Grad

(1)
0.0526∗∗∗
(0.0148)

Has Invest Inc * Win > $100k Pre-HS Grad
Observations
Mean Dep

1,461,262
.215

(2)

(3)
0.0052∗∗
(0.0026)

0.0049∗
(0.0025)
1,460,890
.215

0.0031
(0.0027)
1,460,890
.215

(2)

(3)
0.0433∗∗∗
(0.0160)

0.0393∗∗∗
(0.0150)
1,461,262
.215

0.0208
(0.0163)
1,461,262
.215

Note: This table presents the interaction of household resources with the size of the lottery win. The top panel uses a continuous
measure of win amount while the bottom panel uses a binary measure for wins exceeding 100,000 dollars. Main effects are
not shown. Estimates show the percentage point effect of income shocks on four-year college enrollment in the year of high
school graduation. Students for whom the win occurs prior to high school graduation are potentially affected. The specifications
include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **,
and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

63

Table A10: Four-Year College Attendance: Heterogeneity by Timing
(1)
(2)
Within 6 Years
0.0001
(0.0007)

Trend Test
Years Pre Grad * Win Amt ($100k) Pre-HS Grad

Years Pre Grad * Win > $100k Pre-HS Grad

0.0026
(0.0046)
1,461,262
.215

Observations
Mean Dep

1,460,890
.215

Trend Test by Household Income
Above Med Inc * Years Pre Grad * Win Amt ($100k) Pre-HS Grad

(5)
(6)
Within 6 Years
-0.0008
(0.0014)

Above Med Inc * Years Pre Grad * Win > $100k Pre-HS Grad
Observations
Mean Dep

1,460,890
.215

-0.0069
(0.0088)
1,461,262
.215

(3)

(4)

All Years
-0.0001
(0.0005)

1,902,983
.215

0.0002
(0.0033)
1,903,457
.215

(7)

(8)

All Years
-0.0010
(0.0009)

1,902,983
.215

-0.0093
(0.0062)
1,903,457
.215

Note: This table presents a test of whether the effect of a lottery win varies with when the win occurred relative to a child’s
high school graduation. The number of years between the win and the year of high school graduation is interacted with the
win amount (in hundreds of thousands of dollars) and with an indicator for the win exceeding $100,000. Columns 1 and 2
present the estimates for wins that occur in the six years prior to graduation and columns 3 and 4 present estimates for all lottery
wins, extending as far back as 14 years. The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects.
Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent
respectively.

64

Table A11: Federal Financial Aid: FAFSA Filing, EFC, Pell Grants, and Loan Amounts
(1)
FAFSA
Application
-0.0059
(0.0039)

(2)
Expected
Fam. Contr.
$242.0450
(184.7606)

(3)
Pell
Grants
-$89.44∗∗∗
(34.12)

(4)
Subsidized
Loans
-$15.87
(31.59)

(5)
Unsubsidized
Loans
-$111.59
(105.94)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0201∗∗∗
(0.0068)

$1,620.0784∗∗∗
(352.0651)

-$147.52∗∗
(62.18)

-$118.34∗∗
(55.62)

$4.52
(187.50)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

-0.0083
(0.0095)

$3,860.7219∗∗∗
(582.6894)

-$316.13∗∗∗
(71.70)

-$305.71∗∗∗
(70.21)

$371.30
(249.64)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

-0.0106
(0.0204)

$4,109.3422∗∗
(1,614.9986)

$54.83
(139.00)

-$204.98
(140.96)

-$632.42
(554.41)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

-0.1326∗∗∗
(0.0245)
1,461,262
.294

$2,607.4711
(2,373.4101)
466,280
$7,380.04

-$603.06∗∗∗
(181.60)
319,341
$1,163.24

-$1,003.23∗∗∗
(166.47)
319,341
$1,550.34

-$1,909.92∗∗∗
(719.99)
319,341
$2,985.71

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: Estimates show changes in the rate of FAFSA filing, expected family contribution (EFC), Pell Grants, and loan aid
received. Expected family contributions are conditional on filing a FAFSA, and grants and loans received are conditional on
college attendance. The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win sizes are classified
according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars, and exceeding
1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10,
5, and 1 percent respectively.

65

Table A12: Earnings and Savings: Heterogeneity Tests of Implied Marginal Propensity to Consume

Linear Specification
Above Med Inc* Win Amt ($100k) Pre-HS Grad
Home Owner * Win Amt ($100k) Pre-HS Grad
Observations
Mean Dep
Binary Specification
Above Med Inc * Win > $100k Pre-HS Grad
Home Owner * Win > $100k Pre-HS Grad
Observations
Mean Dep

(1)

(2)
Earnings
-$606.10∗∗
-470.07∗∗
(237.27)
(221.61)
-303.34
(228.49)
1,460,890
1,460,890
$51,275.28
$51,275.28

(3)
(4)
Investment Income
$157.15∗
166.82∗∗
(81.48)
(67.37)
-24.35
(71.13)
1,460,890
1,460,890
$428.51
$428.51

(5)

(7)
(8)
Investment Income
$1,236.58∗∗∗ 1,090.82∗∗∗
(428.90)
(410.05)
358.73
(407.67)
1,461,262
1,461,262
$428.93
$428.93

(6)
Earnings
-$3,428.19∗∗ -3,638.65∗∗∗
(1,359.63)
(1,398.30)
459.59
(1,434.45)
1,461,262
1,461,262
$51,281.81
$51,281.81

Note: This table presents a test of whether the effect of a lottery wins on earnings and investment varies with household
income. The top panel uses a continuous measure of win amount while the bottom panel uses a binary measure for wins
exceeding 100,000 dollars. Results are presented with and without including an interaction for home ownership. Main effects
are not shown. The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Errors are clustered at the
winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

66

Table A13: Children’s Labor Supply and Earnings Responses to Income Shocks
(1)
Earnings
Yr HS Grad
-$78.20∗
(41.77)

(2)
Any Work
Yr HS Grad
-0.0035
(0.0037)

(3)
Earnings
Age 27
-$218.12
(295.95)

Win 30-100k Pre-HS Grad

$38.28
(82.35)

-0.0013
(0.0066)

$195.47
(478.52)

Win 100-300k Pre-HS Grad

-$203.63∗∗
(95.59)

0.0003
(0.0088)

$1,128.69
(694.78)

Win 300k-1.0m Pre-HS Grad

-$503.04∗∗
(199.84)

-0.0223
(0.0195)

$2,815.30∗
(1,613.11)

Win 1.0m or more Pre-HS Grad

-$1,284.37∗∗∗
(318.76)
1,461,262
$4,082.21

-0.0880∗∗∗
(0.0268)
1,461,262
.741

$1,935.31
(1,809.84)
816,342
$20,932.83

Win 10-30k Pre-HS Grad

Observations
Mean Dep

Note: This table presents estimates of child earnings and employment in the year after high school graduation and at age 27 (for
those whom we observe at this age). The specifications include state-by-year of win fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Win
sizes are classified according to six cutoffs: 10,000 dollars, 30,000 dollars, 100,000 dollars, 300,000 dollars, 1,000,000 dollars,
and exceeding 1,000,000 dollars. Errors are clustered at the winner level. The symbols *, **, and *** represent statistical
significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

67

Table A14: Characteristics of Lottery Players and Non-Players: Consumer Expenditure Survey

Age
Family Size
Hours Worked Per Week
Marital Status
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Seperated
Never married
Highest Education
HS or Less
JC or Vocational
Bachelors
Masters / Professional / PhD
Race
White, Non-Hispanic
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other, Non-Hispanic
Family Income
Less than $30,000
$30,000-$49,000
$50,000-$69,999
$70,000 and over
Type of Employment
Private Business
Federal Government
State Government
Local Government
Self-Employed
Age of Oldest Child
No Children
Less than 6
6-11
12-17
Greater than 17
Sample Size

Lottery Players
51.89
2.50
40.82

Non-Players
51.60
2.52
40.35

0.58
0.08
0.15
0.02
0.16

0.54
0.12
0.15
0.03
0.17

0.40
0.28
0.20
0.12

0.38
0.33
0.19
0.10

0.76
0.10
0.10
0.03
0.02

0.72
0.12
0.11
0.04
0.01

0.23
0.21
0.17
0.39

0.34
0.20
0.15
0.32

0.74
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.09

0.72
0.03
0.07
0.07
0.11

0.61
0.05
0.07
0.11
0.17
11,308

0.59
0.07
0.08
0.11
0.15
34,958

Note: This table presents summary statistics for those who report playing or not playing the lottery in the prior year. The
analysis is based on the Consumer Expenditure Survey for Quarter 1 of 2005 to Quarter 4 of 2014.

68

Table A15: Comparison of Lottery Winners and Parents With Same-Aged Children

Parent Married
Parent Wage
Parent AGI
Number of Children
Child Male
Child Citizen
Attend Any Coll: Year of HS Grad
Attend 4-Yr Coll: Year of HS Grad
Attend 2-Yr Coll: Year of HS Grad

Population
0.62
59,325
75,280
3.233
0.51
0.95
0.39
0.25
0.15

Lottery Winners
0.57
51,790
60,466
3.454
0.51
0.96
0.35
0.22
0.14

Note: This table presents summary statistics for parents and children who experience an income shock due to lottery winnings
and for a random sample of parents with children of the same age. The population sample characteristics are shown for parents
with children born between 1980 and 1994 to correspond to those in the lottery sample. Whether an individual is married and
income is derived from filing status, number of children is derived from children ever claimed as a dependent, and college
attendance comes from the 1098-T.

69

