NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN CASH TRANSFERS HELP HOUSEHOLDS ESCAPE AN INTER-GENERATIONAL
POVERTY TRAP?
M. Caridad Araujo
Mariano Bosch
Norbert Schady
Working Paper 22670
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22670

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

Survey data collection for this project was financed by the Inter-American Development Bank.
Administrative data was obtained from the Government of Ecuador. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, the Inter-American Development Bank, its Board of Directors, or the
countries they represent.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22670.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by M. Caridad Araujo, Mariano Bosch, and Norbert Schady. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Cash Transfers Help Households Escape an Inter-Generational Poverty Trap?
M. Caridad Araujo, Mariano Bosch, and Norbert Schady
NBER Working Paper No. 22670
September 2016
JEL No. I3
ABSTRACT
Many poor households in developing countries are liquidity-constrained. As a result, they may
under-invest in the human capital of their children. We provide new evidence on the long-term
(10-year) effects of cash transfers using data from Ecuador. Our analysis is based on two separate
sources of data and two identification strategies. First, we extend the results from an experiment
that randomly assigned children under the age of 6 years to “early” or “late” treatment groups.
Although the early treatment group received twice as much in transfers, we find no difference
between children in the two groups on performance on a large number of tests. Second, we use a
regression discontinuity design exploiting the fact that a “poverty index” was used to determine
eligibility for transfers. We focus on children who were just-eligible and just-ineligible for
transfers when they were in late childhood, and compare their school attainment and work status
10 years later. Transfers increased secondary school completion, but the effects are small,
between 1 and 2 percentage points from a counterfactual school completion rate of 75 percent.
We conclude that any effect of cash transfers on the inter-generational transmission of poverty in
Ecuador is likely to be modest.
M. Caridad Araujo
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20577
mcaraujo@iadb.org
Mariano Bosch
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20577
mbosch@iadb.org

Norbert Schady
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20577
norberts@iadb.org

1. Introduction
A substantial proportion of households in developing countries are poor.1 These households suffer
from multiple deprivations—low income, poor health, low education levels, poor housing
conditions, inadequate access to a variety of services like potable water and sanitation. Many poor
households are also liquidity-constrained, and will not be able to borrow to invest in the human
capital of their children, even if the returns to these investments are high.2 This, in turn, could result
in an inter-generational poverty trap: The children of poor households are more likely to be poor in
adulthood in part because of failures in credit and other markets. Programs that directly transfer
cash to households are one way of attempting to break the cycle whereby poverty is transmitted
from one generation to the next.
Cash transfer programs have become very popular in many developing countries. In Latin
America, the largest programs have budgets close to one-half point of GDP (Levy and Schady
2013). Do cash transfers reduce current poverty? And do they reduce the likelihood that the children
of currently poor households are poor in the future, thus helping households escape an intergenerational poverty trap?
Whether cash transfers reduce current poverty depends primarily on the magnitude of the
transfer, and on the extent to which households offset transfer income by working less. In practice,
a number of evaluations and simulations suggest that cash transfers reduce current income or
consumption poverty, especially when the amount transferred is large (Fiszbein and Schady 2009).
Separate evidence shows that cash transfers do not reduce work effort, in the short-run (Banerjee et
al. 2016), or medium-run (Araujo et al. 2016).3,4

The World Bank estimates that in 2012 12.7 percent of the world’s population was extremely poor (living below a
poverty line of US $1.90 per capita per day), while 35 percent lived below a poverty line of US $3.10 (World Bank 2016).
2 There are other reasons why poor parents may underinvest in the human capital of their children, including incomplete
altruism or mistaken beliefs about the returns to investments in children.
3 Cash transfers do reduce child labor, as intended. See Attanasio et al. (2010) on Colombia, Edmonds and Schady
(2012) on Ecuador;, and Maluccio and Flores (2005) on Nicaragua. However, the reductions in child labor are not large
enough to offset the effect of the transfer on total household income.
4 A separate question is whether transfer income is spent in the same way as other sources of income. There is some
evidence from developing countries that this is not the case. For example, a disproportionate proportion of the transfer
appears to be spent on food and on goods that benefit children (see Angelucci and Attanasio 2009, and Attanasio and
Lechene 2014 on Mexico; Attanasio et al. 2012 on Colombia; Macours et al. 2012 on Nicaragua; and Schady and Rosero
2008 on Ecuador). It is unclear whether this is a result of the fact that transfers are made to women, who are likely to
have different preferences than men, or the fact that transfers are frequently conditional or “labelled”. Conversely, there
is no evidence that cash transfers are disproportionately spent on “sin goods” like alcohol and tobacco (Evans and
Popova 2014).
1

2

The extent to which cash transfers reduce future poverty hinges largely on whether the
children of households that received transfers accumulate more human capital.5 There is
considerable evidence that cash transfers increase school enrollment.6 Having children enroll in
school, however, may not be enough to improve their life chances in adulthood if these children do
not complete more years of schooling, or learn little while they are in school.
To credibly assess whether cash transfers can help children escape an inter-generational
poverty trap, one needs data that follows children from the period in which their parents received
cash transfers into adolescence or adulthood. Such evidence is sparse (Molina-Millán et al. 2016 is a
review).
Barham et al. (2013; 2016) study the long-term effects of cash transfers made in Nicaragua.
In one paper (Barham et al. 2013) they compare outcomes for children whose families received cash
transfers during the potentially critical “first 1,000 day” window (while the child was in utero and in
the first two years of life) with children in families that received transfers somewhat later. They find
that receiving cash transfers earlier in life raised performance on tests of cognition of boys by 0.15
standard deviations 10 years later. Barham et al. (2016) focus on transfers received in late childhood.
They find that boys who benefited from cash transfers complete 0.5 more years of schooling, have
test scores that are 0.2 standard deviations higher, and have 10-30 percent higher monthly off-farm
income. However, the results from other evaluations have been less encouraging. In Mexico,
Behrman et al. (2009; 2011) conclude that 3 years of cash transfers (relative to no transfers) resulted
in approximately 0.3 more grades of completed schooling, but did not increase performance on tests
of reading, writing, and math. In Cambodia, a program that made transfers to families of girls in
middle school increased school attainment by 0.6 years, but did not improve test scores or labor
market outcomes (employment and earnings) 3 years after the program had ended (Filmer and
Schady 2014).
In this paper, we study the long-term (10-year) effects of transfers made by what at the time
of our analysis was the largest (in proportional terms) cash transfer program in Latin America, the
Bono de Desarrollo Humano (Human Development Bond, BDH) in Ecuador. The BDH made generous
transfers—on average, transfers accounted for 15-20 percent of pre-transfer income of recipient
households. At its peak, the program covered 40 percent of households in the country, and had a
Cash transfers could also reduce future poverty if households invest the transfer in a productive asset that yields a
stream of income in the future. The evidence on this is mixed. See Gertler et al. (2012) on Mexico, and Maluccio (2010)
on Nicaragua.
6 Baird et al. (2014) and Fiszbein and Schady (2009) review the evidence.
5

3

budget of 0.7 percent of GDP. Unlike some of the better-known programs in Latin America (like
the PROGRESA program in Mexico or the Bolsa Familia program in Brazil), BDH transfers were
not explicitly conditional on pre-specified behaviors like school enrollment, although households
were encouraged to spend transfer income on children (Schady and Araujo 2008).
We present results from two different data sources, two identification strategies, and
corresponding to two critical stages in the accumulation of human capital. The first set of results
focuses on children who became eligible for transfers in early childhood. Many authors in a number
of disciplines have stressed the importance of health and development in the first years of life. 7 Our
results are based on data from an evaluation that randomly assigned households to an “early” and
“late” treatment group in 2003. All households in the evaluation sample had at least one child under
the age of 6 years at baseline. An “early treatment” group began receiving BDH transfers in 2004,
while a “late treatment” group only became eligible for transfers 3 years later. We use data collected
in a household survey in 2014 to see whether children in the early treatment group outperform those
in the late treatment group on tests of language, math, attention, working memory, fluency of
recovery, and in behavioral outcomes. We find no evidence that receiving BDH transfers early in life
had an effect on any of these outcomes.
In Ecuador, like many other middle-income countries, elementary school completion rates
are essentially universal. The first critical decision point that determines how much schooling a child
attains occurs in secondary school. For this reason, in our second set of results we focus on children
in households that were eligible for transfers when these children were of an age where they were
making decisions about secondary school enrollment and completion. We make use of the fact that
the BDH program has used a poverty score to determine eligibility for transfers since 2003. This
poverty score creates a sharp cutoff in eligibility. We compare the school attainment and
employment status of young adults, ages 19-25 in 2013/14, in households that were just-eligible and
just-ineligible for cash transfers between 2003 and 2009.
We find that young adults in households that were just-eligible for transfers are more likely
to have completed secondary school. However, the magnitude of the effect is modest, between 1
and 2 percentage points (from a counterfactual of 75 percent). Program impacts appear to be
somewhat larger (and are only significant) among women than men. On the other hand, we do not
find that BDH transfers increased employment amongst young adults. This does not appear to be
See, amongst many important references, Almond and Currie (2010); Cunha and Heckman (2007); and Shonkoff and
Phillips (2010).
7

4

because transfer recipients are more likely to continue on to tertiary education—there is no effect of
the transfer on the probability that a young adult is enrolled in an educational institution in 2013/14.
Rather, it appears that cash transfers prevented a small fraction of women from dropping out of
school before completing secondary school, but did not have a measurable effect on their later
education or work choices.
In sum, our analysis shows that cash transfers received in early childhood did not improve
learning outcomes in late childhood, while cash transfers received in late childhood had small effects
on the school attainment of young adults. We conclude that, at least in Ecuador, it is likely that cash
transfers will have at most a modest effect on the probability that the children of poor households
will escape poverty in the future.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we describe the BDH program,
earlier evaluations, and education in Ecuador. Section 3 discusses our identification strategy, and
section 4 presents results. We conclude in section 5.
2. Context
A. Cash transfers in Ecuador
The current welfare system in Ecuador, which includes the BDH program, dates back to the late
1990s. In 1999 the country suffered from a severe banking crisis, GDP per capita fell by 32 percent
in a single year, and unemployment increased from 9 percent to 17 percent. In this context, the
Ecuadorean government created a cash transfer program, the Bono Solidario (Solidarity Bond).
Payments were intended to go to poor households. However, because the program did not have
clear selection criteria, many recipients were non-poor, and many poor households did not receive
transfers.
In 2000/02, the government carried out a “poverty census” known as the Selben; the Selben
covered about 90 percent of households in rural areas, and about the same fraction of households in
selected urban areas that were judged to have a high incidence of poverty. It gathered information
on household composition, education levels, work, dwelling characteristics, and access to services.
This information was aggregated into a poverty score by principal components. Beginning in March
2003, this poverty score was used to determine eligibility for transfers. The name of the program
was also changed, from Bono Solidario to Bono de Desarrollo Humano (BDH).
New poverty censuses were carried out in 2007/08 and 2013/14. Once again, the
information was aggregated by principal components, and new poverty scores were calculated in
5

2009 and 2015. In both cases, the change in the poverty score resulted in considerable reshuffling of
households in and out of eligibility.8
Transfer payments in Ecuador have grown in magnitude over time. Bono Solidario began with
a 7 dollar transfer per household. With the creation of the Bono de Desarrollo Humano in 2003, the
transfer increased to 15 dollars, was revised upwards in 2009 (to 35 dollars), and increased again in
2014 (to 50 dollars). Payments have also grown as a proportion of household income of the poor—
from 13 percent of the pre-transfer income of the poorest 40 percent of the population in 1999 to
20 percent a decade later.
B. Earlier evaluations of the BDH program
There are numerous evaluations of the impact of BDH transfers on a variety of outcomes. These are
based on different samples and different identification strategies. Paxson and Schady (2010) use a
randomized experiment to evaluate the short-term effects of transfers on the development of young
children. They find no effects of the transfers, on average. However, among the poorest households,
BDH transfers improved child physical development (by 0.16 standard deviations) and cognitive and
socio-emotional development (by 0.18 standard deviations).9 Using data from the same experiment,
Fernald and Hidrobo (2011) show that the program improved outcomes of infants and toddlers,
while Hidrobo and Fernald (2013) argue that the intervention reduced domestic violence. Schady
(2012a) shows that BDH transfers reduced the proportion of adult women who were anemic. In our
paper, we use panel data from this evaluation. Specifically, we follow children who were 5 years or
younger at baseline into late childhood to test for program effects 10 years later.
A second randomized experiment of the BDH focused on households with school-aged
children at baseline. With these data, Schady and Araujo (2008) find that BDH transfers substantially
increased school enrollment, especially among households who (erroneously) believed that the
transfers were conditional on enrollment. Positive effects of transfers on school enrollment are also
reported by Oosterbeek et al. (2008). Edmonds and Schady (2012) show that BDH transfers
For example, 36 percent of all households in the first poverty census had scores that placed them within 5 points of the
cutoff that determined eligibility for transfers. Among these households, 46 percent of those eligible for transfers by the
first poverty census became ineligible, and 42 percent of households who were ineligible became eligible.
9 The measure of child physical development is based on three outcomes: Child height, elevation-adjusted hemoglobin,
and a measure of fine motor control. The measure of child cognitive and behavioral development is based on five
outcomes: language development, tests of short- and long-term memory, a test in which a child is used to find patterns
in pictures, and the Behavioral Problems Index (BPI), a commonly used scale that is based on the frequency that a child
displays each of 29 behaviors, as reported by her mother. Within a composite, each individual outcome receives the
same weight.
8

6

substantially reduced child labor. Schady and Rosero (2008) find that transfers resulted in an upward
shift of the food Engel curve—households who were eligible for transfers spent a higher fraction of
income on food.
Others have exploited the fact that the BDH program used a poverty score to determine
eligibility as a source of identification. Ponce and Bedi (2010) report positive program effects on
tests of language and math achievement. An important limitation of their paper, however, is that
they do not have data on the actual poverty score of households. Rather, they attempt to recreate
poverty scores with data from a household survey. Araujo et al. (2016) analyze whether transfers
affected the work decisions of adult women. The data they use includes the household poverty
scores that the BDH program used to determine eligibility for transfers. Their analysis, which is
similar in spirit to that which we carry out in this paper, finds that the BDH did not reduce work
effort. However, transfers appear to have shifted some women from formal to informal
employment as a way of hiding income.
In sum, there are a number of earlier evaluations of the BDH program, including on
schooling outcomes. However, with the exception of Araujo et al. (2016), all of these evaluations
have focused on short-term impacts. The most important contribution of our paper is that we study
the effects of cash transfers on young children (0-5 years of age) and somewhat older children (9-15
years of age) after 10 years.
C. Schooling in Ecuador
Schooling in Ecuador is compulsory from 5 to 14 years of age. The elementary school cycle runs
from kindergarten to 6th grade, secondary school from 7th through 12th grades. Eighty percent of
school-aged children are enrolled in public school, with the remainder in private school. After
secondary school, there are a large number of vocational colleges, technical schools and universities,
both public and private.
Ecuador has made considerable progress expanding the coverage of the education system, as
can be seen in Figure 1.10 Panel A shows that school enrollment of children of elementary school age
is close to universal—over 99 percent of children aged 6-11 are enrolled in school. Panel B shows
there have been substantial increases in elementary school completion over time. Averaging across
men and women, the proportion who graduated from elementary school increased from 65 percent
To carry out these calculations, we used the 2015 Encuesta Nacional de Empleo, Desempleo y Subempleo (ENEMDU), a
nationally representative household survey in Ecuador.
10

7

for the cohort born in 1950-54 to 94 percent for the cohort born in 1985-89. Importantly, this
suggests that there is little room for a cash transfer program like the BDH (or any other program) to
affect school enrollment rates for young children, or elementary school completion rates.
Turning to somewhat older children, Figure 1 shows that, after age 11, school enrollment
declines gradually: At age 15, 92 percent of children are enrolled in school, and at age 18, only 49
percent of individuals are enrolled in some educational institution. Panel C, finally, shows that
secondary school completion rates have gone up sharply over time—from 24 percent for the cohort
born in 1950-54 to 58 percent for the cohort born in 1985-89. However, even in the most recent
cohorts, a substantial proportion of adults dropped out before completing secondary school. It
follows that cash transfers could in principle increase school enrollment and attainment for this age
group.11
Finally, Figure 1 shows that educational gaps between men and women have closed over
time. As is the case in other Latin American countries, there are now no substantive differences in
enrollment rates of boys and girls. For the most recent cohorts, there are no differences by gender in
graduation rates from elementary or secondary school, either.
Although school enrollment rates in in Ecuador have gone up, the quality of education is a
serious challenge. Ecuador does not participate in the international PISA tests, so it is hard to
benchmark the performance of children in high school in Ecuador relative to other countries.
However, Ecuador was one of 15 countries in Latin America that participated in TERCE, a test of
3rd and 6th grade children carried out in 2013. In 3rd grade math, 47.8 percent of children in Ecuador
had the lowest of the four levels of performance on the test, very similar to the average for Latin
America (47.2 percent), but substantially more than higher-performing countries like Costa Rica
(23.1 percent) or Chile (15.4 percent) (UNESCO 2015). Results are very similar for 6th graders.
There are steep socioeconomic gradients in test scores of school-aged children in Ecuador
(Berlinski and Schady 2015). To a large extent, these gradients are already apparent before children
enter school (Paxson and Schady 2007; Schady et al. 2015). The deep deficits in cognitive
development, and the low test scores of poor children in Ecuador suggest that cash transfers could
in principle improve learning outcomes if transfer income were spent in a way that benefits children.

Evidence from a number of evaluations shows that, unsurprisingly, cash transfers have the biggest effects on school
enrollment for children in grades where dropout is high. See de Janvry and Sadoulet (2006) and Schultz (2004) on
Mexico; Schady and Araujo (2008) on Ecuador; Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011) on Colombia; and Filmer and Schady (2008;
2014) on Cambodia.
11

8

3. Data and identification strategy
A. Experimental analysis
As discussed above, one set of estimates we report is based on data from a panel of households that
have been followed since 2003. Households in this panel were part of a randomized evaluation of
the impact of cash transfers on child health and development (see Paxson and Schady 2010 for a
discussion). One group of households was randomly assigned to an early treatment group, another
to a late treatment group.12 At baseline, all households in both groups had at least one child under
the age of 6 years.13 The baseline survey was collected between October 2003 and March 2004;
follow-up surveys have been carried out regularly since then, most recently in 2014.14
Figure 2 shows that the proportion of households in the early treatment group that received
transfers rose sharply after June 2004, when they were first made eligible; by March 2005, roughly 50
percent of households in this group were receiving transfers in any given month. The figure also
shows that the proportion of households in the late treatment group that received transfers
increased steadily after March 2007, when they in turn were first made eligible; however, the take-up
of the BDH increased more slowly in this group, and never fully caught up with the early treatment
group. It is likely that this occurred because some households in the late treatment group never
realized that their eligibility status had in fact changed. In any event, by end-2011 (the last point at
which we have payment data for this sample) households in the early treatment group had received
approximately twice as much in transfers as those in the late treatment group (US $1,200, compared
to $625, on average).15

Random assignment was done at the parish level. Parishes are the smallest administrative units in Ecuador. Fifty-one
parishes were assigned to the early treatment and 26 assigned to the late treatment group. Within these parishes, a
sample of households who were in principle eligible for transfers given their poverty score, but had never received
payments, was selected.
13 An additional requirement was that households in the sample did not have any children 6 years of age or older.
Payments made by the BDH are not conditional on any pre-specified household behaviors. At an early stage, however,
program administrators considered making the program conditional on regular health check-ups for households with
young children, and on school attendance for households with older children. It was not clear which condition would
apply to households that had both younger and older children. For this reason, the evaluation design required that
households in the sample have young children, but not older children.
14 The original sample included households in urban and rural areas. Since 2005, however, only households in rural areas
have been followed. For this reason, our analysis is restricted to households in the rural sample.
15 Figure 2 also shows that, beginning in December 2009, the proportion of households in the evaluation sample that
received payments began to decline, and by September 2011 had fallen by roughly 20 percentage points in the early
treatment group (15 percentage points in the late treatment group, where take-up was lower). This decline is a result of
the change in the poverty score from the first to the second poverty census. The change in the score meant that a
substantial proportion of households in the sample were no longer eligible for payments (because their score on the
second poverty census placed them above the cutoff for eligibility); no new households entered the evaluation sample.
12

9

Paxson and Schady (2010) show that the characteristics of the early and late treatment
groups were balanced at baseline. Attrition between the baseline survey and the 2014 follow-up 10
years later was modest, 14 percent, and is uncorrelated with assignment to the early or late treatment
group. The 2014 survey, which is the basis of the analysis we carry out in this paper, included a
particularly rich set of tests, including three language tests; four math tests; tests of attention and
working memory; and two other tests that measure fluency of recovery and the incidence of
behavior problems, respectively. Details of the tests we use in our analysis are given in the Data
Appendix.
We transform the raw scores on each test into a z-score with zero mean and unit standard
deviation. We then construct three test aggregates (for language, math, and “other tests”). Each test
within an aggregate receives the same weight, and the aggregate, in turn, is standardized so it too has
a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. We also construct an overall aggregate which
equally weights the three groups of tests.
Given random assignment, identification is straightforward. We report the results of intentto-treat regressions that take the following form:
(1) Yihp = αc + Zihpβ1 + Xihpβ2 + εihp
where the i, h, and p subscripts refer to individuals, households, and parishes; Yihp is one of the four
test aggregates; αc is a set of canton fixed effects;16 Zihp is a dummy variable for whether the child in
question is in a household that was assigned to early or late treatment groups; Xihp is a vector of
baseline characteristics, which we include to correct for any possible imbalance between early and
late treatment groups and to increase precision; and εihp is the error term. We run regressions by
OLS, and cluster standard errors at the parish level. The parameter of interest is β1, the intent-totreat estimate of the effect of being assigned to the early treatment group on test scores.
B. Regression discontinuity (RD) analysis
To generate the data set for the second set of estimates, we merged data from three different
sources: data on a household’s poverty score calculated from the 2000/02 poverty census; monthly

16

Cantons are administrative units at a higher level than parishes, comparable to municipalities in the United States.

10

data on welfare payments (from BDH administrative records); and data on education and work
outcomes, as reported in the 2013/14 poverty census.17
The approach we take is straightforward. We compare outcomes for households who were
just-eligible or just-ineligible for transfers between 2003 and 2009 (based on their poverty score,
calculated with the 2000/02 poverty census). To assess program impacts on school enrollment,
attainment, and work, we use the responses on the 2013/14 poverty census.
We begin by verifying that the 2003 poverty score was in fact used to determine eligibility for
cash transfers in the 2005-09 period (data on payments for this sample are not available before
2005). Figure 3 clearly indicates that this was the case. The proportion of eligible households who
received transfers in any given month hovers between 70 and 80 percent, while the proportion of
ineligible households who received transfers is essentially zero. On the other hand, the differences in
transfers between the two groups are much smaller after 2009 (when a new poverty score, based on
the 2007/08 poverty census, was used to determine eligibility).
The regressions we run to estimate BDH program impacts take the following form:
(2) Yihc = αc +Sihβ1+ I(Sih<C)β2 + I(Sih<C)* Sihβ3 + εihc
where Yihc is an outcome for young adult i in household h and canton c; αc is a set of canton fixed
effects; Sih is a parametrization of the running variable, the poverty score calculated on the basis of
the 2000/02 poverty census; I(Sih<C) is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one for
individuals whose 2003 poverty score placed them below the cutoff for eligibility; I(Sih<C)* Sih is an
interaction term between the running variable and the eligibility dummy; and εihc is the error term.
We run regressions by OLS, and cluster standard errors at the parish level. The parameter of interest
is β2, the intent-to-treat effect of cash transfers on enrollment, educational attainment, and
employment in young adulthood.
As in other applications of RD, it is important to ensure that results are not driven by a
particular parametrization of the control function. In our preferred specification, we use local linear
regressions (LLRs) and determine the optimal bandwidth using the approach recommended in
Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012). To check for robustness, we also report results with different
bandwidths, as well as estimates that use the full sample of young adults and control for a quartic
(rather than just a linear term) in the control function. Also, as in other applications of RD, it is
All of these data are confidential. The process of merging the various data sets was carried out by staff of the BDH
program and the Ministry of Social Development in Ecuador. The data set we use has been made anonymous by
removing the cédula, the unique individual identifier that is present in all these data bases and is used to merge them.
17

11

important to note that the results we present are local in the sense that they only apply to individuals
at the 2003 eligibility cutoff.
We provide two tests to support our RD identification strategy. First, Figure 4 shows that
there is no unusual heaping of mass at the cutoff for eligibility. We comfortably pass a McCrary
density test (coefficient of -0.033, with a standard error of 0.019) (McCrary 2008). Second, Table 1
shows that there are no discontinuities in the observable characteristics of (soon to be) eligible and
ineligible households in 2000/02. 18
An additional concern arises because of the way we merge the different data sets we use in
our analysis. In each household covered by the 2000/02 poverty census, the BDH recorded the
cédula (national ID number) of one adult woman. This woman became the recipient of BDH
transfers if her poverty score was below the eligibility cutoff. In our estimates we test whether young
adults in households of women for whom we have the cédula, as recorded in 2000/02, have different
schooling and work outcomes, as recorded in the 2013/14 poverty census, depending on eligibility
for transfer during the 2003-09 period. Conceivably, transfers could have had an effect on fertility
(although there is little evidence of this from a number of evaluations of cash transfers in developing
countries),19 or on household composition. For example, if eligibility for transfers in 2003-09 made it
more (or less) likely that a young adult left home, our estimates could in part pick up these
compositional changes.
To get a sense for this, we test whether in 2013/14 there are differences in household size,
the number of children ages 0-15, or the number of young adults ages 19-25 between households
who were eligible (ineligible) for transfers in 2003-09. These results are reported in the bottom three
rows of Table 1. None of the differences are significant, and all of the coefficients are precisely
estimated and very close to zero. We conclude that, while we cannot fully rule out that there are
compositional changes in households that are correlated with eligibility for transfers 10 years earlier,
these do not appear to be a first-order concern.
4. Results
A. Results from randomized evaluation
The main results on the impact of BDH transfers using the randomized evaluation are in Table 2
and Figure 5. Table 2 reports 10-year program effects for the sample as a whole; separately for
18
19

These are based on our preferred RD specification, as discussed above.
See Steckov et al. (2006), Todd et al. (2012) and the discussion in Fiszbein and Schady (2009), chapter 4.

12

children who were younger than 3 years of age (including children who were in utero) at baseline
and children who were older; for girls and boys; and for children whose mothers had at most
completed elementary school and those whose mothers had higher school attainment. In each case,
we report the results from regressions in which the outcome variable is total scores and, separately,
language, math, or other scores, respectively.
Table 2 shows that, for no sample and for no test aggregate are there positive and significant
program effects. In fact, the coefficients are overwhelmingly negative (albeit, they are close to zero
and are not significant with one exception, corresponding to the impact of transfers on language
outcomes for younger children).
Figure 5 presents results by cumulative ventile of the distribution of per capita expenditures
at baseline.20 We do this in part because Paxson and Schady (2010) found that BDH transfers had no
short-term effects on child development for the sample as a whole, but substantially improved
outcomes for children in the lowest quartile of the distribution of per capita expenditures. Figure 5
shows that the estimates become more precise as we move from left to right in each panel, as
expected given the larger sample sizes. However, there is no evidence that BDH transfers improved
test scores anywhere in the distribution of per capita expenditures. If anything, and contrary to the
results in Paxson and Schady (2010), the point estimates for the poorest households are most likely
to be negative.
In sum, Table 2 and Figure 5 provide strong evidence that, 10 years after children randomly
assigned to the early treatment group began to receive transfers, children in this group did not have
higher scores on any of a large number of tests taken in late childhood than children in the late
treatment group.
B. Results from regression discontinuity analysis

The first (leftmost) value in each panel of Figure 5 corresponds to coefficients and confidence intervals for regressions
that limit the sample to the 5 percent poorest households, the next corresponds to the 10 percent poorest households,
and so on. The rightmost value in each panel corresponds to the sample as a whole, and is equivalent to the estimates in
Table 2. Log per capita expenditures is “imputed”. As Paxson and Schady (2010) discuss, the baseline 2003/04 survey
collected information on housing characteristics and ownership of a list of household durables, but did not include an
expenditure module. A companion study collected the same information on housing and durables and included an
expenditure module. (These data are the basis for the analysis in Schady and Araujo 2008; Schady and Rosero 2008; and
Edmonds and Schady 2012). Paxson and Schady (2010) used data from this companion study to estimate a regression of
the logarithm of monthly expenditure on measures of housing characteristics, durable goods ownership, and several
household characteristics such as the household head’s age and education level, and household size, and used the
resulting coefficients to impute the logarithm of expenditure at baseline for the sample of households in the panel. We
use the same measure in the analysis in this paper.
20

13

We report the results from our regression discontinuity estimates in Figure 6 (for women), Figure 7
(for men), and Table 3. Figures 6 and 7 show no evidence of jumps at the eligibility cutoff in the
probability of enrollment in an educational institution (Panel A) or work (Panel B), for women or
men. Panels C in both figures suggest that the BDH had at most a very modest effect on the
probability that young adults have completed elementary school, which is not surprising given the
very high counterfactual completion rates. Finally, panels D suggest somewhat larger effects on the
probability of completing secondary school, especially for women, where there is a jump at the
cutoff in completion rates of roughly 2 percentage points.
Regression results for various samples and specifications are reported in Table 3. The table
confirms that young women in households that were eligible for transfers when they were in late
childhood are 2-3 percentage points more likely to have graduated from secondary school 10 years
later. These results are stable across specifications. Results on secondary school completion for men
are smaller in magnitude and are generally not significant. There is no evidence that young men or
women who were eligible for transfers are more or less likely to be enrolled in some educational
institution. In the case of work, some of the coefficients for women in Table 3 are significant, but
these results are sensitive to how the control function is parametrized.
In sum, our regression discontinuity results show that 10 years after one group of
households became eligible for transfers and another one did not, young women in transfer-eligible
households had modestly higher secondary school completion rates than those in transfer-ineligible
households. However, this did not translate into a higher probability of attending university or some
other tertiary institution. Moreover, there is no clear effect on the probability that these women
work. The broad pattern of results indicates that cash transfers prevented a small fraction of women
from dropping out of secondary school, but did not have a measurable effect on their subsequent
education and work choices.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we have used two different data sets and two identification strategies to assess the
long-term (10-year) effects of the BDH cash transfer program on various measures of human capital
accumulation. We note that ours is one of only two evaluations that look at the effects of cash
transfers after a decade. (Barham et al. 2013; 2016 look at the 10-year effects of a cash transfer
program in Nicaragua.)

14

Our experimental estimates show that cash transfers received in early childhood did not
improve learning outcomes in late childhood. Our regression discontinuity estimates show that cash
transfers received in late childhood modestly increased the proportion of young women who
completed secondary school but did not affect their education and work choices after graduation.
We conclude that, in Ecuador, generous cash transfers are likely to have at most small effects on the
transmission of poverty from one generation to the next.
The data we use do not allow us to credibly analyze why cash transfers did not have bigger
impacts. It may be that the cross-sectional relationship between income on the one hand, and school
attainment and achievement on the other, is not primarily causal in nature; school quality may be
very low, which could help explain the absence of effects on learning outcomes; there may be
cultural reasons or problems in labor markets that keep women from turning their (modestly) higher
schooling levels into higher employment rates. We do not know which of these (or any other)
explanations account for the very limited effects of large cash transfers on human capital outcomes
10 years later.
In any event, regardless of the explanation, our findings suggest that cash transfers in
Ecuador are best understood as a way of reducing current poverty, rather than as a means of helping
children in poor households escape an inter-generational poverty trap. A number of other
interventions at various stages of childhood have been shown to improve outcomes in adulthood,
including earnings. These include nutrition interventions in Guatemala (Maluccio et al. 2009), home
visiting programs in Jamaica (Gertler et al. 2012), and higher teacher quality in the United States
(Chetty et al. 2011; 2014). We do not know whether these positive effects on long-term outcomes
would translate to other settings. Nevertheless, our results suggest that placing too much hope in
cash transfers as a way of reducing the inter-generational transmission of poverty, as many
governments in Latin America appear to have done, may be misguided.

15

Data Appendix
This data appendix provides additional details on the tests applied in the 2014 household survey.
The survey included three language tests. The first test, the Test de Vocabulario en Imágenes Peabody
(TVIP), is the Spanish-speaking version of the much-used Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT)
(Dunn et al. 1986). The TVIP has been used in a number of surveys in Ecuador (Araujo et al. 2016;
Paxson and Schady 2007, 2010; Schady 2011) as well as in other countries in Latin America
(Macours et al. 2012; Schady et al. 2015). The test has been shown to be highly predictive of future
outcomes, including in the United States (Case and Paxson 2008; Cunha and Heckman 2007) and in
Ecuador (Schady 2012b). The other two language tests are a test of verbal comprehension, which
evaluates knowledge of synonyms, antonyms, and analogies, and a test of reading comprehension, in
which a child is asked to read two short texts and is then asked simple questions about their
contents.
The 2014 survey included four math tests, all of which were drawn from the Woodcock-JohnsonMuñoz battery of achievement tests (Muñoz-Sandoval et al. 2005). One test, numeric series, asks the
child to complete a series of numbers where one is missing; the test measures mathematical content
and reasoning. A second test, math fluency, assesses the ability of children to rapidly solve basic
addition, subtraction, and multiplication problems. A third test, calculations, focuses on more
complex mathematical problems. The final test, applied problems, asks a child to solve a number of
word problems.
In addition to the language and math tests, the survey collected data on tests of attention and
working memory. Attention and working memory are two domains in what is referred to as
“executive function” (EF).21 EF includes a set of basic self-regulatory skills which involve various
parts of the brain, but in particular the prefrontal cortex. It is an important determinant of how well
young children adapt to and learn in school. Low levels of EF in childhood carry over to adulthood.
A longitudinal study that followed a birth cohort in New Zealand to age 32 years found that low
levels of self-control in early childhood are associated with lower school achievement, worse health,
lower incomes, and a higher likelihood of being involved in criminal activity in adulthood, even after
controlling for IQ and socioeconomic status in childhood (Moffitt et al. 2011).
Finally, the 2014 survey included a test of fluency of recovery, and a test of behavioral problems.
The test of fluency of recovery is drawn from the Woodcock-Johnson-Muñoz battery of cognitive
tests; it measures the capacity to recover cumulative knowledge. The behavioral test is the Strengths
and Difficulties Questionnaire (Goodman 1997; 2001), which is based on responses by parents. The
test has five scales, measuring emotional symptoms, conduct problems, hyperactivity, peer
relationship problems, and prosocial behavior.
All tests were extensively piloted in Ecuador, and adjustments were made so they would be
appropriate for the sample of children, as needed.

21

The other two domains of executive function are inhibitory control and working memory.

16

References
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2010. “Human Capital Development before Age Five.” In:
David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, Eds., Handbook of Labor Economics (1315-1486). New
York: North Holland.
Angelucci, Manuela, and Orazio Attanasio. 2013. “The Demand for Food of Poor Urban Mexican
Households: Understanding Policy Impacts Using Structural Models.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 5(1): 146-78.
Araujo, M. Caridad, Mariano Bosch, and Norbert Schady. 2016. “The Effect of Welfare Payments
on Work in a Middle-Income Country.” Unpublished manuscript, Inter-American
Development Bank.
Attanasio, Orazio, and Valerie Lechene. 2014. “Efficient Responses to Targeted Cash Transfers.”
Journal of Political Economy 122(1): 178-222.
Attanasio, Orazio, Emla Fitzsimons, Ana Gomez, Martha Isabel Gutierrez, Costas Meghir, and Alice
Mesnard. 2010. “Children’s Schooling and Work in the Presence of a Conditional Cash
Transfer Program in Rural Colombia.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 58(2): 181210.
Baird, Sarah, Francisco Ferreira, Berk Ozler, and Michael Woolcock. 2014. “Conditional,
Unconditional, and Everything in Between: A Systematic Review of the Effects of Cash
Transfer Programmes on Schooling Outcomes.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 6(1): 1-43.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, Gabriel Kreindler, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2015. “Debunking the
Myth of the Lazy Welfare Recipient: Evidence from Cash Transfer Programs Worldwide.”
Unpublished manuscript.
Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John A. Maluccio. 2013. “Boys’ Cognitive Skill Formation and
Physical Growth: Long-term Experimental Evidence on Critical Ages for Early Childhood
Interventions.” The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 103(3): 467-71.
Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John A. Maluccio. 2016. “More Schooling, More Learning,
More Earnings: Effects of a Three-Year Conditional Cash Transfer Program in Nicaragua
after 10 Years.” Unpublished manuscript, Inter-American Development Bank.
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh L. Linden, and Francisco Perez. 2011. “Improving
the Design of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized
Experiment in Colombia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(2): 167-95.
Behrman, Jere R., Susan W. Parker, and Petra E. Todd. 2009. “Medium-Term Impacts of the
Oportunidades Conditional Cash Transfer Program on Rural Youth in Mexico.” In: Stephan
Klasen and Felicity Nowak-Lehmann, editors. Poverty, Inequality, and Policy in Latin America,
219–270. Cambridge, United States: MIT Press.
Behrman, Jere R., Susan W. Parker, and Petra E. Todd. 2011. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers for
Schooling Generate Lasting Benefits? Five-year Follow-up of Progresa/Oportunidades.”
Journal of Human Resources 46(1): 93-122.
17

Berlinski, Samuel, and Norbert Schady. 2015. The Early Years: Child Well-Being and the Role of Public
Policy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Case, A., and C. Paxson. 2008. “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market Outcomes.”
Journal of Political Economy 116(3): 499-532.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Schanzenbach, and
DannyYagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings?
Evidence from Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1593-1660.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, and Jonah Rockoff. 2014. “Measuring the Impact of Teachers II:
Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” American Economic Review
104(9): 2633-2679.
Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckman. 2007. “The Technology of Skill Formation.” American Economic
Review 97(2):31-47.
De Janvry, Alain, and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2006. “Making Conditional Cash Transfer Programs More
Efficient: Designing for Maximum Effects of the Conditionality.” World Bank Economic
Review 20(1): 1-29.
Dunn, L., D. Lugo, E. Padilla, and L. Dunn. 1986. Test de Vocabulario en Imágenes Peabody. Circle Pines,
MN: American Guidance Service.
Edmonds, Eric, and Norbert Schady. 2012. “Poverty Alleviation and Child Labor.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(4): 100-24.
Evans, David K., and Anna Popova. 2014. “Cash Transfers and Temptation Goods: A Review of
Global Evidence.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6886.
Fernald, Lia C.H., and Melissa Hidrobo. 2011. “Effect of Ecuador’s Cash Transfer Program (Bono
de Desarrollo Humano) on Child Development in Infants and Toddlers: A Randomized
Effectiveness Trial.” Social Science and Medicine 72(9): 1437-46.
Filmer, Deon, and Norbert Schady. 2008. “Getting Girls into School: Evidence from a Scholarship
Program in Cambodia.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 56(2): 581-617.
Filmer, Deon, and Norbert Schady. 2014. “The Medium-Term Effects of Scholarships in a LowIncome Country.” Journal of Human Resources 49(3): 663-694.
Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty
Washington, D.C: World Bank.
Goodman, Robert. 1997. “The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire: A Research Note.” Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 38(5): 581-86.
Goodman, Robert. 2001. “Psychometric Properties of the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire.”
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 40(11): 1337-45.
Hidrobo, Melissa, and Lia C.H. Fernald. 2013. “Cash Transfers and Domestic Violence.” Journal of
Health Economics 32(1): 304-19.
18

Imbens, Guido, and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2012. “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression
Discontinuity Estimator.” Review of Economic Studies 79(3): 933-59.
Levy, Santiago, and Norbert Schady. 2013. “Latin America’s Social Policy Challenge: Education,
Social Insurance, Redistribution.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(2): 193-218.
Macours, Karen, Norbert Schady, and Renos Vakis. 2012. “Cash Transfers, Behavioral Changes, and
Cognitive Development in Early Childhood: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(2): 247-73.
Maluccio, John A., and Rafael Flores. 2005. “Impact Evaluation of a Conditional Cash Transfer
Program: The Nicaraguan Red de Protección Social.” Research Report No. 141,
International Food Policy Research Institute.
Maluccio, John. 2010. “The Impact of Conditional Cash Transfers on Consumption and Investment
in Nicaragua.” Journal of Development Studies 46(1): 14-38.
Maluccio, John A., John Hoddinott, Jere Behrman, Reynaldo Martorell, Agnes R. Quisumbing, and
Aryeh D. Stein. 2009. “The Impact of Improving Nutrition during Early Childhood on
Education among Guatemalan Adults.” Economic Journal 119(537): 734-63.
McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
Design: A Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 698-714.
Moffitt, Terrie, Louise Arseneault, Daniel Belsky, Nigel Dickson, Robert Hancox, HonaLee
Harrington, Renate Houts, Richie Poulton, Brent Roberts, Stephen Ross, Malcolm Sears, E.
Murray Thomson, and Avshalom Caspi. 2011. “A Gradient of Childhood Self-Control
Predicts Health, Wealth, and Public Safety.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
108(7): 2693-98.
Molina-Millan, Teresa, Tania Barham, Karen Macours, John A. Maluccio, and Marco Stampini.
2016. “Long-Term Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin America: Review of the
Evidence.” Social Protection Division Technical Note No. IDB-TN-923.
Muñoz-Sandoval, Ana, Richard W. Woodcock, Kevin S. McGrew, and Nancy Mather. 2005. Batería
III Woodcock-Muñoz. Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing.
Oosterbeek, Hessel, Juan Ponce, and Norbert Schady. 2008. “The Impact of Cash Transfers on
School Enrollment: Evidence from Ecuador.” Unpublished manuscript.
Paxson, Christina, and Norbert Schady. 2007. “Cognitive Development among Young Children in
Ecuador: The Roles of Wealth, Health, and Parenting.” Journal of Human Resources 42(1): 4984.
Paxson, Christina, and Norbert Schady. 2010. “Does Money Matter? The Effects of Cash Transfers
on Child Health and Development in Rural Ecuador.” Economic Development and Cultural
Change 59(1): 187-229.
Ponce, Juan, and Arjun S. Bedi. 2010. “The Impact of a Cash Transfer Program on Cognitive
Achievement: The Bono de Desarrollo Humano of Ecuador.” Economics of Education Review
29(1): 116-25.
19

Schady, Norbert. 2011. “Parental Education, Vocabulary, and Cognitive Development in Early
Childhood: Longitudinal Evidence from Ecuador.” American Journal of Public Health 101(12):
2299-2307.
Schady, Norbert. 2012a. “Cash Transfers and Anemia among Women of Reproductive Age.”
Economics Letters 117(3): 887-90.
Schady, Norbert. 2012b. “El Desarrollo Infantil Temprano en América Latina y el Caribe: Acceso,
Resultados y Evidencia Longitudinal de Ecuador.” In: Marcelo Cabrol and Miguel Székely,
Eds., Educación para la Transformación. Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.
Schady, Norbert, and M. Caridad Araujo. 2008. “Cash Transfers, Conditions, and School
Enrollment in Ecuador.” Journal of the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association 8(2):
43-70.
Schady, Norbert and Jose Rosero. 2008. “Are Cash Transfers Made to Women Spent Like other
Sources of Income?” Economics Letters 101(3): 246-48.
Schady, Norbert, Jere Behrman, M. Caridad Araujo, Rodrigo Azuero, Raquel Bernal, David Bravo,
Florencia Lopez-Boo, Karen Macours, Daniela Marshall, Christina Paxson, and Renos Vakis.
2015. “Wealth Gradients in Early Childhood Cognitive Development in Five Latin
American Countries.” Journal of Human Resources 50(2): 446-63 (2015).
Schultz, T. Paul. 2004. “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican PROGRESA
Poverty Program.” Journal of Development Economics 74(1): 199-250.
Shonkoff, Jack P., and Deborah A. Phillips (Eds.). 2000. From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of
Early Childhood Development. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Stecklov, Guy, Paul Winters, Jessica Todd, and Ferdinando Regalia. 2006. “Demographic
Externalities from Poverty Programs in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from
Latin America.” Working Paper 2006-1, American University, Department of Economics.
Todd, Jessica, Paul Winters, and Guy Stecklov. 2012. “Evaluating the Impact of Conditional Cash
Transfer Programs on Fertility: The Case of the Red de Protección Social in Nicaragua.”
Journal of Population Economics 25(1): 267-90.
UNESCO. 2015. “Informe de Resultados: TERCE-Tercer Estudio Regional Comparativo y
Explicativo.” Available at http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002435/243532S.pdf.
Accessed on September 9, 2016.
World Bank. 2016. “Poverty: Overview.” Available at
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/overview. Accessed on September 9, 2016.

20

Figure 1: Schooling outcomes in Ecuador, by gender
Panel A: School enrollment, by age
100
90
80
70
60

Males

50

Females

40
30
20
10
0
6

9

12

15

18

21

24

Panel B: Elementary school completion, by birth cohort
100
90
80
70
60

Males
Females

50

Panel C: Secondary school completion, by birth cohort
60
55
50
45
40
35

Males

30

Females

25
20

Note: Own calculations based on the 2016 ENEMDU household survey.

21

Figure 2: Cash Transfers Received by the Early and Late Treatment Groups, Experimental
Sample

Note: Sample size is 1338 children, 1707 children, 898 in early treatment and 440 in the late treatment group. These
sample sizes are somewhat smaller than those in the estimation sample in Figure 5 and Table 2 because we could not
merge all of the households in the survey with the monthly payment data from the BDH. The discrepancy is likely due
to errors in reporting, collecting or inputting the data on national identifiers (cédulas) during the household survey.

22

Figure 3: Cash Transfers Received by Eligible and Ineligible Households, Regression
Discontinuity Sample

Note: The figure depicts the share of eligible and ineligible households (within 5 points of the eligibility cutoff, as
determined by the 2000/02 poverty census) receiving BDH cash transfers. Sample size is 249,846 households (41,530
transfer-ineligible and 208,316 transfer-eligible). Calculations are based on the administrative data on payments kept by
the BDH.

23

0

.02

.04

.06

.08

Figure 4: Density of observations around eligibility threshold

-40

-20

0

20

40

Note: Sample size is 307,394 observations

24

Figure 5: Program effects on test score aggregates, by ventile of baseline per capita consumption, experimental sample

Language

-1

-.5

-.5

0

0

.5

.5

1

Total

0

20

40
60
Wealth percentile
CI 95%

80

100

0

20

Coeficient

40
60
Wealth percentile
CI 95%

100

Coeficient

Other

-1

-.5

0

-.5

0

.5

1

.5

1

1.5

Math

80

0

20

40
60
Wealth percentile
CI 95%

80

Coeficient

100

0

20

40
60
Wealth percentile
CI 95%

80

100

Coeficient

Note: The figure depicts coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from regressions of outcomes on a dummy variable for children in the early treatment group,
by ventile of the distribution of per capita expenditures at baseline. The first (leftmost) value in each panel of the figure corresponds to coefficients and confidence
intervals for regressions that limit the sample to the 5 percent poorest households, the next corresponds to the 10 percent poorest households, and so on. The
rightmost value in each panel corresponds to the sample as a whole, and is equivalent to the estimates in Table 2. All regressions include canton fixed effects and the
following controls: gender of the child, age at baseline in months, maternal years of education, household size, and the number of durables owned by household.
Standard errors are clustered at the parish level.

25

.35

.25

.4

.3

.45

.5

.35

Figure 6: BDH program effects, women
Panel A: Enrollment at any educational institution
Panel B: Work

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
Standarized Selben Poverty Score
Data

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

Prediction

-2
-1
0
1
2
Standarized Selben Poverty Score
Data

4

5

Prediction

.7

.95

.96

.75

.97

.8

.98

.85

Panel D: Secondary school completion

.99

Panel C: Elementary school completion

3

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
Standarized Selben Poverty Score
Data

Prediction

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
Standarized Selben Poverty Score
Data

3

4

5

Prediction

Notes: The figure shows estimates of the effect of BDH eligibility (according to the 2000/02 poverty census) on the probability
of being enrolled at any educational institution (Panel A), working (Panel B), having completed primary education (Panel C) and
having completed secondary education (Panel D) in 2013/14 for women. Each panel also plots the RD estimation fit linear
polynomial, estimated separately on each side of the cutoff, with bandwidth of 5. Sample size is 34,672.

26

.2

.5

.25

.55

.3

.6

.35

Figure 7: BDH program effects, men
Panel A: Enrollment at any educational institution
Panel B: Work

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
Standarized Selben Poverty Score
Data

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

Prediction

-2
-1
0
1
2
Standarized Selben Poverty Score
Data

4

5

4

5

Prediction

Panel D: Secondary school completion

.94

.6

.95

.65

.96

.7

.97

.75

.98

.8

Panel C: Elementary school completion

3

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
Standarized Selben Poverty Score
Data

Prediction

3

4

5

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
Standarized Selben Poverty Score
Data

3

Prediction

Notes: The figure shows estimates of the effect of BDH eligibility (according to the 2000/02 poverty census)on the probability of
being enrolled at any educational institution (Panel A), working (Panel B), having completed primary education (Panel C) and having
completed secondary education (Panel D) in 2013/14 for women. Each panel also plots the RD estimation fit linear polynomial,
estimated separately on each side of the cutoff, with bandwidth of 5. Sample size is 53,442.

27

Table 1: Balance in the regression discontinuity sample
Eligible
Ineligible
households
households
Data from 2000/02 poverty census
Urban
0.784
0.748
Lives in a house
0.852
0.777
Has untreated floors
0.242
0.383
Has toilet indoors
0.573
0.387
Has shower indoors
0.304
0.145
Has kitchen gas
0.983
0.964
Has electricity
0.998
0.992
Owns lands
0.173
0.167
Number of rooms
2.563
2.189
Data from 2013/14 poverty census
Household size
4.099
4.154
Number of children ages 0-15
0.777
0.878
Number of young adults ages 19-25
1.444
1.481

p-value of
difference
0.020***
-0.011*
0.004
0.002
0.005
0.002
-0.001
-0.002
0.010
-0.015
-0.007
0.013

Note: Sample size for all calculations is 249,846 households. The values for the columns labeled “eligible households”
and “ineligible households” are means for all households below and above the eligibility cutoff, respectively. The p-value
corresponds to a test that there are no jumps in the characteristic in question, based on our preferred Local Linear
Regression (LLR) as discussed in the text.

28

Table 2: Experimental estimates of BDH effects on test scores after 10 years
Total
Language
Math
“Other”
scores
scores
scores
scores
-0.071
-0.060
-0.090
-0.023
Full sample (n=1707)
(0.083)
(0.068)
(0.094)
(0.064)
-0.081
-0.170*
-0.039
-0.017
Children -9 to 35 months at baseline (n=612)
(0.078)
(0.088)
(0.087)
(0.065)
-0.068
-0.001
-0.125
-0.022
Children 36 months or older at baseline (n=1095)
(0.084)
(0.119)
(0.107)
(0.089)
-0.050
-0.009
-0.110
0.014
Females (n=858)
(0.078)
(0.061)
(0.093)
(0.082)
-0.070
-0.094
-0.052
-0.041
Males (n=849)
(0.108)
(0.102)
(0.118)
(0.079)
-0.026
-0.021
-0.071
0.041
“Low” education mothers (n=1123)
“High” education mothers (n=584)

(0.088)
-0.178
(0.140)

(0.081)
-0.165
(0.120)

(0.086)
-0.137
(0.170)

(0.083)
-0.167
(0.102)

Note: All regressions include canton fixed effects and the following controls: gender of the child, age at baseline in
months, maternal years of education, household size, and the number of durables owned by household. Standard errors
are clustered at the parish level. *, **, *** significant at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent, respectively.

29

Table 3: Regression discontinuity estimates of BDH effects on schooling and work
outcomes after 10 years
Mean,
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
ineligibles
Enrolled in school
All
0.34
0.005
0.007
0.005
0.002
0.005
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.007)
Males
0.27
0.004
0.012
0.008
0.005
0.010
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.011)
Females
0.44
0.001
-0.009
-0.001
-0.002
-0.004
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.013)
Working
All
0.43
-0.005
0.009
0.001
-0.006
0.004
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.008)
Males
0.53
-0.008
-0.009
-0.003
-0.009
-0.004
(0.006)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.010)
Females
0.28
0.006
0.044***
0.008
-0.003
0.022*
(0.008)
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.011)
Completed elementary school
All
0.96
0.002
0.004
0.004*
0.003
0.003
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
Males
0.96
0.002
0.005
0.005
0.003
0.006
(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.005)
Females
0.96
0.000
0.002
0.003
0.001
-0.001
(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.005)
Completed secondary school
All
0.73
0.015***
0.018**
0.016***
0.012***
0.019**
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.008)
Males
0.69
0.013*
0.013
0.014*
0.009
0.013
(0.007)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.008)
Females
0.79
0.019***
0.024**
0.019**
0.017***
0.028**
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.006)
(0.013)
Note: “Mean, ineligibles” refers to the value of the outcome in question at the eligibility cutoff. Specification (1)
corresponds to local regression (LLR) with an optimal bandwidth; specifications (2), (3) and (4) correspond to LLRs
with bandwidth =2.5, 5, and 10, respectively; specification (5) uses the full sample and includes a quartic in the control
function (the 2003 poverty score). All regressions include canton fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the parish
level. *, **, *** significant at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent, respectively. In the regressions of males and
females (“all”), sample sizes are approximately 100,000 in specification (1) (with the exact number varying by outcome),
43,227 in specification (2), 88,114 in specification (3), 174,148 in specification (4) and 307,394 in specification (5).

30

