NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVES AND ETHICS IN THE ECONOMICS OF BODY PARTS
Nicola Lacetera
Working Paper 22673
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22673

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

I wrote this paper following my participation to the Symposium “Law and Markets: Regulating
Controversial Exchange” at the Osgoode Law School of York University, Toronto, in September
of 2015. I thank Mitu Gulati, Kim Krawiec and Poonam Puri for inviting me to the Symposium
and encouraging me to write this essay, and for providing insightful comments to a previous
draft. I also greatly benefited from conversations with Al Roth. The essay builds on my joint
work and almost daily interactions with Julio Elías and Mario Macis; I want to express my
gratitude to them, and to claim only partial ownership over (but full responsibility for) what I
wrote. In addition to the recent work with Julio and Mario and to previous studies conducted with
Mario, I extensively refer to my research in collaboration with Victor Iajya, Robert Slonim, and
Sarah Stith. The content and structure of this paper partially follows a cycle of lectures that I gave
at the Center for Economic Studies of the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich in July 2016;
I am thankful for the hospitality of the University and the Center during my visiting period, and
to the colleagues and students there for their comments. I dedicate this paper to the memory of
my friend Julia Fletcher, whose life could have been longer if a bone marrow match were found
for her. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Nicola Lacetera. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Incentives and Ethics in the Economics of Body Parts
Nicola Lacetera
NBER Working Paper No. 22673
September 2016
JEL No. D47,D63,D64,I11,K32,Z13
ABSTRACT
Research shows that properly devised economic incentives increase the supply of blood without
hampering its safety; similar effects may be expected also for other body parts such as bone
marrow and organs. These positive effects alone, however, do not necessarily justify the
introduction of payments for supplying body parts; these activities concern contested
commodities or repugnant transactions, i.e. societies may want to prevent certain ways to regulate
a transaction even if they increased supply, because of ethical concerns. When transactions
concern contested commodities, therefore, societies often face trade-offs between the efficiencyenhancing effects of trades mediated by a monetary price, and the moral opposition to the
provision of these payments. In this essay, I first describe and discuss the current debate on the
role of moral repugnance in controversial markets, with a focus on markets for organs, tissues,
blood and plasma. I then report on recent studies focused on understanding the trade-offs that
individuals face when forming their opinions about how a society should organize certain
transactions.

Nicola Lacetera
University of Toronto
Institute for Management and Innovation
3359 Mississauga Road, Room KN 235
Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6
CANADA
and NBER
nicola.lacetera@utoronto.ca

1. Introduction: an intellectual journey
I spent the last decade studying the “economics of body parts”, an in particular the motivations
for donating blood, tissues and organs. There were two main reasons for my interest in this topic.
First, although the donation of blood and organs involves millions of people as well as
organizations and governments, there is a systematic supply shortage. The American Association
of Blood Banks estimates that, annually, about 7 million volunteers donate blood in the U.S.,
with about 13.6 million units of whole blood and red blood cells collected; Canadian Blood
Services collects over 900,000 whole blood donations every year; 1 yet inventories often fall
beyond safety levels to guarantee the adequate treatments of many conditions; supply is also
seasonal whereas demand is stable, and blood cannot be stored for more than a few weeks (Lang
2014). In lower-income countries shortages, and their health consequence, are even more severe.
In Canada, more than 4,500 people were waiting for an organ transplant in 2014, but only 2,356
organs were transplanted, and 278 people died waiting for a transplant. 2 In the U.S., about
17,000 kidney transplants occur every year, against an annual need of 35,000; a shortage that,
over time, produced a waiting list of over 100,000 patients. The average wait time for a
transplant is also increasing (over 4.5 years). Each kidney transplant would lead to about
$200,000 in direct savings; estimates indicate that the social benefits of a kidney transplant are
$1.1 million per recipient if we add the value of the increased, quality-adjusted life expectancy
(Held et al. 2016).
The second reason of my interest lies in the peculiarity and complexity of the motivations
that lead people to donate blood, consent to donate their organs when they die, and even donate
certain organs (such a kidney or part of the liver) while alive. Of course, altruism is a powerful
driver of the decision to perform these acts; these other-regarding preferences may be fully a
concern for other’s well-being (relatives or strangers), while at the same time they might directly
increase the well-being of the donors – a sort of warm glow (Andreoni 1990). 3
Although a powerful motivator, the frequent shortages of blood and the large imbalance in
the supply and demand of organs suggest that altruism alone may not be enough to satisfy
1

See for example the information at http://www.aabb.org/tm/Pages/bloodfaq.aspx#a1 and www.blood.ca.
Information is available at http://healthycanadians.gc.ca/diseases-conditions-maladies-affections/donationcontribution-eng.php#a21.
3
In case of directed donations, i.e. to loved ones, also other motivations arguably move individuals; for example,
donating a kidney to a spouse will increase the welfare of the donor through the happiness of having a loved one
being healthier but also because the healed spouse would make it more likely to contribute to the household income.
2

societal needs. A natural question is therefore whether other types of incentives, such as those
provided by economic or “material” rewards, might lead to an increase in supply. For a long
time, however, the prevailing opinion was that the addition of these “extrinsic” incentives would
not be effective and could actually be counterproductive. How is this possible? In a book that
became very influential in academic and policy circles, Richard Titmuss provided the basic
theoretical framework (Titmuss 1970). Discussing different systems of procurement of blood for
transfusion, Titmuss claimed that a system based on payments would attract donors with less
desirable characteristics, in particular poorer individuals in greater need of those rewards, but
who, in turn, would be more likely to carry transmissible diseases such as hepatitis. This
“adverse selection” effect would likely reduce the amount of blood actually available for
transfusion and the overall quality of the blood supplied. Second, offering material rewards
would crowd out people who are motivated to donate for altruistic reasons rather than enhancing
these intrinsic incentives.
Several studies on blood donations provided evidence interpreted as supporting Titmuss’s
claims. Surveys and laboratory experiments documented a negative impact of compensation on
the willingness of individuals to donate. Studies also found that people who were more
responsive to economic incentives were more likely than others to report behaviors or disease
histories that would make them ineligible to be donors. 4
It is in relation to these studies, largely based on relatively small samples and relying on
“stated” behavior rather than actual responses to incentives, that my coauthors and I set out to
collect evidence from various contexts about actual responses of blood donors. Our evidence,
based both on observational data and on randomized field trials in multiple environments and in
collaboration with several blood banks and donor organizations, showed that carefully designed
rewards (from t-shirts to gift cards to time off work) do increase blood supply without negative
consequences on the quality of donors and the safety of blood, and are generally cost-effective
(Lacetera, Macis and Slonim 2013, Lacetera and Macis 2016). In an additional study, we showed
that incentives such as leave from work and tax benefits to organ and bone marrow donors in

4

Lacetera, Macis and Slonim (2013) and Lacetera and Macis (2016) provide surveys and discussions of these
findings.

2

certain U.S. states did not enhance organ donations, but they had a positive effect on the
donation of bone marrow (Lacetera, Macis and Stith 2014). 5,6
The evidence thus suggests that economic incentives would provide a powerful and relatively
simple tool to enhance blood donations and potentially also the donation of other body parts.
Gary Becker and Julio Elías, for example, estimate that payments to organ donors between
$15,000 and $30,000 would eliminate the waiting list for transplants within a few years (Becker
and Elías 2007). But is the study of the behavioral effects of economic incentives for blood or
organ donations all that we need to provide insights for policy and the law? Is this positive and
cost effective response to incentives enough to recommend the use of economic rewards and
even straight out payments to blood and organ donors?
The most recent steps in my intellectual journey increasingly convinced me that the answer
to these questions is negative. Conversations and more formal correspondences following the
publication of our work, in particular, suggested that, even in presence of a positive behavioral
effect, providing economic rewards for the provision of body parts might conflict with deep
moral beliefs. Societies, while relying on market and price-mediated mechanisms for the
provisions of most goods and services, regulate and also ban many trades because they consider
them morally unacceptable, especially if they include a payment system and, at last partially,
regardless of the potentially benefits that the parties involved might derive from those trades.
The opposition to these transactions rests in part on a desire to protect vulnerable people from
exploitation or coercion (Hill 1994). However, the aversion goes beyond these aspects, and
includes concerns that explicit rewards for certain activities might corrupt some of the moral
values that hold a society together.
In this essay, I discuss the type and nature of the moral opposition to payments for the supply
of body parts. I will, in particular, offer insights from economics about the potential balance
between these moral concerns and the efficiency effects of providing incentives.

5

See also Chatterjee et al. (2015). For a case study showing positive effects on live undirected kidney donations, see
Bilgel and Galle (2015).
6
Recent evidence also shows that economic incentives enhance other forms of prosocial activities, such as proenvironment behavior, as well as other activities driven by strong intrinsic and other-regarding motives, such as civil
service, teaching, and health-related jobs. For a survey of these results, see Lacetera (2016).

3

2. The nature of moral repugnance toward payments
Although, obviously, the study of ethics goes back thousands of years, here I focus on a recent
framework for understanding the moral views of certain economic exchanges, which Nobel
Laureate economist Alvin Roth introduced, based on the concept of “repugnant transactions”.
Roth defines repugnance toward a transaction as the aversion toward other individuals engaging
in it, even if the parties directly involved benefit from that trade. 7 Just like societies regulate or
prohibit certain activities and trades because they produce more standard economic inefficiencies
(e.g. negative externalities or informational asymmetries about the quality or safety of a good or
service), limits and prohibitions apply even in absence of these frictions but when ethical
concerns are present. These limits vary over time and places. For example, indentured servitude
was once accepted in many countries, but is now universally seen as unacceptable, whereas life
insurance contracts were considered repugnant in the past but are now widely allowed. Activities
such as same-sex marriage, surrogacy, prostitution, the supply of cadavers for research or eating
certain types of food (e.g., horse meat) are regulated differently in different countries—and
sometimes even within the same country—largely because of moral considerations.
Most of the transactions that are viewed as morally repugnant involve the human body or
parts of it as the “good” of the transaction (in the form of a sale or service provision): from a paid
voluntary army to prostitution, from surrogacy to payments for human organs. Providing
payments or other economic incentives to donors of blood and body parts is considered morally
unacceptable also by many blood collecting organizations and health agencies. For instance, the
World Health Organization, states that blood supply should not be remunerated in any way
(World health Organization 2009). The WHO advances similar if not stronger arguments with
reference to the transplantation of human cells, tissues and organs; the guiding principles, again,
exclude payments to donors (World health Organization 2004).
The opposition to any form of compensation for certain activities is typically motivated with
more than one single type of moral concerns.
A first set of issues regards the risk of exploitation or coercion of individuals – a violation of
the basic moral principle that individuals should provide free and informed consent to undertake
7

Kidney exchange mechanisms that do not include monetary payments (paired donations and chains), which Roth
and his coauthors contributed to design and implement, were elaborated also as a way to avoid repugnance
constraints. Because I focus on transactions, especially related to body parts, that do raise ethical opposition, I will
not discuss kidney exchange here. For details about this hugely important market design innovation, see for example
Roth, Sonmez and Unver (2004), Roth (2007) and Roth (2015).

4

a transaction, and especially so when a medical procedure is part of the trade. The concern with
providing compensation is that disadvantaged individuals may over supply, for example, their
blood or body parts in a way that can be harmful to their own health and that they can regret in
the future (Council of Europe 2015, Nuffield Council on Bioethics, Radin 1996, Satz 2010,
United States Task Force on Organ Transplantation 1986). 8
Second, payments may contrast with a principle of fairness in the allocation of blood and
organs, because it would create disparity in access if this was based on the ability to pay of the
recipients (Council of Europe 2015, Nuffield Council on Bioethics, Radin 1996, Satz 2010,
United States Task Force on Organ Transplantation 1986). 9
A third reason of moral opposition is that allowing compensation would deteriorate deeper
moral principles. Compensating blood and organ donors (but also, for example, surrogate
mothers) would violate human dignity and would corrupt sacred or protected values. Allowing
these activities may then create a moral slippery slope where further, and even more
questionable, trades are allowed; societies would therefore be better off “stopping” before
running these risks (Council of Europe 2015, Delmonico et al. 2002, Sandel 2012).
Finally, a sense of unease or disgust toward certain activities could represent a form of
instinctive wisdom and, as such, be sufficient motive to prohibit certain activities (even if the
sources of disgust cannot be fully articulated). Leon Kass, who served as chairman of the
President’s Council on Bioethics from 2001 to 2005 in the United States, advanced this
argument, for example, to support his claim against human cloning (Kass 1997).
There are some fundamental differences between these moral concerns, and my reading of
the relevant literature is that it has not sully spelled out these differences. Absent a clear
understanding of the peculiarities of each source of ethical opposition, it is difficult to study how
to address the various concerns and, in particular, which policy choices are appropriate.
On the one hand, issues related to coercion, exploitation and fairness could at least in part be
addressed by proper legal and institutional design. For example, rewards may have a coercive
and exploitative nature because an individual could use compensation to solve some pressing
8

Recent studies in economics investigated the potential undue influence effects of remunerations. See Ambuehl
(2016) and Ambuehl, Niederle and Roth (2015).
9
Fairness considerations may also be more complex than just the concern that disadvantaged individuals may be
coerced into supplying blood for compensation, or not be able to access blood because of its price. One might argue,
for example, that (uncompensated) donors are the only participants to not to receive any economic benefits in the
supply chain, because other parties, such as collection agencies and medical providers, received payments or
reimbursements for services and costs.

5

needs, without thoroughly thinking about the longer-term consequences; this may be the case
especially if the payment is in the form of cash, whereas in-kind items would be less likely to
generate excess pressure on potential donors because they are less easy to monetize. In-kind
rewards and delayed compensation, for example contribution to a pension, investment or college
fund, are some of the proposals recently advanced to allay concerns about the excess temptation
of direct cash and the ensuing problems of coercion and exploitation. Regarding concerns for
fairness, a policy solution would be to regulate payments and have a third party, e.g. the
government or insurance companies, pay for the rewards and allocate, blood or organs only
based on medical need and other transparent criteria that do not give an undue advantage to the
rich. Note that even the most vocal advocates of payments for blood or body parts do not propose
a pure market system, but the type of regulated payments that I just described (Beard and Leitzel
2014, Satel and Hippen 2008).
To the extent that institutional arrangements can mitigate coercion, exploitation and
unfairness, one could argue that these forms of moral opposition are also more amenable to
“tradeoff thinking”, i.e. to be weighed against the potential efficiency gains that payments may
cause (e.g. increases in supply); societies may be open, in other words, to accepting efficiencyenhancing procurement and allocation systems even if more ethically questionable. Thus where
the nature of the moral opposition to payments resides in issues of coercion, exploitation and
unfairness, arrangements to reduce these risks should allay moral aversion.
On the other hand, preoccupations for human dignity, the corruption of social values or even
disgust resemble “sacred values”, i.e. principles that individuals and societies are not willing to
compromise against any other form of potential gain. In his original analysis, Titmuss (1970)
expressed concerns about payments for blood donors, in addition to his predictions about the
negative effects of rewards on donor motivation and blood safety; compensation would be
exploitative especially of individuals in lower socioeconomic groups, but it would also more
broadly affect the prevailing values in a society, reducing people’s “sense of community”; thus a
payment system for one altruistic activity could spread negative moral consequences on society
overall and as such, there is room to limit the individual freedom to offer and receive economic
rewards. 10 The World Health Organization’s aversion to paying for blood, tissues or organs,
mentioned before, is based on arguments that go beyond concerns for exploitation, and refer to
10

For an analysis of these arguments see also Archard (2002)

6

the risk of erosion of overall moral values in society (WHO 2004). In expressing their opposition
to any form of payment for organ donors, Delmonico et al. (2002) are equally clear about the
origins of their moral opposition; they state that payments are “ethically unacceptable […]
despite the purported benefits of such a sale for both the buyer and the seller. […] Fundamental
truths of our society, life and liberty, should not have monetary price” (italics added). The
fundamental truths mentioned in this quote trumps any consideration, in the words of the authors,
for the benefits that parties may receive from a price mediated organ transaction. And Michael
Sandel, in describing the different forms of moral concerns for allowing certain transactions to
be price-mediated, clarifies that in most cases, solving issues related to coercion and fairness
would only partially address the opposition: “[…] the liberal consent theorists think that the
commodification and privatization of public life can be addressed simply by adjusting the
background conditions within which markets operate. According to [them], there is nothing
wrong with commodification that fair terms of social cooperation cannot cure; if only society
were arranged so that people’s choices to buy and sell things were truly voluntary, rather than
tainted by unfair bargaining conditions, the objection to commodification would fall away. What
that argument misses are the dimensions of life that lie beyond consent, in the moral and civic
goods that markets do not honor and money cannot buy” (Sandel 2003; italics added).
Although the visceral disgust toward certain activities and transactions, considered by Kass
(1997) as a form of wisdom, may figure as similar to concerns for human dignity and corruption
of social values, these concerns appeal to principles that are shared in a population and not
entirely subjective; in contrast an appeal to disgust makes it harder to distinguish a “deep
wisdom” from, for example, fear and opposition to something that is new or different (e.g.
interracial or same sex marriage). The inability to refer to specific and generally accepted or
shared principles is the cause of extensive critiques to disgust-based arguments and of the
general reluctance of scholars, practitioners and policymakers to have disgust-based aversions
inform public policy (Nussbaum 2004).
These strong beliefs are unlikely to be amenable to compromises with any gains; they also
may not change in face of new information showing, for example, the potential positive supply
effects of providing payments. Another peculiarity of “sacred value” concerns is that, by their
own nature, they are less well defined and, as such, more likely to vary between countries and
over time. This might contribute to explaining heterogeneities between countries in what morally

7

controversial activities are allowed. For example, prostitution is illegal in the United States (with
exceptions in Nevada) but not in Germany, whereas Germany (as many other European
countries) bans commercial surrogacy and many U.S. states allow it. It is implausible that two
societies like Germany and the U.S. have contrasting conceptions of what constitutes coercion,
exploitation or fairness in a transaction. Yet, deeper cultural differences might determine what is
considered a sacred value is and what is not. Another relevant example is the difference in
legislation regarding the procurement of plasma in the U.S. and Canada. The U.S. allows
payments for plasma donors and the establishment of for profit plasma centers, whereas
payments are illegal in most provinces of Canada. Yet, Canada imports most of the plasma that it
needs from the U.S. (Sher 2013). Even within the same jurisdiction, finally, seemingly similar
actions in different trades concerning the human body receive different treatment; for example,
still in Canada, forms of consensual body harm such as boxing (or hokey) are legal, whereas
courts have ruled that practices such as BDSM between consenting adults be sanctioned (Luksic
2015). All this suggests, again, that some deeper and less clearly defined moral objections need
to be considered.
A few studies show that certain beliefs can alter reactions to presented facts, even at the level
of cognitive processing. Dan Kahan and his coauthors, for example, found evidence of
“ideologically motivated cognition”; the ability of individuals to solve certain mathematical
problems, for example, is affected by whether the situation depicted in the problem represents a
politically divisive issue (such as the effects of gun control policies) – people are more likely to
give answers that are more consistent with their political beliefs than with the data of the
problem (Kahan 2012, Kahan et al. 2013). Brendan Nyhan and his team documented that the
provision of information that refutes claims of a MMR/autism link reduced the intent to
vaccinate their children for parents with the least favorable vaccine attitudes (Nyhan 2014). And
Hanselmann and Tanner (2008) showed that thinking about “taboo” and “tragic” tradeoffs is
more stressful than thinking about standard tradeoffs. Recent models in economics consider
these forms of “motivated beliefs” (Bénabou 2015, Bénabou and Tirole 2016).
Other studies found that under certain circumstances, individuals may be open to considering
counterfactuals and cost-benefit considerations in relation to sacred or protected values. Baron
and Leshner (2000) found that people differ in their assessment of what constitutes a protected
value; moreover, even when individuals classified an activity or transaction as a sacred value

8

(e.g. guaranteeing free speech, no matter the content), they could often come up with
counterexamples (e.g., freedom of speech can be limited in certain case, for example for Nazi
propaganda). Philip Tetlock and his coauthors contend that, although people are reluctant to
make certain tradeoffs, they often end up making them. They may recast a sacred value as not
sacred, or, conversely, they might modify the status of a given principle to being protected rather
than negotiable (Fiske and Tetlock 1997, Tetlock 2003). In the case of the supply of body parts,
for example, the level and safety of blood or organ supply may be the main criterion to assess the
moral acceptability of a procurement and allocation system. If economic rewards increased the
safe supply of blood and organs, thereby saving more lives and improving health outcomes for
more people, then one might consider it ethical to adopt, rather than prohibit, compensation.
If, on the one hand, these studies suggest that there may be room to balance moral beliefs
with other welfare relevant factors, such as economic efficiency, the heterogeneity among
individuals and activities regarding the perception of protected value and how amenable they are
to tradeoffs indicate that these compromises are complex, based on not fully defined concepts
and, as such, likely to lead to different outcomes for different activities and contexts.
In the next section, I discuss some recent work that my coauthors and I are doing to address
these questions in the case of payments for organ donations.

3. Just how strong is the moral opposition to payments?
In the last couple of years, Julio Elías, Mario Macis and I set out to elaborate a conceptual and
empirical framework to assess whether the moral concerns that individuals have about providing
compensation to organ donors are more similar to sacred values or, instead, people are open to
considering payments if they enhanced the supply of organs. Our interest was not just in how
individuals perceive the morality of a given transaction and its organization, which has been the
main topic of much of the existing related research; rather, we focused on opinions about
whether society (regardless of the ethical stances of single individuals) should allow and regulate
certain transactions.
Knowledge of whether the members of a society consider also the efficiency effects of a
morally controversial transaction or they are not willing to compromise their moral position with
any other aspect of a trade, together with more precise evidence on the nature of moral concerns

9

as described above, can inform about what kind of policies a country may consider to alleviate
the shortage of organs in ways that are acceptable by a population.
Addressing these questions is challenging, however. First, some of the policy options of
interest, for example creating a market for kidneys, are not available; thus we have no direct
information on whether different procurement and allocation systems for organs would enhance
supply, and by how much. Second, moral beliefs are hard to quantify, let alone compare between
individuals. These issues imply that research on the nature of ethical beliefs and tradeoffs
between moral repugnance and efficiency of different organ procurement and allocation systems
cannot rely on actual choices and objective metrics, but rather on hypothetical scenarios and
subjective measures. If, on the one hand, this might affect our ability to provide clear policy
implications, on the other hand we should realize that the alternative option is to not address
these questions at all. Although economists are generally uneasy with relying on hypotheticals or
“stated” preferences as opposed to actual behaviors and “revealed” preferences, there are many
important areas of research where observing actual behavior is not possible and yet hypothetical
studies based on subjective measures can provide useful information. Examples include the
analysis of subjective well-being and the relationship between happiness and choice, of
individual preferences for a more or less redistributive tax system, and of time and risk
preferences (Benjamin et al. 2014, Callen et al. 2014, Kuziemko et al. 2014).
In a first set of studies, we asked whether individuals would change their support for
payments to organ donors, if information was available to them about different procurement and
allocation systems for organs, including payments for donors (Elías, Lacetera and Macis 2015ab). We surveyed 3,417 participants recruited through Amazon Mechanical Turk, an Amazon
Web Services platform that allows reaching a large number of individuals to perform tasks
online and is increasingly used for surveys and experiments (Buhrmester Kwang and Gosling
2011, Mason and Suri 2012). A random subsample (the treatment group) received a short text
that described the current state of the organ shortage in the U.S. and its social and economic
consequences; the text then reported different strategies that have been proposed (and tried in
some cases) to alleviate the shortage, including kidney exchanges, changing the default rule for
cadaveric organ donation, and regulated payments to donors or their families, with references to
academic studies that evaluated these proposals. In particular the text offered details about
current estimates of the positive impact of compensation on supply. We then elicited the

10

opinions of the respondents about allowing regulated payments for organ donors or their
families. To preserve the privacy and anonymity of the responses and to limit social desirability
bias, we gauged these opinions using the Item Count Technique (Coffman, Coffman and Ericson
2016); instead of asking directly if an individual would favor regulated payments, within each
treatment condition one subgroup received a list of four "neutral" statements (i.e., non-sensitive
and not related to the research topic), and the other subgroup received the same four sentences
plus a fifth one that expressed the favor toward payments for organs. The subjects reported the
number of statements that applied to them. Thus we could not determine whether a person
answered positively or negatively to a specific item; however, the difference in the average
number of indicated statements between those with five and those with four sentences provided
an estimate of the share of subjects supporting the activity of interest. The control group did not
receive any text; we only asked about their support for payments for organs.
We found that giving information on studies that predict an increase in the supply of organs
if payments were allowed led to an increase in the support for these payments from 50% to about
70% of the surveyed subjects. Further tests showed that individuals were responsive to
information that was specific to organ donations; there was no effect on approval rates for
payments to organ donors of providing information on the benefits of a market system for other
morally controversial activities (such as prostitution) activities or in general terms, or of
providing any information at all before asking opinions about payments for organ donors.
Interestingly, we did not find evidence of heterogeneity in response to specific information
according to, for example, gender, education or religious beliefs of the respondents.
In contrast, supplementary evidence on the support for two other morally repugnant activities
(slavery and prostitution) showed that the role of information and cost-benefit considerations in
changing attitudes was heterogeneous according to gender, religiosity, and political orientation.
Information about the potential benefits of legalizing prostitution (the reduction of sexually
transmitted diseases and violence against sex workers), in particular, reduced support for
legalization among women; in addition, providing this information also resulted in women
reducing their support for payments to organ donors, in contrast with an increase in support when
women received direct information about the potential increase in organ supply from paying
organ donors. Therefore there was a “spillover” effects of information on a morally controversial
transaction to another, in a case where the two activities were somewhat related to the trade of

11

the human body or body parts, and where a focus especially on women, as in the case of
prostitution, may generate strong, visceral opposition also for other body-related and transactions
of they occur at a monetary price.
The findings from these studies imply that the provision of well-supported information can
change attitudes toward the acceptance of morally charged market trades, but this information
has be context-specific and the effects are, in turn, specific to a particular transaction and not
generalizable; thus we need a case-by-case approach to understand the acceptance of marketbased solutions for morally controversial transactions.
Although these studies offer evidence, at least in the case of payments for organs, that
information might change opinions about whether payments should be considered in a society,
they were not designed to quantify the tradeoffs that people might make between increase in the
supply of organs resulting from payments on the one hand, and their moral opposition to these
payments. Moreover, we could not investigate heterogeneity in these tradeoffs in a more
systematic way that would allow us to distinguish different “types” in a population – in
particular, individuals with more consequentialist views, and therefore open to compromising
between efficiency and morality, and deontological individuals who would give priority to moral
beliefs over efficiency considerations. 11 Finally, the findings from these studies could not inform
about what types of moral concerns, among those described above, were important to people.
These are indeed the questions that we are addressing in our ongoing research (Elías,
Lacetera and Macis 2016). We are relying, again, on a survey instrument that we elaborated and
submitted to 2,918 U.S.-based respondents on mTurk. This survey allows to test whether the
moral aversion to providing payments to organ donors (we focus on live kidney donations) is a
“sacred value”, or individuals balance moral preferences with the potential efficiency gains from
allowing a price mediated trade of kidneys. Subjects in this experiment rated their moral views of
three different kidney procurement and allocation system: a system based on unpaid donors with
priority based allocation (the current system); a system where donors would receive $20,000
from a public agency, with allocation based on the same priority algorithm; and a system of
11

As mentioned in the previous section, previous work indicates that people might also hold “utilitarian”
preferences such that they may consider a system as less repugnant (or more morally acceptable) precisely because it
enhances the supply of organs. In particular, if economic rewards increased the safe supply of kidneys, then these
individuals might consider it ethical to adopt, rather than prohibit, incentives. In our study, however, we find that
opinions about how moral an organ procurement and allocation system is do no depend on the hypothesized supply
level that the system would produce.

12

individual, private transactions, where again donors would receive $20,000 and the organ
recipient would pay (out of pocket or through privately purchased insurance). The questions on
the morality or, conversely, repugnance of each system were in the form of numerical ratings of
how coercive, unfair, exploitative and against human dignity each system was according to the
participant, and an overall assessment of how much a system was in contrast with the
respondent’s values. We then asked the subjects to assume that each system would produce a
certain number of kidneys; these numbers were randomly determined from a distribution for
each individual. Respondents, finally, selected the system that they thought was the most
appropriate to adopt by a society.
In addition to letting us assess whether people would support a more efficient system (i.e.
one for which the hypothesized supply of kidney was higher) even if considered less morally
acceptable, this choice experiment also provides information on the heterogeneity in preferences
and on the nature of the moral opposition to payments for kidneys.
Our current estimates indicate that the median respondent would favor payments to organ
donors made by a public agency if it increased the annual supply of kidneys by about six
percentage points, whereas a twenty percentage point increase would be required to accept a
system based on private transactions. Thus, a majority of individuals would be willing to accept
a more repugnant system provided that it produced a sufficiently large additional number of
transplants. Note that the size of the estimated trade-off does not depend just on the presence of a
monetary payment, but varies depending on whether the exchanges occurred through private
transactions or whether a third party provided payment to donors and allocated organs to
recipients. In particular, a system whereby a public agency pays donors and the allocation of
organs follows priority rules required relatively small efficiency gains (a reduction of about 10%
of the annual shortage) to receive the support of a majority, whereas individual transactions
between organ donors and recipients required larger supply increases (a 56% reduction of the
shortage). The analysis of the ratings for the various types of morality concerns showed that
private transactions were considered highly unfair to the recipients, whereas a system with public
agency payments and organ allocation reduced fairness concerns to a level similar to that of
unpaid donations, arguably because this system was perceived to guarantee equal access to
organs for all patients in need. Thus fairness to the recipients is an important factor affecting the
moral repugnance toward a paid-donor system.

13

There was also heterogeneity, in our data, in the willingness to trade off morality and
efficiency, ranging from consequentialist respondents to deontological ones who required very
high (if at all) increases in efficiency to accept payment systems that they consider more morally
repugnant. Interestingly, there was no strong relation between this heterogeneity and various
socio-economic characteristics that we collected in the survey; conversely, the differences in
estimated tradeoffs related to overall ethical stances of the participants, again gauged through
some questions in the survey. Thus the dissenting positions on whether to allow and how to
regulate a morally controversial transaction such as the procurement and allocations of kidneys
for transplant appear to reside in deeply held beliefs that go beyond demographics, religion or
political preferences, and thus need to be measured separately.

4. Concluding thoughts
Let me summarize the main insights from this essay, and in doing so, indicate directions for
future research and implications for policy and regulation.
First, the existing evidence suggests that properly designed incentives for the supply of body
parts such as blood and plasma increase supply without negative consequences on the quality of
the collected material. These effects plausibly extend to the supply of bone marrow and organs,
for example, as some initial evidence as well as theoretical analyses indicate.
Second, this behavioral effect alone does not necessarily justify advocating for the
introduction of payments for supplying body parts; these activities concern contested commodity
or repugnant transactions, i.e. societies may want to prevent certain ways to regulate a
transaction even if they increased supply, based on ethical concerns such as exploitation,
fairness, and the degrading of human values.
Third, and as a consequence of the previous two points, when trades concern contested
commodities societies often face tradeoffs between the efficiency-enhancing effects of
transactions mediated by a monetary price, and the moral opposition to the provision of these
payments for certain trades. Both the efficiency effects and the ethical concerns are relevant for
welfare, and as such, societies should pay attention to both.
Fourth, in order to fully consider efficiency effects as well as moral issues around the
organization of a contested transaction, we need to know what the efficiency effects are, what
moral beliefs a population holds, and whether and how people make tradeoffs between their

14

preferences for efficiency and for consistency with their ethical positions. Although for some
activities such as blood and plasma donations we now have information on the supply effects of
incentives, comparable evidence for other body parts such as bone marrow and organs is very
limited, because of data constraints and more importantly because of legal prohibitions.
Similarly, we know little about the nature of the moral concerns about establishing payments for
these transactions; as a consequence, evidence of whether and how people trade off ethical
beliefs and cost-benefit considerations in the context of repugnant transactions has been missing.
In recent studies focused on payments for organ donors (and live kidney donors in
particular), we found that U.S. respondents increased their support for payments when provided
specific information about the potential positive supply effects of monetary compensation; and
that the majority of individuals would be willing to accept a more repugnant system provided
that it produced a sufficiently large (but realistic) additional number of transplants. The
opposition to payments, moreover, is much stronger if payments come from private transaction
than when the payer is a third party, consistent with the importance of fairness concerns in
determining ethical beliefs regarding compensation for the supply of organs.
Research like ours, and we hope more to come also from other researchers, can inform
policymakers about what options are morally viable to address the shortage of organs and tissues
for transplant. Moreover, trial studies assessing the effects of paid donations could significantly
enhance the ability of a population to determine what the preferred organ procurement and
allocation system should be. For example, the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court recently ruled that
compensating individuals who donate bone marrow through a particular process known as
apheresis is legal. 12 The effect of this provision in the areas of the United States affected by the
ruling would enhance the ability of a population to decide whether to extend these types of
compensation is acceptable. Similar considerations hold with regards to other transactions where
ethical beliefs and efficiency considerations may collide; research strategies that allow to assess
the nature and extent of morality-efficiency tradeoffs, together with the possibility to conduct
12

Flynn v. Holder (U.S. Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit, No. 10-55643, 1 December, 2011). The Department of
Health and Human Services, however, issued in 2013 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that would append “bone
marrow” with “and other hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells without regard to the method of their collection.”
(https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2013/10/02/2013-24094/change-to-the-definition-of-human-organunder-section-301-of-the-national-organ-transplant-act-of). This would essentially reverse the decision in Flynn v.
Holder, which is based on the idea that, instead, the extraction of bone marrow by apheresis is very similar to the
procedures to extract blood platelets or plasma, for which people can receive compensation.

15

studies about the effects of certain ways to organize a trade, should be explored also in other
relevant areas. For example, this approach may help to understand whether the welfare benefits
from legalizing indoor prostitution, such as the reduction of violence and incidence of STDs,
compensate for the moral opposition to regulating markets for sex that people may have. Other
transactions to analyze within our framework include commercial surrogacy and the donation of
human eggs.
An implication for academic work in this area is that it is important to combine the
theoretical approaches and methods of different disciplines, such as philosophy, bioethics,
psychology, sociology, law and economics; each area of studies would offer material to
understand a complex theme, thus providing more founded insights for policy.

16

References
Ambuehl, S. (2016). An offer you can’t refuse? Incentives change how we think. Working paper,
Stanford University.
Ambuehl, S., Niederle, M., & Roth, A. E. (2015). More money, more problems? Can high pay be
coercive and repugnant? American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 105(5), 357-360.
Andreoni J. (1990). Impure altruism and donations to public goods: A theory of warm-glow giving.
Economic Journal, 100, 464-477.
Archard, D. (2002).Selling yourself: Titmuss’s argument against a market in blood. The Journal of Ethics
6(1), 87-102.
Baron, J., & Leshner, S. (2000). How serious are expressions of protected values? Journal of
Experimental Psychology - Applied, 6(3), 183-194.
Beard TR, Leitzel J. (2014). Designing a compensated–kidney donation system. Law and Contemporary
Problems 2014; 77: 253-287.
Becker, G. S., & Elías, J. J. (2007). Introducing incentives in the market for live and cadaveric organ
donations. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 3-24.
Bénabou, R. (2015). The economics of motivated beliefs. Jean-Jacques Laffont Lecture, Revue
d’Economie Politique, 125(5), 665-685.
Bénabou, R. & Tirole. J. (2016). Mindful economics: The production, consumption, and value of beliefs.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3) 141-164.
Benjamin, D. J., Kimball, M. S., Heffetz, O., & Szembrot, N. (2014). Beyond happiness and satisfaction:
Toward well-being indices based on stated preference. American Economic Review, 104(9), 26982735.
Bilgel, F., & Galle, B. (2015). Financial incentives for kidney donation: A comparative case study using
synthetic controls. Journal of Health Economics, 43, 103-117.
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T. & Gosling, S.D. (2011). Amazon’s Mechanical Turk: A new source of
inexpensive, yet high-quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 3-5.
Callen, M., Isaqzadeh, M., Long, J. D., & Sprenger, C. (2014). Violence and risk preference:
Experimental evidence from Afghanistan. American Economic Review, 104(1), 123-148.
Chatterjee, P., Venkataramani, A. S., Vijayan, A., Wellen, J. R., & Martin, E. G. (2015). The effect of
state policies on organ donation and transplantation in the United States. JAMA Internal Medicine,
175(8), 1323-1329.
Coffman, K., Coffman, L., & Ericson, K. (2016). The size of the LGBT population and the magnitude of
anti-gay sentiment are substantially underestimated. Management Science, forthcoming.
Council of Europe (2015). Council of Europe Convention against Trafficking in Human Organs.
Delmonico F.L. et al. (2002). Ethical incentives — not payment — for organ donation. New England
Journal of Medicine, 346(25), 2002-2005.
Elías, J. J., Lacetera, N., & Macis, M. (2015). Sacred values? The effect of information on attitudes
toward payments for human organs. American Economic Review, 105(5), 361-365.
Elías, J. J., Lacetera, N., & Macis, M. (2015). Markets and morals: An experimental survey study. Plos
One, 10(6), e0127069.
Elías, J. J., Lacetera, N., & Macis, M. (2016). Efficiency-morality trade-offs in repugnant transactions: A
choice experiment. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 22632.
Fiske, A. P., & Tetlock, P. E. (1997). Taboo trade‐offs: reactions to transactions that transgress the
spheres of justice. Political Psychology, 18(2), 255-297.

17

Hanselmann, M., & Tanner, C. (2008). Taboos and conflicts in decision making: Sacred values, decision
difficulty, and emotions. Judgment and Decision making, 3(1), 51.
Held, P. J., McCormick, F., Ojo, A., & Roberts, J. P. (2016). A cost‐benefit analysis of government
compensation of kidney donors. American Journal of Transplantation, 16(3) 877–885.
Hill J.L. (1994). Exploitation. Cornell Law Review, 79, 631–99.
Kahan, D. M. (2012). Ideology, motivated reasoning, and cognitive reflection: an experimental
study. Judgment and Decision Making, 8, 407-24.
Kahan, D. M., Peters, E., Dawson, E. C., & Slovic, P. (2013). Motivated numeracy and enlightened selfgovernment. Yale Law School, Public Law working paper 307.
Kass, L. R. (1997). The wisdom of repugnance: why we should ban the cloning of humans. New
Republic, 216(22), 17-26.
Kuziemko, I., Norton, M. I., Saez, E. & Stancheva, S. (2015). How elastic are preferences for
redistribution? Evidence from randomized survey experiments. American Economic Review, 105(4),
1478-1508.
Lacetera, N. (2016). Incentives for prosocial activities. IZA World of Labor.
Lacetera, N. & Macis M. (2016). Paid vs. volunteer donations: An analysis of the behavioral and ethical
issues around donor incentives. In Domen R., Ed., Ethical Issues in Transfusion Medicine and
Cellular Therapies, American Association of Blood Banks.
Lacetera N, Macis M., & Slonim R. (2013). Economic rewards to motivate blood donations. Science,
340(6135), 927-928.
Lacetera, N., Macis, M., & Stith, S. S. (2014). Removing financial barriers to organ and bone marrow
donation: The effect of leave and tax legislation in the US. Journal of Health Economics, 33, 43-56.
Lang, K. (2014). Canada’s blood supply hits 6-year-low, prompting donor appeal. CTV News, Sept. 30
(http://www.ctvnews.ca/health/canada-s-blood-supply-hits-6-year-low-prompting-donor-appeal1.2031337).
Luksic, N. (2015). BDSM in Canada is 50 shades of legal grey. CBC News
(http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/bdsm-in-canada-is-50-shades-of-legal-grey-1.2969194).
Nuffield Council on Bioethics (1995). Human tissue: Ethical and legal issues, London.
Nussbaum, M. (2004). Hiding from humanity: Disgust, shame, and the law. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Nyhan, B., Reifler, J., Richey, S., & Freed, G. L. (2014). Effective messages in vaccine promotion: a
randomized trial. Pediatrics, 133(4), e835-e842.
Radin, M. J. (1996). Contested commodities: the trouble with trade in sex, children, body parts, and other
things. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Roth, A.E. (2007). Repugnance as a constraint on markets. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 3758.
Roth, A. E. (2015). Who Gets What—and Why: The New Economics of Matchmaking and Market
Design. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, Chicago.
Roth, A. E., Sonmez, T., & Unver, M.U. (2004). Kidney Exchange. Quarterly Journal of Economics
119(2): 457-488.
Sandel, M. (2003). What money shouldn’t buy. The Hedgehog Review 5(2), 77-97.
Sandel, M. (2012). What money can’t buy: The moral limits of markets. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Satel S. & Hippen, B. (2008). A way to reward organ donors. Forbes, October 30
(http://www.forbes.com/2008/10/29/organ-donors-kidneys-oped-cx_ss_bh_1030satelhippen.html).
Satz, D. (2010). Why some things should not be for sale: The limits of markets. Oxford University Press.

18

Sher, G. (2013). Prohibiting pay-for-plasma would harm patients. Toronto Star, March 13
(http://www.thestar.com/opinion/commentary/2013/03/13/prohibiting_payforplasma_would_harm_pa
tients.html).
Tetlock, P. E. (2003). Thinking the unthinkable: Sacred values and taboo cognitions. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7(7), 320-324.
Titmuss, R.M. (1970). The gift relationship. Allen and Unwin.
United States Task Force on Organ Transplantation (1986). Issues and Recommendations. Task Force on
Organ Transplantation, US Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service, Health
Resources and Services Administration.
World Health Organization (2004). World Health Assembly Resolution 57.18, Human organ and tissue
transplantation, 22 May (http://www.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA57/A57_R18-en.pdf).
World Health Organization. (2009). The Melbourne Declaration on 100% voluntary non‐remunerated
donation of blood and blood components.

19

