                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




QUALITY PREDICTABILITY AND THE WELFARE BENEFITS FROM NEW PRODUCTS:
         EVIDENCE FROM THE DIGITIZATION OF RECORDED MUSIC

                                           Luis Aguiar
                                          Joel Waldfogel

                                       Working Paper 22675
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22675


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




We are grateful for comments from Avi Goldfarb and Ajay Agrawal, as well as seminar
participants at the IPTS, Minnesota, the Society for Economic Research on Copyright Issues, the
Summer Institute on Competitive Strategy at Berkeley, the NBER Summer Institute joint IO/
Digitization meeting, the Econometric Society Meetings in Minneapolis, the 12th Conference on
Media Economics in Naples, the 13th ZEW Conference on ICTs in Mannheim, the 8th ICT
Conference in ParisTech, Penn State, the University of Michigan, Yale University, Stanford GSB,
the University of Zurich, and Universidad Carlos III de Madrid. All remaining errors are ours.
Disclaimer: The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
official opinion of the European Commission or the EC Joint Research Center, nor do they
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22675.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Luis Aguiar and Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Quality Predictability and the Welfare Benefits from New Products: Evidence from the Digitization
of Recorded Music
Luis Aguiar and Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 22675
September 2016
JEL No. L15,L81

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore the consequence of quality unpredictability for the welfare benefit of new products,
using recent developments in recorded music as our context. Digitization has expanded
consumption opportunities by giving consumers access to the “long tail” of existing products,
rather than simply the popular products that a retailer might stock with limited shelf space. While
this is clearly beneficial to consumers, the benefits are somewhat limited: given the
substitutability among differentiated products, the incremental benefit of obscure products - even
lots of them - can be small. But digitization has also reduced the cost of bringing new products to
market, giving rise to a different sort of long tail, in production. If the appeal of new products is
unpredictable at the time of investment, as is the case for cultural products as well as many
others, then creating new products can have substantial welfare benefits. Technological change in
the recorded music industry tripled the number of new products between 2000 and 2008. We
quantify the effects of new music on welfare using a simple illustrative, but explicitly structural,
model of demand and entry with potentially unpredictable product quality. Based on a range of
plausible forecasting models of expected appeal, a tripling of the choice set according to expected
quality adds substantially more to consumer surplus and overall welfare than the usual long-tail
benefits from a tripling of the choice set according to realized quality, perhaps by more than an
order of magnitude.


Luis Aguiar
Digital Economy Unit
European Commission – Joint Research Center
Edificio EXPO - Calle Inca Garcilaso 3
41092 Sevilla (Spain)
luis.aguiar@ec.europa.eu

Joel Waldfogel
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics
3-177 Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jwaldfog@umn.edu
1       Introduction

The rise of the Internet - and digitization more generally - has placed attention on the welfare
benefit of cost reductions that raise the number of available products. Researchers and others
have viewed the Internet as delivering infinite shelf space, allowing consumers access to a
long tail of obscure products.1 Despite the importance of long-tail effects in consumption,
the welfare benefit of new products is much larger when we account for the unpredictability
of product quality at the time of investment. We term this the “long tail in production.”

The usual long tail idea in consumption is that the Internet allows consumers access to the
large number of extant products, rather than simply the popular products that consumers
might access from a local retailer with limited shelf space. While access to additional prod-
ucts is clearly beneficial to consumers, the benefits may be somewhat limited: given the
substitutability among differentiated products, the incremental benefit of obscure products
- even lots of them - can be small. A long tail in production is different. The appeal of many
products to consumers is difficult to know at the time that investments are made. This un-
predictability is substantial for cultural products such as books, movies, and music, leading
screenwriter William Goldman to famously remark that “nobody knows anything” about
which new movies will be commercially successful (Goldman, 1984). Industry observers re-
port that roughly 10 percent of new movies are commercially successful, and the figures for
books and music are similar (Caves, 2000). The unpredictability of product appeal is not
limited to cultural products. Gourville (2005) reports new product failure rates between 40
and 90 percent across many categories.

When the costs of bringing new products to market fall, society can in effect take more draws
from an urn of potential new products. If the appeal of new products to consumers were
perfectly predictable at the time of investment, then entry of additional products would be
similar to adding more shelf space, virtual or otherwise, in a retail environment. The addi-
tional products would each have limited appeal and, in particular, lower appeal than the last
currently-entering product. But if appeal is unpredictable - and we will provide additional
evidence that it is for music - then adding more products can have substantial benefits by
delivering consumers products throughout the realized quality distribution. Because product
    1
     By some estimates, the benefit consumers obtain from access to a long tail of additional varieties may
be as high as $1.03 billion per year for books alone in 2000 (Brynjolfsson et al., 2003).



                                                    1
appeal is also unpredictable in other industries, this idea may have broader applicability.

Technological change in the recorded music industry has allowed substantial growth in the
number of new products, a tripling in new products between 2000 and 2008, leading us to
explore how growth in the number new products available affects welfare under our random
long tail perspective in relation to the conventional view. We can measure the benefit as the
difference between welfare with the new, enlarged choice set and a smaller choice set including
a third of the recently-entering products. Yet, the welfare impact of an entry cost reduction
that triples the choice set depends heavily on which third of existing recent products would
have entered absent the cost reduction. This, in turn, depends on the predictability of quality
at the time of investment. At one extreme, if product quality were perfectly predictable (the
“perfect foresight” or PF case), then a reduction in the cost of entry from, say, T to T ′ would
elicit entry of new products with expected - and realized - revenue between T and T ′ . The
addition of these modest-appeal products to the choice set corresponds to the traditional
long tail benefits. The newly entering products would necessarily raise surplus available to
consumers, but the benefit might be small since none of the new products would exceed the
quality of the least-attractive existing product. In the more realistic case in which quality
were not entirely predictable (the “imperfect predictability” or IP case), benefits would be
larger, as some new products would have high realized quality despite low expected revenue.

To quantify the benefits of new products made possible by digitization, we develop a simple
illustrative equilibrium model of the recorded music industry that includes a structural de-
mand model and a model of entry based on expected revenue. We use data on digital music
track sales for 17 countries in 2011 to estimate a nested logit model of demand. The output
of the model includes both parameter estimates and measures of the realized appeal of each
product, which we term δ. We use the realized δ’s for the US in 2011 to develop a forecasting
model of expected quality, which we incorporate in our entry model. We infer fixed costs
from the expected revenue of the last entering product. The model allows us to address
the two questions that motivate the paper. First, what is the effect of the cost reductions
associated with digitization - which have tripled the number of products brought to market
in the US - on consumer surplus and overall welfare? And our second, main question: how
do these benefits, which we term the long tail in production, relate to the conventional long
tail in consumption?




                                               2
Despite our detailed data on track sales, some features of our context place limits on the
richness of the demand model we can estimate. Hence, our exercise is best viewed as an
empirical illustration of the idea of the long tail in production rather than a richly specified
demand estimation exercise. Even if we cannot precisely measure the size of the welfare
benefit from new products, we can make stronger statements about its size in relation to
the conventional long tail benefits associated with the Internet. We find that the size of the
long tail in production relative to the conventional long tail is, perhaps surprisingly, quite
insensitive to different parameter estimates and demand modeling approaches. A tripling
of the choice set according to expected quality adds nearly twenty times as much consumer
surplus and more than ten times as much overall welfare as a tripling of the choice set accord-
ing to realized quality. That is, the long tail in production is almost twenty times as large
as the traditional long tail. While insensitive to estimated demand parameters, the result
does depend crucially on the predictability of quality; and we explore the sensitivity of our
finding to different degrees of predictability. It is hard to know precisely how well industry
participants can predict quality, but evidence presented here and elsewhere about the un-
predictability of quality lead us to the conclusion that the random long tail is substantially
larger than its conventional counterpart.

The paper proceeds in 7 sections after the introduction. Section 2 presents descriptive facts
about entry in the music industry, institutions for product discovery in the digital era, and
a simple model illustrating the impact of unpredictability on the welfare effects of entry.
Section 3 sets out an empirical structural model of the music market. Section 4 presents the
data that we will use in our estimation, while Section 5 presents our estimates of demand,
expected revenue, and the fixed costs from the entry model. Next, we turn to counterfactual
results in Section 6, including both estimates of the welfare impact of an enlarged choice set
with imperfect predictability, as well as our main object of interest, the size of this welfare
gain in relation to the welfare impact of an enlarged choice set with perfect foresight. Section
7 discusses the sensitivity of results to estimated parameters and forecasting approaches.
Section 8 concludes.




                                               3
2        Background

2.1        Industry Background

This subsection provides background on three issues relevant to our exercise. First, we
discuss technological change and the growth in new products. Second, we provide infor-
mation on institutions for product discovery. Third, we describe existing evidence on the
unpredictability of product quality.



2.1.1       Cost Reduction and Product Growth


Since 1999, recorded music revenue has fallen by 70 percent around the world. While industry
participants - particularly the major record labels - have raised concerns that declining
revenue would undermine investment incentives, the number of new products brought to
market has risen rather than fallen as the cost of bringing new products to market has fallen
substantially. As documented elsewhere, the cost of production, promotion, and distribution
of new music have fallen sharply with digitization. These cost reductions are substantial
enough to have enabled growth in the number of new products despite the drastic decline in
revenue; and the number of new recorded music products brought to market each year has
risen since 1990 and more sharply since 2000 (Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf, 2010; Handke,
2012; Waldfogel, 2013; Aguiar and Waldfogel, 2016). According to Nielsen data, the number
of new music products brought to market tripled between 2000 and 2008.2



2.1.2       Product Discovery


The welfare that society derives from music equals the benefit to consumers, beyond what
they pay, plus producer surplus, less costs of production and product discovery. With the
substantial growth in new products, we would expect product discovery costs to rise. In
particular, one might expect difficulty in consumer discovery of good products among the
plethora of new offerings. Indeed, it is possible that consumers would fail to discover good
products among the new releases, particularly among the new products released without
much fanfare (e.g. little-known artists on independent labels). Under our imperfect pre-
    2
        See for instance http://tinyurl.com/how-many-releases.


                                                  4
dictability view of the world, we would expect some of the products with low ex ante promise
to be highly valuable to consumers, if they were discovered. If products with modest ex ante
promise make up a growing share of the new music that becomes commercially successful,
then we would infer that new products do not overwhelm the new product discovery in-
stitutions. And, indeed, in related research this is exactly what we find: products from
independent labels, as well as products from new artists, make up growing and now substan-
tial shares of the best-selling new recorded music (Waldfogel, 2013; Aguiar and Waldfogel,
2016).

What might explain these findings? In the pre-digital environment, terrestrial radio was
the main means of product discovery. Music labels provided radio program directors with
more music than they could air, and the program directors would choose songs to promote
(sometimes with compensation). These songs were then aired to large radio audiences (Caves,
2000). The digital era has also brought some new information institutions which reduce
discovery costs. The digital environment facilitates access to a great deal of information
about new music, in the form of online criticism at sites like Pitchfork and aggregators such
as Metacritic.3 In addition, consumers have access to customized online “radio stations” via
sources such as Pandora and Spotify. These sources reduce costs of experimentation in two
ways. First, they provide informed suggestions. A consumer seeds a Pandora station with
music that he or she likes; the service then presents the listener with music that resembles
the seed, or is liked by people who also like the seed. Second, these suggestions are served to
small numbers of individuals rather than to large audiences. One of the major social costs
of product discovery is the time that listeners spend getting acquainted with new music
to decide whether they like it. Playing a new song on a traditional radio station is thus a
costly, large-scale experiment using the time of thousands of listeners. Serving a song via the
Internet to targeted individuals expressing interest in related music consumes less listener
time and could therefore actually be less costly.

While systematic quantification of social costs would be a useful exercise, it is clear that
changed discovery costs have not prevented consumers from finding good new products.
Hence, we proceed with welfare analysis based directly on consumer surplus, revenue, and
costs of entry, leaving aside measures of product discovery costs before and after digitization.
   3
       See the discussion in Waldfogel (2013).




                                                 5
2.1.3   Evidence of Quality Unpredictability in Music


Industry sources, including those cited in the introduction, claim that investors have difficulty
predicting which cultural products will be commercially successful. Recent developments in
the recorded music industry provide additional evidence for this view. The recorded music
industry is divided into two broad sectors, the major labels, which account for a small share
of releases but the vast majority of sales, and a large fringe of independent labels. The
majors are in general able to sign the most commercially promising artists. If quality were
entirely predictable, then this promise would be fulfilled: all of the ultimately successful
records would have been released by major labels. Instead - and increasingly since 2000 -
a growing share of best selling works are passed over by majors and are instead released
by independent labels (see Waldfogel, 2013; Aguiar and Waldfogel, 2016). This provides
additional, context-specific evidence supportive of industry lore that commercial prospects
are difficult to predict ex ante.



2.2     Related Literature

The study quantifies the benefit of a technological change that allows more entry of new
products, given that new product appeal is unpredictable. Our question and approach are
related to both the literature estimating the welfare effects of particular new products and
the entry literature. Many studies evaluate the welfare impact of new products. A few
prominent examples include Petrin (2002) and Hausman and Leonard (2002). The usual
approach is to estimate demand in the presence of the new product, then to simulate welfare
absent the new product. We similarly do that, but we also model the entry process. That
is, the comparative static that we evaluate is not simply about whether a particular new
product - such as the minivan or breakfast cereal - exists, but rather about the cost of entry
that would give rise to new products.

Our paper is therefore closely related to the strand of the entry literature that incor-
porates demand modeling and therefore allows for explicit estimates of fixed costs (e.g.
Berry and Waldfogel, 1999). Usually, researchers postulate a model in which products (or
firms) enter as long as their variable profit exceeds their fixed costs; and fixed costs are es-
timated from the expected revenue of marginal entrants. Observed entry configurations can


                                               6
then be viewed as Nash equilibria given the estimated fixed costs. Such models can be used
to estimate welfare under, say, counterfactual fixed costs. Our exercise does this, adding the
novel feature that product appeal is unpredictable at the time of entry.

Our exercise is also closely related to the literature on the “long tail” benefits of the Internet.
Brynjolfsson et al. (2003) quantify the benefit of access to the full list of books at Amazon
in contrast to, say, the 100,000 books locally available to a consumer. Sinai and Waldfogel
(2004) show that locally isolated consumers make greater use of the Internet. Anderson
(2006) popularized the idea of the long tail in a book asserting that the long list of products
at the tail of the distribution are growing in importance relative to the small number of
products at the head. All of these studies take the view - implicitly or explicitly - that
digitization raises the variety available to people via an infinite shelf-space mechanism rather
than the new product mechanism that we explore.4



2.3     How Would Entry Cost Reduction Affect Welfare?

To fix ideas this section describes the intuition of our approach. Section 3 discusses the
explicit model. When entry costs are T , then all products with expected revenue above T
enter, while those with lower expected revenue do not; when the entry cost falls from T to
T ′ , then more products become viable, and more entry occurs. Having more products in the
choice set raises welfare, but the size of the impact of additional products on welfare depends
on the predictability of product quality at the time of investment. To see this, consider the
following simple model of product entry with the possibility of quality unpredictability.

At the time of investment, an investor forms an estimate of a product’s marketability as
the true revenue y, plus an error ν: y ′ = y + ν.5 If the entry cost is T , then all products
with expected revenue y ′ > T enter. If the entry cost T falls to T ′ , then all products with
y ′ > T ′ enter. When product quality is perfectly predictable (ν = 0), then a reduction in
entry costs brings new products with expected and realized revenue - and therefore, we infer,
product quality - between T and T ′ . In the more realistic case in which product quality is
not perfectly predictable at the time of investment, the addition of products with expected
revenue between T and T ′ elicits entry of products whose realized revenue might be anywhere
   4
      Quan and Williams (2016) make the point that one will overstate the long tail benefits of access to a
large choice set if one overlooks the fact that offline assortments are tailored to local tastes.
    5
      This setup is reminiscent of Terviö (2009).


                                                    7
in the distribution and can, of course, exceed T .

Our main concern in this paper is the evaluation of an entry cost reduction that tripled the
number of new products. Given that digitization has already occurred, the welfare effect of
digitization is the difference between the welfare associated with the current status quo choice
set and the choice set including only a third as many new products. The major challenge
to this exercise, however, is determining which third of recently-added status quo products
would have existed if digitization had not reduced entry costs. This, in turn, depends on the
predictability of product quality.6

If investors had perfect foresight - and product quality were therefore completely predictable
to investors at the time of entry - then when costs were high, only the products with the
highest expected and realized quality would enter. Hence, the counterfactual high-entry-cost
choice set would be the top third of products according to realized quality. The comparison
of the top third of products with the total choice set is analogous to the shelf-space problem
underlying the usual long tail welfare calculation asking, for example, what benefit consumers
derive from access to the top million books as opposed to the top 100,000. Under this usual
approach, the benefit of additional products would be relatively small. At the other extreme,
if quality were completely unpredictable to investors, then the counterfactual choice set
associated with high entry costs would be a random sample of status quo products. Because
the additional products would be as good, on average, as existing products, the additional
products would add more to welfare than if investors had perfect foresight.

In the more plausible intermediate case of imperfect predictability, the effect of new products
on welfare would fall between the two polar cases. This discussion demonstrates that the
impact of cost reduction on product entry and resulting welfare - the long tail in production
- depends crucially on the predictability of product quality to investors.




3       The Model

This section describes the components of our equilibrium model of the recorded music indus-
try needed for measuring the welfare impact of the cost reduction. We start by describing
    6
     While we focus throughout the text on the welfare benefit of tripling the number of new products, we
also explore the welfare consequence of different degrees of growth in the choice set. See Section 7.



                                                   8
our structural model of demand. We then turn to our forecasting model of product quality
before presenting our entry model. Details of the empirical implementation are deferred
until Section 5, after we introduce the data in Section 4.



3.1       Demand

Given our goal of developing an entry model incorporating expectations about product qual-
ity, we employ a model that allows us to easily infer product quality while also allowing for
substitutability among products. To this end we employ a nested logit model, similar to
that of Berry (1994) and Ferreira et al. (2013).

In each country, consumers choose whether to buy music and then choose among available
songs. The choice sets of songs vary both across countries and over time. Define Jct as the
set of songs available in country c at time t, and index songs by j.7 Suppressing the time
subscript, each consumer therefore decides in each month whether to download one song in
the choice set Jc = {1, 2, 3, . . . , Jc } or to consume the outside good (not purchasing a song).
Specifically, every month every consumer i in country c chooses j from the Jc + 1 options
that maximizes the conditional indirect utility function given by:




                                 uij = xjc β − αpjc + ξjc + ζi + (1 − σ)ǫij

                                     = δjc + ζi + (1 − σ)ǫij ,                                   (1)




where δjc is therefore the mean utility of song j in country c. The vector xjc includes song
as well as country-specific characteristics relevant to consumer interest in the song (and
therefore also relevant to the song’s prospect for success ex ante), pjc is the price of song j
in country c and α is the marginal utility of money. The parameter ξjc is the unobserved (to
the econometrician) quality of song j from the perspective of country c consumers and can
differ across countries for the same song (song j can for example have different quality to US
vs French consumers). ǫij is an independent taste shock. In contrast to a simple logit model,
   7
       Our data cover only digital singles, not albums. See Section 4 for details on the data.




                                                       9
the nested logit allows for correlation in consumer’s tastes for consuming digital music.8 The
parameter ζi therefore represents the individual-specific song taste common to all songs in
the nest. Cardell (1997) shows that if ǫij is a type I extreme value, then this implies that
the error term ζi + (1 − σ)ǫij is also a type I extreme value. The parameter σ measures the
strength of substitution across songs in the choice set Jc . When σ = 0, the model resolves
to the simple logit (see footnote 8) and the parameter ζi , the consumer-specific systematic
song-taste component, plays no role in the choice decision. As σ approaches 1, the role of the
independent shocks (ǫi0 , ǫi1 , . . . , ǫiJ ) is reduced to zero and the within group correlation of
utility approaches one. This implies that consumer tastes, while different for any consumer
i across songs, are perfectly correlated within consumer i across songs.

Given the functional forms associated with nested logit, we can calculate the market share
and revenue of each product for any set of product qualities δjc .9



3.2     Quality Prediction

Our model of entry with unpredictable product quality requires us to have a measure of
the appeal, or commercial success, that an investor would expect from releasing song j.
The results from our demand estimation allow us to construct estimates of the mean utility
of each song as well as their quality predictions. For each song j, and omitting country
subscripts, δj reflects the appeal it generates for consumers based on its market share. The
explanatory variables xj included in the demand model, which describe consumer’s demand
for the product, are also relevant to quality prediction. This gives rise to our first forecasting
approach: With the xj variables included directly in the demand model, we can recover a
quality prediction directly from the estimated demand model in a single step.10 We note
here that some variables that will be helpful for prediction - namely record label identities -
are only available for the US, so we will also employ a second, two-step approach, recovering
    8
    In the logit model the individual taste ǫij is independent across both consumers and choices and the
conditional indirect utility function is given by uij = δjc + ǫij . This prevents the possibility that consumers
have heterogeneous tastes, i.e. differ in their taste for consuming music.              
    9                                                                               S  jc
      In the nested logit model we can calculate δjc as ln (Sjc ) − ln (S0c ) − σ ln 1−S 0c
                                                                                            , where Sjc represents
the market share of song j in country c and Soc is the market share of the outside good. See Section 5 for
details of implementation. We also implement our estimates using a plain logit model to explore robustness
of the results to the demand model specification. See Section 7 below.
   10
      In general, δj = xj β − αpjc + ξj . Because our data does not include prices, αpjc becomes part of the
constant term in xj in our empirical implementation. Our prediction of song j’s quality is therefore δj′ = xj β.b
See Section 5 for details of implementation.


                                                       10
δj from the demand model, then regressing it on both xj and the label variables.



3.3     Supply and Fixed Costs

Our measure of the welfare associated with an entry configuration, or set of products that
enters, is the sum of consumer surplus and revenue less the number of products times the fixed
cost per product. The demand model gives us consumer surplus and revenue for any entry
configuration. In order to evaluate the welfare associated with a set of entering products, we
need fixed costs and the ordered set of entering products, which our entry model delivers.
While the imperfect prediction model is our central approach and the approach we view
as realistic, we also develop approaches using perfect foresight and no predictability, both
to illustrate the intuition of our approach and to compare our estimates of the long tail in
production with estimates analogous to the long tail in consumption, reflected in the perfect
foresight model.



3.3.1   Perfect Foresight


Under perfect foresight (PF), products enter in order of realized quality, or δj . The fixed
cost under the status quo is the expected revenue of the last (N th ) entering product.

To estimate the counterfactual perfect foresight fixed costs that give rise to one third of
recent status quo entry, we must calculate the expected revenue of the last product when
           N
only the   3
               best-selling products enter. To this end, define δj as the realized quality of
product j, and define ∆j as the set of products {δ1 , . . . , δj }. Because products are imperfect
substitutes, revenue to each product depends on the full set of products in the market. The
expected revenue to product 1 entering alone depends on ∆1 , and so on. That is, if E [rk ] is
the expected revenue of product k, then E [rk ] is a function of the vector ∆k .

If we order the products such that δk > δk+1 , the products enter as long as E [rk (∆k )] > T ,
where T denotes fixed costs of entry. For example, given the nested logit structure, the
expected and realized revenue to product 1 when it is alone is

                                                    "
                                                    δ1  #
                                                 e 1−σ
                                r1 = pMs1 = pM            ,                                   (2)
                                               D1σ + D1

                                               11
                δ1
where D1 = e 1−σ , p is the price of the product, and M is market size.11

More generally the revenue to product k (when it is the last entering product) is given by

                                                      "  δk  #
                                                      e 1−σ
                                     rk = pMsk = pM            ,                                  (3)
                                                    Dkσ + Dk


              P
              k      δj
                                                                          N
where Dk =         e 1−σ . To estimate counterfactual fixed costs when    3
                                                                              products enter, we can
             j=1
infer that the fixed costs (T ) equal the expected (and realized) revenue of the last entering
                               N
product: T ≈ rk ,         k=   3
                                 .

Our PF fixed cost estimates require an important caveat (which applies to our imperfect
predictability estimates as well). We derive our estimates of fixed costs from the expected
revenue of the marginal entering product. Hence, strictly speaking, our fixed cost is an
estimate of the fixed cost for the marginal entrant. It seems likely that infra-marginal
entrants incur higher fixed cost. This means, further, that our estimate of the aggregated
fixed costs incurred by all entrants, N · F C, is a lower-bound on the resources consumed by
the fixed costs of entry. Underestimation of N · F C would lead to over-estimates of welfare.
We can, however, place an upper bound on fixed costs as well. Under free entry, entry could
occur until profit opportunities have been dissipated. Hence, total revenue itself provides an
upper-bound estimate of aggregate fixed costs (N · F C). See Section 5.1.3.



3.3.2   No Predictability


At the opposite extreme from the perfect predictability model is a model with no pre-
dictability. While not a plausible depiction of reality, this model nevertheless provides a
useful benchmark, describing a world in which, literally, “nobody knows anything.” With
no predictability, all products are identical ex-ante. Hence the expected revenue of any prod-
uct depends only on the total number of products entering (k) and is the total revenue to
  11
     In our empirical implementation, we define the market size as 12 times the country population. We
also explore the sensitivity of our results to different market size definitions. See Section 5.1.4.




                                                 12
those k products divided by k. That is,

                                                    "      Dk     #
                                                        Dkσ +Dk
                                    E [rk ] = pME                     ,                       (4)
                                                          k


where Dk is evaluated with a particular draw of k product qualities (δj ), p is the price, and
M is market size.

Hence, the no prediction estimate of status quo fixed cost is the total observed revenue
divided by the number of products. We estimate counterfactual fixed cost as the average
                         N                                                           N
revenue per product if   3
                             products entered. To estimate this, we take draws of    3
                                                                                         δ’s, and
each draw generates an estimate of average revenue per product.

Under the no predictability model, additional products add substantially to welfare by con-
struction because the average quality of products does not decline with entry. The only
reason that consumer surplus and the expected revenue per product decline with entry is
through substitution allowed for by the nested logit model’s parameter σ.



3.3.3   Imperfect Prediction


The perfect foresight and no-prediction models present two extremes, both somewhat unre-
alistic. This leads us to the imperfect prediction case, in which investors have some ability to
predict the appeal of songs at the time of investment. Our predicted δ’s (which we term δ ′ )
create an ordering of potential projects in descending order of ex ante (expected) promise:
δ1′ > δ2′ > . . . > δN
                     ′
                       . In the no prediction case (above), we took a random draw of the
k products to estimate the revenue per product when k products enter. In the imperfect
prediction case, the analog to a random draw of k products is the top k products ordered
by expected quality.

We calculate the expected revenue of the k th entrant as follows. Order songs by their ex ante
promise (δ ′ ). When the first (k − 1) songs, ordered by their ex ante appeal, are in the market
with their ex post appeal, the revenue to the k th entrant depends on its realized value. For
a particular realization of δk = δk′ + ε, the share of population consuming product k, via the




                                              13
nested logit formula, is:


                                                                             ′ +ε)
                                                                           (δk
                                                                          e 1−σ
                           sk (ε) = "                                     #σ "                                       #.        (5)
                                          P
                                          k−1        δj        (δ ′ +ε)
                                                                 k                   P
                                                                                     k−1        δj        (δ ′ +ε)
                                                                                                            k
                                                e   1−σ   +e    1−σ          +             e   1−σ   +e    1−σ

                                          j=1                                        j=1



Because of the nonlinearity of the share formula, we compute the expected market share by
integration. The expected market share of the k th entrant is therefore given by
                                                                 Z
                                                    E [sk ] =         sk (ε)f (ε)dε,                                           (6)



where f is the density of ε. In our empirical implementation, we will take f to be the
empirical distribution of the residuals from our prediction model, ε ≡ δ − δ ′ . We will
therefore compute the expected revenue of the k th entrant (when the first (k − 1) songs
ordered by their ex ante appeal have entered) as


                                                     #
                                                     "                ′ +ε
                                                                      δk
                                                                             
                                                                           n
                                       1 XN
                                                             1 XN
                                                                    e 1−σ
              E [rk ] = pME [sk ] = pM       sk (εn ) = pM         σ
                                                                             ,                                                (7)
                                       N n=1                 N n=1 Dkn + Dkn


                P
                k−1        δj         ′ +ε
                                     δk   n
where Dkn =           e   1−σ   +e    1−σ     and N is the total number of products.
                j=1

We estimate status quo fixed costs using the expected revenue of the last entrant, and we
                                                                                                                          rd
estimate counterfactual fixed cost as the expected revenue of the last ( N3 ) product when
          N                                                                                           N
the top   3
              products enter according to expected quality, or k =                                    3
                                                                                                        .




4     Data

Given our goals of estimating the welfare benefits of new music products, we would ideally
observe all revenue generated by new music products. This would include sales of digital
music, sales of physical products (e.g. CD’s) as well as live performance revenue. Our actual
data, while very rich and detailed, include only a subset of the ideal. That is, the basic
data for this study include annual sales of all digital singles in the US, Canada, and 15
European countries, 2006-2011, but our data contain no information on physical products

                                                                     14
nor live performance revenue.12 Our sample includes 3,984,227 distinct tracks from 75,235
distinct artists and, because a song can appear in multiple countries and years, 50,828,216
observations. Total digital track sales in the data are 628.3 million in 2006 and rise to 1512.4
million in 2011.

The sales data are drawn from Nielsen’s SoundScan product, which serves as “a major source
for the Billboard charts and is widely cited by numerous publications and broadcasters as the
standard for music industry measurement.” Nielsen tracks what consumers are buying “both
in-store and digitally.” In particular, they “compile data from more than 39,000 retail outlets
globally.”13 We use the same version of the Nielsen data employed in Aguiar and Waldfogel
(2016), and readers are directed there for details on the dataset construction.14

We use these underlying data to create two datasets that we use for demand estimations
and quality predictions, respectively. While we have data for 2006-2011, the main data used
for demand estimation covers 17 countries for 2011 and includes data on artists’ country
of origin, artists’ age (measured as the number of years between a song’s release year and
the artist’s earliest vintage release) as well as an artist genre designation.15 We obtained
the genre data from Allmusic.com.16 We perform the quality prediction exercise and welfare
calculations using only the subset of US data since these data also include the identity of
labels releasing each song. Our revenue data cover digital track sales, not the total revenue
that artists earn from creating music. The track sales are a subset of total recorded music
sales. Our US digital track sales total $1.313 billion for 2011, while the RIAA reports total
recorded music sales of $7.008 billion.17 Hence, to make them reflective of US recorded music
sales, we scale up our estimates by 5.34.18 We discuss this further in Section 5.3 below.
  12
      The dataset initially includes the following 16 European countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom. However, given that Poland enters the data in 2008 only, we decided to drop it from the analysis.
   13
      http://www.nielsen.com/content/corporate/us/en/solutions/measurement/music-sales-meas
urement.html.
   14
      That dataset excludes entries that appear not to be songs and includes only artists whose national
origins can be determined from MusicBrainz (www.musicbrainz.org). The latter criterion excludes 44.4
percent of otherwise valid observations while retaining 91 percent of sales.
   15
      We rely on the 2011 data for our demand estimation because our identification strategies are cross-
sectional and because the 2011 data are the most recent. See Section 5.1.4.
   16
      We sought matches for each of the 75,235 sample artists from Allmusic.com. We obtained matches
for 61,073 artists, accounting for 93.2 percent of the sales in the data with origin matches. The artists
are clasified into 36 distinct genres, which we aggregate to five broad genres: electronic, jazz, pop/rock,
rap/R&B, and other.
   17
      The RIAA reports sales of 1,306.2 million digital tracks, generating $1,492.7 in revenue, or $1.14 per
track. Our data contain 1.149 billion US track sales. At $1.14 per track, our data cover $1.313 billion in
track sales. See RIAA, 2011 Year-End Shipment Statistics.
   18
      Artists also derive revenue from live performance as well as recorded music. In 2011, live performance


                                                     15
Other variables we employ in the study include population, GDP per capita, the urban
share of the total population, the percentage of fixed broadband Internet subscribers, the
percentage of mobile cellular subscriptions, and the percentage of Internet users. These are
drawn from the World Bank Open Data.19 We also use measures of the digital share of
music expenditure in each country and year, which we take from the Recording Industry in
Numbers 2013 publication from IFPI.

Table 1 reports 2011 sample means for variables used in the estimation, by country and
overall.20 Tracks sell an average of 55.87 units across countries. Of the songs in the sample,
8 percent are in the electronic genre, 5 percent are in the jazz genre, 42 percent are in the
pop/rock genre, and 10 are in the rap/R&B genre. Six percent of the tracks in the sample
are from Germany, 2 percent are from Spain, 5 percent are from France, 16 percent are from
the UK, and 41 percent from the US. Of the tracks, 8 percent are by artists who are new
(have no prior recordings) in 2011. The average artist age (measured as the number of years
between the song’s release and the artist’s earliest vintage release) is 12.64. The average
artists’ last-year (2010) sales is 1,262 across all countries. GDP per capita averages $US
50.50 thousand across the countries in the study, and the digital sales share averages 30%.




5     Empirical Implementation

5.1     Demand Model

We now turn to empirical implementation. We start by presenting the estimation of our
structural demand model. We then present, in turn, our forecasting model of product quality
and the estimation of the fixed costs of entry.

Following equation (1) and normalizing the utility of the outside good δ0c to 0, the market
                                            δjc                 X δjc
                                          e 1−σ
shares for all j ∈ Jc are given by Sjc = Dσ +DJ , where DJc =       e 1−σ . Inverting out δjc
                                                 Jc        c
                                                                         j∈Jc
from observed market shares as in Berry (1994) yields
revenue was $4.35 billion. See 2011 Pollstar Year End Business Analysis, available at http://www.pollst
arpro.com/files/Charts2011/2011BusinessAnalysis.pdf. To the likely extent that the creation of new
music also brings the opportunity to generate some live performance revenue, measures of expected revenue
based only on recorded music sales would understate the true expected revenue.
   19
      See http://data.worldbank.org/.
   20
      For each variable, the overall value is computed as the simple average across countries.



                                                      16
                                                              
                                                         Sjc
                   ln (Sjc ) − ln (S0c ) = δjc + σ ln
                                                       1 − S0c
                                                                        
                                                                   Sjc
                                         = xjc β − αpjc + σ ln             + ξjc ,             (8)
                                                                 1 − S0c



so that an estimate of β, α and σ can be obtained from a linear regression of differences
in log market shares on product characteristics, prices and the log of within group share.
The vector xjc includes three kinds of variables. First, we include country-level variables:
the 2011 digital share of music expenditure in the country, GDP per capita, the shares
of population that are urban, fixed broadband subscribers, mobile cellular subscribers, and
Internet users. Second, we include artist-level variables: genre, artist’s age, country of origin,
whether the artist is new with this release, and the artist’s sales in previous years. Third,
we include terms in the age of the song.

As the determinants of appeal in the demand model, the variables xjc are also relevant to
quality prediction. Hence, we can effectively estimate the demand and prediction models in
one step. The one-step approach faces a practical obstacle, however, as one important set
of variables (the identity of labels releasing each song) is available only for the US and not
for other countries and hence cannot be used directly in demand estimation. Our estimate
of the relative welfare gain from additional products will be sensitive to the explanatory
power of the prediction model. Hence, we will undertake estimation in two ways. First, we
do one-step estimation, including all of the available song and artist characteristics that are
predictive of song success directly in (8). Second, we take a two-step approach, deriving δj
from our estimate of σ from (8), then regressing δj for new US songs in a second step on all
relevant predictors, including both xj and the label variables that are only available for the
US.



5.1.1   Identification of σ


The substitution parameter σ plays an important role in showing the benefits of additional
products to consumers. It is helpful to note that the demand model (8) is a regression of
ln (Sjc )−ln (S0c ) on, among other variables, ln (Sjc )−ln (1 − S0c ). Before even considering the


                                                 17
possible endogeneity of the independent variable, it is worth observing that it is a regression
of a function of Sjc on a related function of Sjc . Hence, our first approach, OLS, could
produce an upwardly biased estimate of σ (indicating close substitutability of products) for
mechanical reasons. Instrumental variables (IV) can address this problem as well as the
possible endogeneity of ln (Sjc ) − ln (1 − S0c ).

We explore two broad IV strategies for identifying σ. The endogenous variable of interest on
                                                       
                                                    Sjc
the right hand side of the demand equation is ln 1−S0c . We can get some intuition about
identification of σ from noting that in a symmetric model - if all inside products had equal
                          Sjc                  1
market shares - that     1−S0c
                                 would equal   N
                                                 ,   where N is the number of products. In general, the
market share of an individual product j is a function of the number of remaining products
(N − 1), as the product must compete with the other N − 1 products. Just as the market
share of a product j depends on the number of products entering, it also depends on the
natural determinant of the number of entering products, the size of the market. Hence, one
can imagine using either N or measures of market size, such as population, as instruments
             
        S
for ln 1−Sjc0c .

Two points about using the number of products as an instrument are in order. First, this
is the simplest version of the IV approach used in Berry et al. (1995) (henceforth BLP) and
described in Nevo (2000), which in general entails using functions of the other products in
the choice set as instruments. In this case, the function is simply the sum of the products,
or N. Second, one can be concerned that N is itself endogenous. If markets with more
entry have elevated unobserved taste for recorded music, then this instrument will lead to
estimates that overstate the market expansion arising from entry (and therefore understating
the size of the demand parameter σ).

On the other hand, if market size affects entry conditions but is not directly related to
                                         
                                    S
preferences, then instrumenting ln 1−Sjc0c with market size will avoid this overstatement
of market expanding effects of entry. While the European Union has free trade in most
products, copyright presents an exception to free trade within Europe. Customers are not
always allowed to purchase digital music across borders (Herrera and Martens, 2015). Hence,
the decision to make a song available must be made on a country-by-country basis, and we
therefore expect to see larger N in larger markets, as the product entry decision is undertaken
for more songs in larger markets.21
  21
       This is the approach employed in Berry and Waldfogel (1999), Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) and dis-

                                                        18
Simple figures illustrate our two basic IV approaches to identification of the demand model.
The left panel of Figure 1 depicts the relationship between market size, as measured by
the log of population, and the number of songs available in each country in 2011. The
relationship is clearly positive. We take this as evidence of variation in the choice sets that
is driven by the size of the market, as opposed to the tastes of individuals. The right-hand
panel of the figure shows the relationship between the log of the number of products and per
capita consumption; this too is positive, but as discussed above one can be concerned that
the number of products entering is endogenous to the level of demand for music.

While the simplest version of the BLP approach uses the number of products as instruments,
more complicated variants involve functions of the characteristics of products. Here, for our
approach, we can use the sum of the following product characteristics: age, genre, and
country of origin. In what follows, we report four groups of estimates of the demand model
(8): OLS, IV using market size, IV using the number of products, and IV using functions of
characteristics.



5.1.2    Price coefficient


While we need an estimate of the price coefficient to translate the utility gain from additional
products into a dollar value, the parameter plays no role in our calculation of the value of the
random long tail relative to the conventional one. To estimate α, we would ideally observe
exogenous price variation across songs that would allow us to econometrically identify the
price coefficient α. This approach is infeasible because we do not observe song-level prices.
We do, however, observe the average price, allowing to infer the α parameter from a first-
order condition on pricing.

Because the price is constant, the term αpjc in (8) simply becomes part of the constant term
in the estimating equation


                                                                           
                                                                    Sjc
                        ln (Sjc ) − ln (S0 ) = xjc β + σ ln                     + ξjc .     (9)
                                                                  1 − S0c
cussed in Berry and Haile (2015) and Berry and Waldfogel (2016).




                                                  19
Using σ we can calculate the country-specific mean utility of each song δjc :


                                                                                  
                                                                             Sjc
                               δjc = ln (Sjc ) − ln (S0c ) − σ ln                   .                     (10)
                                                                           1 − S0c

We can infer α from a condition on the music demand elasticity. Assuming that songs are
sold by a profit maximizing monopolist facing zero marginal cost, the price level would be
set such that the demand for songs is unit elastic.22 Given that the elasticity of demand for
                                      h             i
                                              DJ
music in our model is given by η = αp 1 − DJ +Dσ , we can infer the price parameter under
                                                             J
                                                                σ
                                                         1 DJ +DJ
the assumption of unit-elastic pricing as α =            p DJσ
                                                                  .

In reality, it is likely that major sellers of digital music (e.g.                      Apple) price songs be-
low the static profit maximization level to stimulate demand for complementary hardware
(Shiller and Waldfogel, 2011; Danaher et al., 2014). If so, the estimate of α is an upper
bound, and our resulting estimates of consumer surplus will be a lower bound.23

At this point we therefore have estimates of σ, α and mean utilities (δj ) for each product,
which allow us to calculate consumer surplus and revenue.



5.1.3      Consumer Surplus, Revenue, and Welfare Measures


Given our estimates of σ and α, we can calculate the mean utility of each song, and given
these estimates of δjc we can calculate the consumer surplus (CS) and revenue (Rev). These,
in turn, allow us to calculate two kinds of welfare measures, CS and overall welfare W =
CS + Rev − N · F C, where N is the number of products and F C is the fixed cost per
product. Note that if entry costs equaled revenue, then welfare would simply equal consumer
surplus. In what follows, we calculate the change in welfare both assuming that fixed costs
are determined by the marginal entrant as well as under the assumption that fixed costs
equal revenue, in which case ∆W = ∆CS. Use of consumer surplus as a welfare measure is
also consistent with the literature in this area (e.g. Brynjolfsson et al., 2003) which focuses
  22
      Note that this way of inferring α is not uncommon among practitioners.                As noted by
Björnerstedt and Verboven (2013), one may want to verify whether elasticities are consistent with exter-
nal industry information as opposed to relying too heavily on econometric estimates. While our motivation
is driven by lack of data on producthprices, we basically
                                                 i        follow the same type of approach.
                                                                              σ
  23                                           DJ                     1 DJ +DJ
       If demand is inelastic, then pα 1 −        σ
                                             DJ +DJ   < 1 and α <     p   DJσ   .




                                                        20
entirely on CS. Consumer surplus is given by24

                                                             !
                                    M    X                           M             
                               CS =   ln   DJ1−σ                 =     ln DJ1−σ + 1 .                          (11)
                                    α    J
                                                                     α


Revenue is given by


                                                                  
                                                           DJ
                                            Rev = pj M               .                                         (12)
                                                       (DJσ + DJ )

Our objects of interest are the absolute change in welfare with the new products and, espe-
cially, the change in welfare under our IP approach, relative to the standard PF long tail.
                               h                            i
                             M      1−σ            1−σ
Given our setup, ∆CSIP = α ln(DJ + 1) − ln(DJ IP + 1) , where J is the full status quo
                                                                      0

choice set,   J0IP   is the set of products that would have existed absent cost reduction under IP,
              PJ      δj
and DJ =            e 1−σ . Note that this depends on α, σ, and our predictions of which products
              j=1
enter the counterfactual IP choice set. ∆WIP = ∆CSIP + ∆RevIP − N0 · F C0 − NIP · F CIP ,
where ∆RevIP is the status quo revenue less the revenue that the top third of products in
expected revenue would generate, and N0 and F C0 are the number of products and the fixed
costs per product in the status quo, respectively.

Our second and main object of interest is the welfare change ratio:
                                                                                                   !
                                         h                               i          DJ1−σ +1
                                                                            ln
                     ∆CSIP
                                     M
                                     α
                                           ln(DJ1−σ + 1) − ln(DJ1−σ
                                                                 IP + 1)            D 1−σ
                                                                                       IP +1
                                                                                        J
                                                                                            0
                            =            h                       0
                                                                         i=                        !,          (13)
                     ∆CSP F          M         1−σ             1−σ
                                          ln(DJ + 1) − ln(DJ P F + 1)               DJ1−σ +1
                                     α                           0          ln      D 1−σ
                                                                                     J0P F +1




                           ∆WIP
and, analogously,          ∆WP F
                                   . These ratios depend on σ and the products predicted to enter the
                                           ∆WIP                                 ∆CSIP
choice set. Notice that while              ∆WP F
                                                   depends on α, the ratio      ∆CSP F
                                                                                                does not. Moreover,
although σ enters (13), so that the welfare change ratios formally depend on σ, as it turns
out below, the ratios are empirically almost invariant to σ. Hence, the welfare change ratio
turns out not to be sensitive to estimates of the demand parameters α and σ (although,
again, it will depend on the predictability of product quality).
  24
     The results from our estimations allow us to calculate CS and revenue for each country in each year.
However we omit the country and time subscripts since we perform our counterfactual exercise on US data
in 2011 only.



                                                         21
5.1.4   Results


We now turn to demand estimates, and this section describes four approaches we undertake
for demand model identification.

Although we have data on 2006-2011, our main estimates rely only on 2011 data, for two
reasons. First, our identification strategies are cross-sectional. Second, the 2011 data are the
most recent, and by 2011 digital music has been more widely adopted. Table 2 reports first-
stage estimates using each of the three IV approaches. In all cases the dependent variable is
                          
                     S
the inside share ln 1−Sjc0c , and we cluster standard errors in all specifications at the country
level. The first column uses the log of population as an instrument. As Figure 1 showed,
market size works, in the sense that the number of available products is greater in larger
markets: the larger the market, the smaller the average inside share. The F -statistic for the
instrument is 76.5. When we use the number of products as an instrument, the instrument
also works, in the sense of bearing a strong relationship with the endogenous inside share.
Markets with more products have, on average, smaller inside shares; and the F -statistic
is 385.0. Using the full BLP-style instruments, the sums of the ages of products, and the
numbers of products by genre and origin, the F -statistic is 7588.

Table 3 reports estimates of the demand model using OLS as well as the three IV approaches
laid out in above. Our demand specifications include all of the country, song, and artist-
level variables. Note that we do not report all of the prediction coefficients in Table 3 but
defer their discussion until Table 4 and Section 5.2. The first point to observe is that OLS
gives rise to our highest estimate of σ, 0.786, possibly for the mechanical reason that we are
regressions a function of Sjc on another function of Sjc .

Estimation using the market-size instrument, in column (2), gives a σ estimate of 0.751.
Estimates using the simplest BLP approach - i.e. using ln(N) as an instrument, in column
(3) - give 0.533. The estimates in column (4) using all of the BLP instruments, give a similar
σ estimate of 0.511. Hence, the BLP approach indicate a larger market expansion effect, that
additional products add a great deal to consumption. This is consistent with the intuition
about endogeneity of the number of products.

We have a range of demand estimates before us, and we need to choose an estimate for
carrying out the simulations. OLS has the disadvantage of potential endogeneity, as well


                                               22
as a mechanical relationship between the dependent and independent variable of interest.
Of the IV approaches, the market size instrument is most appealing to us. The use of the
resulting σ estimate (0.751) has the justification that it is conservative, relative to the other
IV approaches, in that the larger σ estimate will give rise to smaller absolute welfare benefits
of digitization. Two other points are important. First, it bears continued emphasis that our
relative welfare measure will turn out to be insensitive to σ. Second, we will calculate all
results of interest for a range of σ values extending beyond the plausible range in Table 3.

Before moving on, we note that we explored a large number of alternative specifications, with
similar results. These include using population rather than its logarithm as an instrument,
as well as using either Internet-connected population or its logarithm as instruments. We
ran specifications without all of the prediction-related observables. We also explored using
data on years 2006 to 2011 separately as well as pooled data on 2006-2011 rather than simply
2011. We estimated two-level nested logit models with genres as nests (using functions of
product characteristics within nests as instruments); we generally could not reject the one-
level nested logit model. Finally, we experimented with different market size definitions.
Using both total and Internet-connected population, we considered measures ranging from
half of the baseline value of 12 × population to twice the baseline. The pattern of results for
σ from the large set of estimates is similar: a range between 0.5 and 0.9, with the highest
estimates from OLS, the lowest estimates from the BLP approaches, and an intermediate
estimate from the use of a population instrument. All of these estimates are available in
Appendix B. The basic result that we find, that the ∆CS ratio is nearly 20, emerges with a
wide range of assumed market sizes.



5.2    Quality Prediction

While we estimate the demand model on data for 17 countries, we perform our counterfactual
exercises on only US data for 2011. In our counterfactual calculations we treat only the
vintage-2011 products as endogenous. That is, we treat the pre-2011 products available
in 2011 as exogenously available and omit the bottom two thirds of vintage 2011 products
(according to their expected quality) in our counterfactual choice set. These simulations can
be interpreted to represent a cost reduction that occurred starting in 2011.

Implementing our simulation requires quality predictions, and the first quality prediction

                                               23
comes straight from the demand model. Recall, from the demand model, that δj = xj β + ξj ,
so we have estimates of β from the demand model above. Column (1) of Table 4 reports
the estimates of the coefficients on the prediction variables from the one-step estimation
approach. Because we are interested only in predicting the quality of 2011 songs, the demand
model includes separate coefficients for the vintage-2011 US products and the other products.
In Table 4 we report only the coefficients on the interactions of vintage-2011 US dummies
with the variables of interest. We see, for example, that new releases from artists with greater
recent sales tend to have higher realized quality and that sales are lower for older artists.
How much of the variation in realized quality does this prediction model explain? We are
interested in the model’s explanatory power only for vintage-2011 US products. Hence, we
calculate the model’s predicted quality for those products, and we calculate the relevant R2
           b δj )2 on the vintage-2011 products. We are able to explain 19.8 percent of the
as corr(xj β,
variation in realized quality for vintage-2011 US songs with the one-step estimates.

The one step estimates have the advantage of being derived from simultaneous estimation,
but they have the disadvantage that we cannot include variables that are not available for
all countries. As a result, it is important to know whether a two-step approach, which would
allow us to include the variables available only for the US, yields similar results. To explore
this, we derive an estimate of δj from our baseline demand estimation, then regress it directly
on the xj variables for just the vintage 2011 US observations.25 Column (2) reports results,
and the coefficients are similar to those in column (1). Moreover, the R2 of this regression is
also similar to the implied R2 for column (1) albeit somewhat higher, at 0.244 rather than
0.198. This provides some indication that the two step approach will not produce misleading
results.26

Column (3) adds the label identifiers to the specification in column (2). The data contain
13,507 different labels. Artists tend to match with different labels according to expected
quality, with the “major” labels releasing artists with substantial commercial appeal and
the independents releasing artists with more modest prospects. There is, moreover, a range
of independent labels from labels such as Merge and 4AD handling well-known “indie” artists
to more obscure labels. Hence, label dummies should be correlated with predictors of success
                                                                                                               
   25                                                                                                      S
      That is, we take our baseline estimate of σ (0.751), then calculate δj = ln (Sj ) − ln (S0 ) − σ ln 1−Sj 0 .
   26
      Even more relevant for us, both prediction equations give rise to roughly equal values of the ratio in
(13).




                                                       24
that labels can observe but the econometrician cannot.27

There is an important sense in which all of the prediction models in columns (1)-(3) of
Table 4 overstate predictability. These models use 2011 data to predict the success of 2011
releases and may suffer from overfitting. The realized qualities of the 2011 releases are not
known at the time of investment, and to mimic the decision problem of investors should use
only information available prior to the realizations of the 2011 vintage releases’ success for
prediction. To this end we can instead estimate the demand and prediction models on 2010
data, then use the resulting coefficients along with 2011 X’s to form predictions. We calculate
the prediction R2 using the 2010 parameters. This R2 is then corr(xj,2011 βb2010 , δj,2011 )2 . Using
the 2010 forecast reduces the R2 from 0.411 in column (3) to 0.323, and this is the baseline
estimation approach we will use in the paper, but we will explore the sensitivity of the results
to predictability extensively in Section 7.4.

We make one final observation. Our prediction model tells which vintage 2011 products
would not have been available to consumers in 2011 absent cost reductions following from
digitization. In reality, cost reduction - and the growth of new releases - predates 2011, so
that the full benefit of digitization that US consumers experience during 2011 exceeds the
benefits associated with the additional vintage-2011 products.



5.3     Fixed Costs

Our estimates of fixed costs are based on estimates of the expected revenue of the last
entering US product. That is, we calculate perfect foresight status quo fixed costs as the
expected (and realized) revenue of the lowest-appeal vintage 2011 product. Because the
lowest revenue observed in the US digital song data for a vintage 2011 song is $1.14, the
resulting status quo fixed cost estimate under perfect foresight is $1.14. Scaling this up to
the total year-2011 US recorded music revenue (multiplying by 5.34) yields a fixed cost of
$6.09 (see Table 5). The analogous perfect foresight counterfactual fixed cost is estimated as
the expected revenue of the last entering vintage-2011 product when all pre-2011 products
are in the choice set while only the top third of vintage-2011 products (by realized quality)
enter. We estimate this to be $133.97.
  27
      To the extent that labels have already formed a prediction of the artist’s appeal when signing them,
including label fixed effects in the forecasting model will arguably lead to more conservative results. The R2
rises fairly substantially with the inclusion of label dummies, to 0.442.


                                                     25
We estimate status quo no predictability fixed costs by calculating the average revenue to
each of the vintage-2011 products when they are available alongside the earlier, exogenous
products (from vintages prior to 2011). We estimate these as $9,467.89. For the counterfac-
tual no predictability fixed costs, we randomly remove two thirds of the vintage 2011 songs,
then calculate the average revenue per 2011 song when, again, they are sold alongside all of
the pre-2011 songs. We repeat this random exercise 5,000 times, resulting in a counterfactual
fixed costs estimate of $10,521.81.

We calculate the imperfect predictability status quo fixed costs by ordering the 2011 products
by expected quality. We then seek an estimate of the expected revenue of the last entering
vintage-2011 product when it is available alongside both the preceding vintage-2011 product
and all of the pre-2011 products. Using equation (7), we estimate the status quo fixed cost
as the expected revenue of the last entering product. We obtain an estimate of $18.97.
We similarly estimate the counterfactual imperfect predictability fixed costs as the expected
revenue of the k = ( N3 )rd entering product, obtaining an estimate of $1,792.23.

As is customary in the empirical entry literature, our fixed cost estimates are derived from
a cross section of revenue data. The fixed costs derived from year-2011 expected revenue of
new vintage-2011 songs reflect only expected first-year song revenue. If first year revenue
is proportional to lifetime revenue, then our fixed cost estimates will be proportional to
the true underlying fixed costs. Moreover, the fixed cost estimates derived from first-year
revenue bear the same relationship to total fixed costs that our observed first-year revenue
bears to total revenue. Hence, revenue and cost estimates are consistent with one another,
for example for the purpose of entry counterfactuals involving different fixed cost levels.

For some purposes, however, one might want to adjust our fixed cost estimates. For instance,
one might want to compare our fixed cost estimates to outside estimates of the cost of
bringing new music to market. Artists and labels release products in order to earn all of the
revenue that those products can generate. In addition to first-year recorded music revenue,
there is the additional revenue from the remaining life of the song. Analysis of sales by time
and vintage shows that the revenue generated in the first year of a song’s life accounts for
an average of 18 percent of lifetime song revenue.28 Hence, we could further inflate first-year
   28
     A regression of the log of stv (the share of year-t sales originally released at vintage v) on age dummies
and vintage dummies allows us to infer the share of sales by age from the coefficients on age dummies. Using
this approach, as in Waldfogel (2012), we find that 18 percent of lifetime sales occur during the calendar
release year. See the Appendix B for details.


                                                      26
revenue by an additional factor of 5.46 (1/18 percent) to yield estimated fixed costs from
the status quo IP model of the expected lifetime total recorded music revenue. This would,
correspondingly, give rise to a larger estimate of the fixed cost of entry. Beyond the lifetime
recorded music revenue is also live performance revenue, which reached $4.35 billion in the
US in 2011.29 Roughly, then the first-year revenue from live performance and recorded music
                             4.35
together is 18.97 · (1 +       7
                                  )   = $30.76. When these first year revenue sources are scaled to
lifetime revenue, this becomes $30.76 · 5.46 = $167.9. In what follows we inflate to total
recorded music revenue, but we note that all revenue sources, together, are relevant if one
wanted to assess the realism of our implied fixed costs estimates.

While the status quo and counterfactual fixed costs estimates are mainly inputs into our
welfare calculations, they are also of some direct interest as answers to the question “how
much must fixed cost have fallen to generate a tripling of entry?” The answer, under im-
perfect predictability, is roughly a factor of one hundred, from about $1,800 to $19 in Table
5.




6          Simulations

We now turn to evaluating the welfare benefits of tripling the choice set.



6.1          Effect of Tripling the Number of Songs on Welfare

Table 6 reports baseline estimates of both the absolute changes in welfare measures (∆CS
                                                                      ∆CSIP          ∆WIP
and ∆W ) as well as our main objects of interest, the ratios          ∆CSP F
                                                                               and   ∆WP F
                                                                                             . Using our
imperfect predictability approach, the additional vintage-2011 songs in the 2011 choice set
raise CS by $10.09 million, and given the implied reduction in entry costs, W rises by $71.72
million. Recall that these are inflated to reflect total US recorded music sales.

The perfect foresight welfare benefits of additional entry, corresponding to the traditional
long tail, are far smaller than the IP benefits. CS for 2011 rises by $0.51 million with a
tripling in the number of new 2011 products, while W rises by $6.20 million. These absolute
changes in welfare, in addition to reflecting any uncertainty we have about the true value
     29
          See footnote 18.


                                                     27
of the substitution parameter are also small. It’s important to note that we calculate the
absolute change in consumer surplus by removing the least promising 90 thousand vintage-
2011 products from a 2011 choice set that continues to include over 2 million products. Given
the substitutability across products, as well as the fact that pre-2011 products collectively
account for a large share of sales, we would not expect the absolute increase in welfare to
be large. Again, the absolute change in welfare under imperfect predictability interests us
mainly in relation to its analog under perfect foresight. And using our baseline model, our
long tail in production produces a ∆CSIP benefit that is 19.82 times larger than traditional
perfect foresight benefit ∆CSP F . Our overall welfare benefit ∆WIP is 11.57 times larger.
This is our main finding.

Although the absolute size of the welfare gain is not our main focus, a few notes are in
order. We estimate that consumers experienced a $10.09 million benefit in 2011 from the
vintage-2011 products made possible by digitization. During 2011, US consumers also en-
joyed additional new products released in 2010, 2009, 2008, and so on, back to 2000 if one
were to mark the onset of digitization following Napster. A rough estimate based on the
growth in the number of new products since 1999 and the shares of these vintages in year-
2011 sales suggests that the role of new, digitization-enabled products in the 2011 choice set
is 4.31 times as large as the new 2011 products alone.30 Hence, the full year-2011 benefit
of new products is roughly four times the benefit arising from just the new (vintage-2011)
products. This is $43.49 million for the US in 2011, a year in which total recorded music
sales were $7 billion.

Our estimates of the absolute size of the welfare benefits from new products appear small in
comparison with existing long tail estimates. Brynjolfsson et al. (2003) estimate that access
to all book titles at Amazon, rather than just the top 100,000 titles, delivered $1 billion
in additional consumer surplus to US consumers in 2000. Their measurement approach
corresponds to what we term perfect foresight but applied to all vintages rather than just
the 2011 vintage. Our basic PF approach counterfactually removes the lowest-demand two
thirds of products released in 2011. We can produce an estimate more closely resembling
Brynjolfsson et al. (2003)’s approach by discarding all but the 100,000 most popular products
among the full 2.2 million products available in 2011 regardless of vintage. The loss in CS
from eliminating all but the top 100,000 products is $86.4 million. This figure remains
  30
       See Appendix B for details on these calculations.



                                                      28
smaller than the corresponding measure for books, largely because books have far lower
sales concentration. Brynjolfsson et al. (2003) report that books outside the top 100,000
titles accounted for about 40 percent of book sales in 2000. In our music data, tracks outside
the top 100,000 account for under 5 percent of sales. Hence, we expect our estimates of
conventional long tail benefits (the benefits arising from access to products outside, say, the
top 100,000) to be much smaller than a corresponding estimate for books.




7     Robustness

                                                                                  ∆CSIP
Our estimates of the absolute changes in welfare as well as the ratios such as    ∆CSP F
                                                                                           depend
on a host of underlying model features, including the price parameter α, the substitutability
of products in the demand model (σ), the ability of investors to forecast quality at the time
of investment, and the magnitude of the enlargement of the choice set (the share of status
quo products available in the higher-cost counterfactual - one third in the default). In this
section we consider the sensitivity of our estimate to these modeling decisions.



7.1    The Price Parameter

While the price parameter α has no effect on the ∆CS ratio, it has a direct effect on the
absolute measure ∆CSIP . Here, we consider the ∆CSIP estimates resulting from a range
of α estimates. Our baseline α is a bound derived from assuming revenue maximizing song
pricing. If we instead assumed that prices were set such that the elasticity of demand were
one half rather than one, then α would be half as large, and ∆CSIP would be double from
its baseline of $10 million to $20 million, meaning that $20 million is a lower-bound estimate
of the change in surplus from the new vintage-2011 songs in 2011. By contrast, if prices
were set such that the elasticity were two, then ∆CSIP would be half its baseline value, or
$5 million.



7.2    Share of Products Included in the Counterfactual Choice Set

Our baseline counterfactual is a world in which all old - and only one third of vintage-2011 -
products exist. It is useful to know how the ratio of interest varies for different counterfactual

                                               29
shares that correspond to different amounts of growth in the choice set besides tripling. To
                           ∆CSIP
this end, we re-estimate   ∆CSP F
                                    , including different numbers of vintage-2011 products in the
counterfactual scenarios. Our baseline exercise considers a tripling of products following the
entry cost reduction, resulting in a ∆CS ratio of 19.8. Assuming a doubling of the number
of products instead, the ∆CS ratio reaches 18.3. We conclude that our random long tail in
production is substantially larger than the conventional long tail for a wide range of choice
set enlargements.



7.3    Substitution Parameter σ

Each value of σ gives us a new vector of product qualities δ, which we term δ(σ). Each new
δ vector, in turn, can be used to construct forecasts of expected quality. We can use these to
create estimates of ∆CSIP and the ∆CS ratio to see the sensitivity of these measures to σ.
As illustrated in Section 5.1.3, the absolute change in ∆CSIP depends on the substitution
parameter σ. Using our baseline σ of 0.751, ∆CSIP is $10 million. By contrast, if σ were at
the ends of our estimated ranges (0.5 or 0.9), then ∆CSIP would be about $13 million or $5
million, respectively.

It is not clear a priori how different levels of substitution affect the ∆CS ratio, so we
undertake simulations for different values of σ. For each possible σ, we calculate a δ vector,
perform our two step forecast, then calculate the ∆CS ratio. Figure 2 depicts the relationship
between σ and the ∆CS ratio. Our estimate of the ratio is nearly invariant to our choice of σ.
If σ = 0, then this becomes the plain logit model, and the ∆CS ratio is 19.78, while if σ = 0.9,
the ratio is 19.88. Using the potentially overfitted but conservative 2011 forecasting model,
this ratio is nearly constant at 13. Because σ is the only estimated parameter determining
δ, Figure 2 also contains implicit estimates of the standard error of our ∆CS ratio estimate.
That the ∆CS ratio is nearly invariant in σ means that if we take bootstrap draws from the
estimated σ distribution, the resulting values of the ∆CS ratio would be tightly distributed.
We conclude that our estimates of the ∆CS ratio are not sensitive to the choice of logit vs
nested logit, nor are they sensitive to the degree of substitutability among songs. Beyond
this, our estimates of the ∆CS ratio are precise.




                                                 30
7.4     Investors’ Forecasting Ability

One of the key features of the model is the extent to which investors can forecast quality at
the time of investment. The better their ability to forecast, the smaller are both ∆CSIP and
the ∆CS ratio. Hence, we would like to investigate the sensitivity of our welfare estimates
to different abilities to forecast.

Strictly speaking, what matters for the estimated magnitudes of ∆CSIP and the ∆CS ratio
is not the R2 from the forecasts per se but rather the value of the choice !
                                                                           set the prediction
                                                                  X δj
model places in the counterfactual. Recall that CS = Mα
                                                        ln 1 +        e 1−σ , where j ∈ pred
                                                                            j∈pred
refers to the set of products j predicted to be in the counterfactual choice set. What matters,
                              X δj                           X δj
therefore, for a forecast is       e 1−σ . Of course, R2 and      e 1−σ are related. To see this,
                               j∈pred                              j∈pred
note that with perfect prediction, and therefore R2 of 1, the songs predicted to be in the top
                                                      X δj           X       δj
third are those actually appear in the top third, or,       e 1−σ =       e 1−σ .
                                                              j∈pred         j∈actual

Ideally, we would like to see beyond the veil of our ignorance to understand how our fore-
casting ability improves as we add more variables. Of course, we have already included all
of the variables available to us in our forecast. To see how our estimate would change if we
had better ability to forecast, we can create a new explanatory variable that is the true value
of δ plus a scaled random error. That is, define Bj = δj + sυj , where s is a scaling variable
which we control and υ is a standard normal error.

Then our forecasting model regresses δ on xjc as in the last column of Table 4 in Section
5.2 above, along with B. We begin with a large value of s, so that we are adding an
irrelevant variable, whose coefficient will be small.31 As s shrinks, B acquires a significant
coefficient; and our ability to predict quality improves. Each value of s is thus associated
with a regression R2 and a prediction R2 . Figure B.6 depicts the relationships between
∆CSIP and the ∆CS ratio and the prediction R2 .

When s = 1000, the regression R2 rises from its baseline of 0.403 to 0.495; and the associated
prediction R2 (for vintage 2011 alone) rises from its baseline of 0.323 to 0.434. The ∆CS
ratio would fall from its baseline value of nearly 20 to about 7.6, and the absolute change
  31
     We use the following values of s to perform our exercise: 10000000, 5000000, 1000000, 500000, 100000,
10000, 1000, 900, 800, 700, 600, 500, 450, 400, 350, 300, 250, 200, 150, 100, 50, 10, 5, 1, and 0. A value of
s = 10000000 gives rise to our baseline prediction R2 of 0.325.



                                                     31
∆CSIP would fall from its baseline of $10.09 million to about $3.9 million. When s = 250,
the regression R2 rises to 0.846, and the associated prediction R2 is 0.843.

A conservative approach to measuring the welfare gain from digitization would employ the
richest and most accurate prediction model available. One model that errs on the side of
conservatism is the model estimated on 2011 data so that the regression residuals are direct
“forecasts” of quality (as opposed to using the forecasts derived from the 2010 regression).
That regression had an R2 of 0.411. The resulting estimates of ∆CSIP and the ∆CS ratio
are $6.63 million and 13.03, respectively.



7.5     Alternative Demand Model

Brynjolfsson et al. (2003) estimate the benefits of the long tail by calculating the share of
book sales accounted for by books available online but not likely to be available at consumers’
local stores. In particular, following Hausman (1981), they estimate the change in consumer
             −p∆q
surplus as   (1+ǫ)
                   ,   where q is the purchased quantity of the books newly available online, and
p is the price per unit of these new products, and ǫ is the price elasticity of demand for the
new product.

We can use this approach to estimate the welfare benefit of the change in products from
digitization, relative to the conventional long tail benefit. To this end, define ∆qr as the
difference between status quo track sales and the sales of products that would have existed
under regime r. Hence, for example, ∆qP F = (q0 − qP F ).32 Then our ratio of interest is as
follows:                                          −p∆qIP
                                     ∆CSIP         (1+ǫ)        ∆qIP
                                            =     −p∆qP F
                                                            =         .                               (14)
                                     ∆CSP F        (1+ǫ)
                                                                ∆qP F


In short, this is sales of the products a) made available in the imperfect predictability sim-
ulation over the sales of products made available with perfect foresight. We calculate this
to be 19.75. Note that this estimate is very similar to the one obtained from our baseline
model, although the approach is vastly different, highlighting that predictability is the main
determinant of the extent to which the random long tail exceeds the conventional one.
  32
    Note that this approach implicitly assumes that total counterfactual sales would equal the sales of the
products predicted to exist in the counterfactual in the status quo (when they are available alongside the
remainder the status quo products).




                                                    32
8    Conclusion

Evaluating the benefit of new products is a central task for economics. Our study has three
conclusions. First, unpredictability can have a large effect on the impact of new product
entry on welfare. We explore the welfare benefit arising from the new products prompted
by reduced entry costs in a context in which quality is unpredictable. This unpredictability
has a large effect on the benefit of new products. Given that unpredictability appears to be
a common feature of new products, this idea may have wider applicability.

Second, applying this perspective to the impact of digitization on the recorded music industry
yields some novel insights about the benefit of the Internet. Observers have understood the
benefit of the Internet to operate through a shelf-space mechanism that we have termed the
long tail in consumption. As important as this mechanism is, we propose that the long tail
in production that we explore is quantitatively more important. Reductions in entry costs
allow producers to “take more draws,” and given the unpredictability of quality at the time of
investment, taking more draws can generate more “winners.” Our illustrative estimates for
music show that the production mechanism could generate almost 20 times as much benefit
as the consumption mechanism for an equal-sized increase in the number of products. This
is invariant to the demand estimates and instead depends on the predictability of product
quality. It’s hard to know the exact predictability of quality, but given the evidence - here
and elsewhere - on the unpredictability of the commercial appeal of cultural products, it
seems safe to say that the random long tail is likely to be substantially larger than the
conventional one. Unpredictability is a generic feature of creative products such as books
and movies, suggesting that the growth of new products in those categories may be producing
large welfare benefits (Waldfogel, 2016; Waldfogel and Reimers, 2015).

Finally, the results of this study provide evidence of an explicit mechanism by which the
growth in new music products since Napster has raised the realized quality of music, as
Waldfogel (2012) and Aguiar and Waldfogel (2016) have argued, despite the collapse of
recorded music revenue.




                                             33
References
Aguiar, L. and J. Waldfogel (2016): “Even the losers get lucky sometimes: New
 products and the evolution of music quality since Napster,” Information Economics and
 Policy, 34, 1 – 15.

Anderson, C. (2006): The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is Selling Less of More,
 Hyperion.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilib-
 rium,” Econometrica, 63, 841–90.

Berry, S. T. (1994): “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,”
 RAND Journal of Economics, 25, 242–262.

Berry, S. T. and P. Haile (2015): “Identification in Differentiated Products Markets,”
 Working Paper 21500, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Berry, S. T. and J. Waldfogel (1999): “Free Entry and Social Inefficiency in Radio
 Broadcasting,” RAND Journal of Economics, 30, 397–420.

——— (2016): “Empirical Modeling for Economics of the Media: Consumer and Advertiser
 Demand, Firm Supply and Firm Entry Models for Media Markets,” in Handbook of Media
 Economics, vol 1A, Elsevier Science.

Björnerstedt, J. and F. Verboven (2013): “Merger Simulation with Nested Logit
  Demand - Implementation using Stata,” Konkurrensverket Working Paper Series in Law
  and Economics 2013:2, Konkurrensverket (Swedish Competition Authority).

Brynjolfsson, E., Y. J. Hu, and M. D. Smith (2003): “Consumer Surplus in the Dig-
 ital Economy: Estimating the Value of Increased Product Variety at Online Booksellers,”
 Management Science, 49, 1580–1596.

Cardell, N. S. (1997): “Variance Components Structures for the Extreme-Value and
 Logistic Distributions with Application to Models of Heterogeneity,” Econometric Theory,
 13, 185–213.

Caves, R. (2000): Creative Industries: Contracts Between Art and Commerce, Harvard
 University Press.

Danaher, B., Y. Huang, M. D. Smith, and R. Telang (2014): “An Empirical Anal-
 ysis of Digital Music Bundling Strategies,” Management Science, 60, 1413–1433.

Ferreira, F., A. Petrin, and J. Waldfogel (2013): “Trade, Endogenous Quality, and
 Welfare in Motion Pictures,” Working paper.

Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2010): “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence From
 U.S. Daily Newspapers,” Econometrica, 78, 35–71.

Goldman, W. (1984): Adventures in the Screen Trade, Grand Central Publishing: New
 York.

Gourville, J. (2005): “The Curse of Innovation: A Theory of Why Innovative New Prod-
 ucts Fail in the Marketplace,” Harvard Business School Working Paper 06-014.


                                           34
Handke, C. (2012): “Digital copying and the supply of sound recordings,” Information
 Economics and Policy, 24, 15 – 29, the Economics of Digital Media Markets.

Hausman, J. A. (1981): “Exact Consumer’s Surplus and Deadweight Loss,” American
 Economic Review, 71, 662–76.

Hausman, J. A. and G. K. Leonard (2002): “The Competitive Effects of a New Product
 Introduction: A Case Study,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 50, pp. 237–263.

Herrera, E. G. and B. Martens (2015): “Language, copyright and geographic seg-
 mentation in the EU Digital Single Market for music and film,” JRC Working Papers
 on Digital Economy 2015-04, Directorate Growth & Innovation and JRC-Seville, Joint
 Research Centre.

Nevo, A. (2000): “A Practitioner’s Guide to Estimation of Random-Coefficients Logit
 Models of Demand,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 9, 513–548.

Oberholzer-Gee, F. and K. Strumpf (2010): “File Sharing and Copyright,” in Inno-
 vation Policy and the Economy, Volume 10, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc,
 NBER Chapters, 19–55.

Petrin, A. (2002): “Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 110, pp. 705–729.

Quan, T. and K. Williams (2016): “Product Variety, Across Market Demand Hetero-
 geneity, and the Value of Online Retail,” Working Paper.

Shiller, B. and J. Waldfogel (2011): “Music for a Song: An Empirical Look at Uniform
  Pricing and Its Alternatives,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 59, 630–660.

Sinai, T. and J. Waldfogel (2004): “Geography and the Internet: is the Internet a
  substitute or a complement for cities?” Journal of Urban Economics, 56, 1–24.

Terviö, M. (2009): “Superstars and Mediocrities: Market Failure in the Discovery of
 Talent,” Review of Economic Studies, 76, 829–850.

Waldfogel, J. (2012): “Copyright Protection, Technological Change, and the Quality
 of New Products: Evidence from Recorded Music since Napster,” Journal of Law and
 Economics, 55, 715 – 740.

——— (2013): “Digitization and the Quality of New Media Products: The Case of Music,”
 in Economics of Digitization, University of Chicago Press.

——— (2016): “Cinematic Explosion: New Products, Unpredictability, And Realized Qual-
 ity In The Digital Era,” Journal of Industrial Economics.

Waldfogel, J. and I. Reimers (2015): “Storming the gatekeepers: Digital disinterme-
 diation in the market for books,” Information Economics and Policy, 31, 47 – 58.




                                          35
A   Figures and Tables

                                                            Identification of the Demand Model
                                     Number of Songs and Market Size                                                                                     Share Consuming and Number of Songs
                                                                                                       US                                           −1
                              14.5                                                                                                                                                                                                US


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GB
                                                                                  GB
                               14                                                                                                                                                                    CH
                                                                                                                                                    −2
                                                                       CA                                       ln(Share of Population consuming)                                DK
                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                                                                                                      NO
                                                                                                                                                                             IE
        ln(Number of Songs)




                                                                                   FR
                              13.5
                                               CH
                                                                                                                                                                                           BE
                                                                                                                                                    −3                                                       DE
                                                                                  IT                                                                                              AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                            FR
                               13                   BE      NL
                                                                                                                                                                                           NL
                                      NO AT                                  ES                                                                                                   SE
                                       DK   SE

                                     IE                                                                                                                              FI
                              12.5                                                                                                                  −4                                          IT



                                          FI

                               12                                                                                                                                                     ES

                                                                                                                                                                PT
                                                    PT                                                                                              −5
                                     15.5      16    16.5        17   17.5    18        18.5   19   19.5                                                 11.5   12        12.5         13            13.5        14        14.5        15
                                                             ln(population)                                                                                                 ln(Number of Songs)

      Graphs present data from 2011.




                                                    Figure 1: Identification of the Demand Model.




                                                                                                           36
                                ∆CS Ratio and Substitution Parameter σ
            25

            24

            23

            22

            21
∆CS Ratio




            20

            19

            18

            17

            16

            15
                 0         .1           .2      .3        .4             .5          .6         .7         .8                   .9
                                                                σ



                     Figure 2: ∆CS Ratio and Substitution Parameter σ.




                                ∆CS Ratio, ∆CSIP, and Prediction R
                                                                                                 2

                                 Forecasting Model Relying on 2010 Data
            20                                                                                                      10
            18                                                                                                      9
            16                                                                                                      8
            14
                                                                                                                         ∆CSIP in millions




                                                                                                                    7
∆CS Ratio




            12                                                                                                      6

            10                                                                                                      5

             8                                                                                                      4

             6                                                                                                      3

             4                                                                                                      2

             2                                                                                                      1

             0                                                                                                      0
                 .32 .35   .4     .45    .5   .55    .6   .65   .7        .75   .8        .85   .9   .95        1
                                                                     2
                                                     Prediction R

                                                ∆CS Ratio                       ∆CSIP



                                        Figure 3: ∆CS Ratio and R2 .




                                                           37
                                                                   Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, 2011.†

     Country     Sales     Share     Share     Share       Share      Share    Share   Share   Share    Share    Share      2010 Artists   Artist     GDP           Share
                           Electr.   Jazz    Pop/Rock    Rap/R&B       DE       ES      FR      UK       US     New Art.       Sales        Age     per capita   Digit. Sales

     AT          13.89      0.09     0.05      0.45         0.10       0.13    0.01     0.03    0.15    0.37       0.09         95.34      11.57      49.58         0.20
     BE          16.36      0.09     0.05      0.42         0.09       0.05    0.01     0.10    0.16    0.36       0.08        141.99      12.38      46.51         0.15
     CA          78.95      0.06     0.05      0.40         0.10       0.04    0.01     0.04    0.13    0.49       0.05       1017.22      13.17      51.55         0.41
     CH          20.63      0.08     0.05      0.41         0.10       0.10    0.02     0.07    0.13    0.36       0.07        191.41      12.05      83.33         0.24
     DE          48.89      0.08     0.05      0.42         0.09       0.13    0.01     0.04    0.15    0.38       0.05        676.40      13.21      44.02         0.16
     DK          22.18      0.09     0.05      0.45         0.11       0.05    0.01     0.03    0.17    0.42       0.09        162.55      11.79      59.89         0.38
     ES          14.11      0.08     0.05      0.40         0.08       0.05    0.09     0.05    0.16    0.36       0.08        118.29      12.61      31.98         0.30
     FI          6.46       0.08     0.04      0.51         0.10       0.05    0.01     0.03    0.17    0.39       0.11         32.85      11.82      48.84         0.19
38




     FR          37.85      0.08     0.06      0.37         0.11       0.05    0.02     0.12    0.14    0.38       0.05        545.80      13.56      42.52         0.22
     IE          18.34      0.08     0.03      0.45         0.09       0.03    0.01     0.03    0.23    0.45       0.10        125.72      11.98      48.25         0.34
     IT          25.22      0.08     0.07      0.41         0.09       0.05    0.02     0.04    0.16    0.39       0.07        228.04      13.37      36.10         0.22
     NL          13.52      0.09     0.06      0.40         0.10       0.05    0.01     0.04    0.16    0.41       0.08         98.61      12.78      50.09         0.18
     NO          16.69      0.07     0.04      0.46         0.09       0.05    0.01     0.03    0.17    0.43       0.09        131.38      12.34      99.14         0.51
     PT          6.84       0.10     0.05      0.44         0.10       0.05    0.02     0.05    0.19    0.38       0.13         34.45      10.58      22.50         0.16
     SE          9.39       0.08     0.05      0.47         0.10       0.05    0.01     0.03    0.17    0.41       0.09         89.96      12.33      57.07         0.50
     UK          102.34     0.08     0.06      0.39         0.09       0.04    0.01     0.03    0.20    0.43       0.04       1976.34      14.41      38.96         0.35
     US          498.11     0.06     0.07      0.35         0.10       0.04    0.01     0.03    0.13    0.50       0.03       15795.76     14.88      48.11         0.56

     Overall     55.87      0.08     0.05      0.42         0.10       0.06    0.02     0.05    0.16    0.41       0.08       1262.48      12.64      50.50         0.30
     †
         For each variable, the Overall row presents the simple average value across countries. Artist’s age is measured as the number of years between the song’s release and
         the artist’s earliest vintage release. GDP per capita measured in thousands of $US.
          Table 2: Demand Model: First Stage

                                   (1)        (2)        (3)
                               Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.
ln(Population)                   -1.173∗∗∗
                                 (0.13)
ln(Number of songs)                         -2.289∗∗∗
                                            (0.12)
Sum of songs’ ages                                     -0.013∗∗∗
                                                       (0.00)
Number of songs from DE                                0.158∗∗∗
                                                       (0.01)
Number of songs from FR                                -0.166∗∗∗
                                                       (0.01)
Number of songs from ES                                -0.868∗∗∗
                                                       (0.03)
Number of songs from UK                                0.154∗∗∗
                                                       (0.01)
Number of songs from US                                -0.554∗∗∗
                                                       (0.01)
Number of Electronic songs                             -2.157∗∗∗
                                                       (0.06)
Number of Jazz songs                                   0.497∗∗∗
                                                       (0.03)
Number of Pop/Rock songs                               0.237∗∗∗
                                                       (0.01)
Number of Rap/R&B songs                                0.607∗∗∗
                                                       (0.03)
Number of other songs                                  0.689∗∗∗
                                                       (0.02)
Share of Digital Sales           -2.498∗∗   -2.061∗∗∗  1.072∗∗∗
                                 (1.16)     (0.49)     (0.15)
GDP per capita                  -23.154     9.072∗∗∗ -23.296∗∗∗
                                (15.28)     (2.48)     (0.77)
Urban Population                 -0.009     0.007      0.036∗∗∗
                                 (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.00)
Age of the song                 -16.818∗∗∗ -22.334∗∗∗ -23.698∗∗∗
                                 (3.18)     (1.74)     (1.68)
(Age of the song)2              311.673∗∗∗ 368.587∗∗∗ 386.088∗∗∗
                                (45.28)    (30.39)    (29.80)

Genre Fixed Effects                  X          X            X
Origin Fixed Effects                 X          X            X
F-stat excluded instruments      76.488      385.021      7588.996
P-value                          0.000        0.000        0.000

No. of Obs.                     10800378    10800378     10800378
†
  All specifications use 2011 data and include variables measur-
  ing artists’ past sales, artists’ age and its squared, an indicator
  for new artists, and time since last release. Standard errors are
  clustered on country level and are in parenthesis.
∗
  Significant at the 10% level.
∗∗
   Significant at the 5% level.
∗∗∗
    Significant at the 1% level.




                                39
                                 Table 3: Demand Model

                              (OLS)                (1)           (2)               (3)
                            Coef./s.e.          Coef./s.e.    Coef./s.e.        Coef./s.e.
          s
     ln( 1−sj 0 )              0.786∗∗∗           0.751∗∗∗      0.533∗∗∗          0.511∗∗∗
                              (0.07)              (0.10)        (0.09)            (0.08)
     Share of Digital Sales    3.159∗∗∗           2.889∗∗       1.205             1.032
                              (1.08)              (1.30)        (1.07)            (1.07)
     GDP per capita          19.471              20.745∗        28.716∗∗∗         29.534∗∗∗
                             (11.97)             (11.73)        (7.51)            (7.33)
     Urban Population          0.007              0.006         0.003             0.003
                              (0.01)              (0.01)        (0.02)            (0.02)
     Age of the song         -12.787∗∗∗          -12.626∗∗∗    -11.614∗∗∗        -11.510∗∗∗
                              (4.14)              (3.79)        (2.89)            (2.81)
                       2
     (Age of the song)       169.008∗∗∗          171.401∗∗∗    186.377∗∗∗        187.914∗∗∗
40




                             (57.40)             (54.32)       (43.54)           (43.08)

     Genre Fixed Effects              X              X             X                X
     Origin Fixed Effects             X              X             X                X
     Instruments                       -         ln(Pop)         ln(N)       Sums of Age,
                                                                             Origin, Genre

     R2                            0.872          0.871          0.806            0.794
     No. of Obs.                 10800378       10800378       10800378         10800378
     †
        All specifications use 2011 data and include variables measuring artists’ past sales,
        artists’ age and its squared, an indicator for new artists, and time since last release.
        Specification (OLS) uses OLS. Specifications (1), (2), and (3) use ln(population),
        ln(number of products), and BLP-style instruments, respectively. Standard errors are
        clustered on country level and are in parenthesis.
     ∗
        Significant at the 10% level.
     ∗∗
         Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗
          Significant at the 1% level.
                          Table 4: Forecasting Model

                                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
                                Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.
ln(sales in t-1)                 141.575∗∗∗ 91.731∗∗∗ 69.240∗∗∗ 65.174∗∗∗
                                 (53.85)       (0.96)      (0.89)       (0.78)
                                         ∗∗                       ∗∗∗
ln(sales in t-2)                  -5.858       -1.420      -4.633      -12.153∗∗∗
                                  (2.81)       (1.13)      (1.03)       (0.89)
                                          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
ln(sales in t-3)                 -15.727      -13.757     -10.377       -3.885∗∗∗
                                  (6.09)       (1.13)      (1.04)       (0.86)
ln(sales in t-4)                  -7.860∗∗     -4.769∗∗∗ -2.631∗∗       0.040
                                  (3.06)       (1.11)      (1.02)       (0.66)
ln(sales in t-5)                  -8.509∗      -0.103      -4.858∗∗∗
                                  (4.58)       (0.84)      (0.77)
                                         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
Years Since Last Release          40.745      14.557       9.757∗∗∗     8.609∗∗∗
                                 (15.81)       (0.77)      (0.70)       (0.56)
                                                      ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
Artist’s Age                      -2.041      -14.678     -11.257      -12.617∗∗∗
                                  (5.98)       (0.41)      (0.38)       (0.34)
(Artist’s Age)2                   -0.056        0.161∗∗∗   0.122∗∗∗     0.152∗∗∗
                                  (0.08)       (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)
New Artist                        1.254∗∗∗      0.834∗∗∗   0.614∗∗∗     0.453∗∗∗
                                  (0.48)       (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)

Genre Fixed Effects                  X              X             X              X
Origin Fixed Effects                 X              X             X              X
Label Fixed Effects                  ✗              ✗             X              X

R2                                  -             0.238         0.411          0.403
Prediction R2                     0.196           0.238         0.411          0.323
No. of Obs.                     10800378         134241        134241         156411
†
   Specification (1) reports the estimates of the coefficients on the prediction variables
   from the one-step estimation approach using 2011 data. Column (1) reports the
   coefficients on the interactions of vintage-2011 US dummies with the variables of
   interest. Columns (2) and (3) use 2011 data and songs from vintage 2011. Column
   (4) uses 2010 data and songs from vintage 2010. The predicted δ’s are constructed
   for the vintage 2011 songs in all specifications. The prediction R2 is computed as
   the square of the correlation between the realized δ’s in 2011 and their prediction.
   Standard errors are clustered on country level and are in parenthesis.
∗
   Significant at the 10% level.
∗∗
    Significant at the 5% level.
∗∗∗
     Significant at the 1% level.




                                          41
                 Table 5: Fixed Costs of Entry.†



Regime                 Perfect         Imperfect              No
                      Foresight      Predictability      Predictability


Counterfactual          133.97           1792.23            10521.81

Status Quo                6.09            18.97              9467.89

†
    Fixed costs are estimated as the expected US digital single revenue
    of the last entering product, scaled up to the size of the entire US
    recorded music market in 2011. Status quo refers to the set of prod-
    ucts available in the US in 2011, while counterfactual models the
    choice set if digitization had not occurred, referring to simulations in
    which the bottom two thirds of vintage-2011 products, by expected
    revenue, are removed from the choice set. Under perfect foresight,
    products are ordered by realized revenue. Under our main model,
    imperfect predictability, products are ordered by expected revenue.
    With the no prediction model, products are ordered randomly (so
    that the counterfactual choice set has one third of actual vintage-
    2011 products, chosen at random). All figures are in $US 2011.




                                    42
                                                    Table 6: Counterfactual Results.†

     Regime                         ∆CS       ∆CS Ratio       ∆Rev      ∆Rev Ratio       ∆T C.     ∆T C Ratio        ∆W       ∆W Ratio

     Perfect Foresight              0.51            1          0.51            1          -5.18          1           6.20          1

     Imperfect Predictability       10.09         19.82        10.09        19.82        -51.55        9.96         71.72        11.57
43




     No Predictability              152.42       299.48       153.16        300.93       800.16      -154.54       -494.58       -79.82

     †
         ∆CS is the change in CS from the tripling of the vintage-2011 products made possible by digitization. The three regimes differ
         by which products are in the counterfactual (no digitization) choice set. Perfect foresight adds products with the lowest realized
         quality, while imperfect predictability adds products with the lowest expected quality. The no predictability regime adds products
         that are as good, on average, as the products that would be available without digitization. “∆CS Ratio” reports ∆CS relative to the
         perfect foresight estimate that corresponds to the traditional long tail. ∆Rev, ∆T C, ∆W , and the corresponding ratios are defined
         analogously. T C is the fixed cost per product times the number of entering products.
B     Appendix

B.1     Scaling of Benefits from New Products

Our empirical approach provides us with an estimate of the benefits experienced by con-
sumers in 2011 from the vintage-2011 products made possible by digitization. During 2011,
US consumers also enjoyed additional new products released in 2010, 2009, 2008, and so on,
back to 2000 if one were to mark the onset of digitization following Napster. To construct an
estimate of the additional benefit that consumers experience in 2011 from all of the songs in
the 2011 choice set made available by digitization, define nv as the number of new (digitally
enabled) songs from vintage v, and define sv as the share of year-2011 sales of all songs from
vintage v. We know that the new digitally enabled vintage-2011 songs account for $10.09
million in consumer surplus. If the digitally enabled songs of previous vintages v are on
average as valuable as the vintage-2011 songs at release, then the contribution of vintage-
v songs to year-2011 CS should be roughly proportional to the vintage-2011 contribution.
Then we can estimate the contributions of earlier vintages to year-2011 consumer surplus
              nv    sv
as ∆CSv =    n2011 s2011
                         ∆CS2011 .   If the vintages since 2000 include the digitally enabled new
songs, then we can estimate the total benefit of these songs by inflating the original $10.09
           P
million by 2011        nv s v
             v=2000 n2011 s2011 .


We can observe Nv , the total number of new products from each vintage, directly from the
2006-2011 sales data (total including both digitally enabled and others). For earlier years, we
can infer the number of new products released each year from the number of older products
selling during 2006-2011. In each calendar year’s sales data we see the number of products
sold in that year originally released at each previous vintage. For example we could use the
number of products from each vintage sold in 2011 as an index of the number of products
released at each vintage. The only shortcoming of that approach is that some products from
prior vintages will not show up in the sales data for each year; and just as sales tend to drop
off over time, the probability of selling at least one copy may drop off.

A simple solution to this problem is to get a measure of the number of products from each
vintage, controlling for age. To this end, define Ntv as the number of products from vintage
v sold in year t, with age therefore given by t − v. Then we can run the following regression



                                                  44
on the US data, 2006-2011:



                                    log(Ntv ) = θt−v + γv + ǫtv ,                               (15)


where θt−v are flexible age effects, γv are vintage effects, and ǫtv is an idiosyncratic error. Then
cv = eγv . Figure B.4 compares this index of the N
N                                                cv (implied new songs) with the number of

songs for which the vintage equals the calendar year for 2006-2011. These estimates stand
at 30,000 in 1999, hover around 45,000 until 2002, then rise: to 78,000 in 2003, to 156,000
in 2005, and reach a peak of 157,000 in 2009. The figure also includes a horizontal line at
the implied number of songs first released in 1999. With the estimates of Nv , we can then
estimate nv for each vintage as the number released in each year less the number released
in the last pre-digitization year. That is, nv = Nv − N1999 . We estimate the inflation factor
P2011        nv s v
   v=2000 n2011 s2011 to be 4.31. This is a rough estimate for a variety of reasons, including that

consumer surplus is not linear in the number of products, due to decreasing marginal utility.



B.2     Fixed Costs Adjustment

Our fixed costs estimates are derived from year-2011 expected revenue of new-vintage-2011
songs and therefore only reflect expected first-year song revenue. While these fixed costs
estimates are consistent with our revenue estimates, one may still want to adjust them
to account for all sources of revenues. In particular, we consider the additional revenue
obtained from the remaining life of the song. For this purpose, we are interested in the share
of sales occurring in each year of a song’s life. Using our data for 2006-2011, we can directly
observe the sales of a vintage-2006 song in 2006-2011, but this does not tell us how much
of the sales occur after the sixth year. We can estimate the share of sales by age using an
approach analogous to the approach above. That is, we can run the following regression:
log(qtv ) = θt−v + γt + ǫtv , where qtv is the quantity of year-t sales that are for songs of vintage
v, γt is a dummy for calendar year t, and other variables are as above. By exponentiating
θt−v we get an index of the sales at each song age. In our data, sales decay with age. Sales
shares for songs over 50 years old tend to be quite small. We can accurately estimate the
                                       sa
share of lifetime sales at age a as   80
                                                 .
                                      X
                                            sa
                                      a=0



                                                     45
Using our data, the share of sales occurring in the first calendar year of release is 18.3
percent, followed by 20.6 percent in the second year, 9.4 percent in the third, 6.4 percent in
the fourth, and 4.9 percent in the fifth.



B.3     Investors’ Forecasting Ability

Using a forecasting model based on 2011 data allows for a more conservative measure of
investors’ ability to forecast quality. Using a similar approach as the one detailed in Section
7.4 of the text, Figure B.6 depicts the relationships between ∆CSIP and the ∆CS ratio and
the R2 using forecasts derived from the 2011 data.



B.4     Alternative Demand Model Specifications

Tables B.7 and B.8 present the results of estimating our demand model by excluding some of
the prediction-related observables and using different sets of instruments. Tables B.11 and
B.12 present the results of estimating demand using data on years 2006 to 2011 separately.
Tables B.9 and B.10 present the results of estimating demand using data on years 2006
to 2011 separately and on the pooled data 2006-2011 using a randomly drawn 5% sample.
Note that the estimates of σ in Table B.10 (using the 5% random sample) are identical to
the ones obtained in Table B.12 using the full sample. Table B.13 presents the results of
estimating two-level nested logit models with genre as nests and using functions of product
characteristics within nests as instruments.



B.5     Market Size Definition

Table B.14 presents the results of using various measures of market size. Using both total
and Internet-connected population, we consider measures ranging from half our baseline
value of 12 ×population to twice that baseline. For each market size definition, the table
shows the corresponding estimate of σ as well as the corresponding counterfactual results.
We also calculate the counterfactuals based on the 2010 quality forecast and on the 2011
quality forecast separately. For each forecasting model, our estimates of the ∆CS ratio are
identical across the various market size definitions used.


                                               46
                                                                  New Songs Since 1999
                                180
                                170
                                160
Number of songs, in thousands




                                150
                                140
                                130
                                120
                                110
                                100
                                 90
                                 80
                                 70
                                 60
                                 50
                                 40
                                 30
                                 20
                                      1999   2000   2001   2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011
                                                                                 year

                                                    Implied new songs                     Songs selling in release year



                                              Figure B.4: New Songs Released, by Vintage.




                                                                            47
                                                                  Music sales by age
                         .2

                        .18

                        .16
  Sales’ share by age




                        .14

                        .12

                         .1

                        .08

                        .06

                        .04

                        .02

                         0
                               0   2    4    6    8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50
                                                                          Music age



                                                      Figure B.5: Music Sales, by Age.




                                             ∆CS Ratio, ∆CSIP, and Prediction R
                                                                                                        2

                                                  Forecasting Model Relying on 2011 Data
                        14                                                                                            7


                        12                                                                                            6


                        10                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                          ∆CSIP in millions
∆CS Ratio




                         8                                                                                            4


                         6                                                                                            3


                         4                                                                                            2


                         2                                                                                            1


                         0                                                                                            0
                              .4       .45       .5    .55   .6     .65    .7   .75   .8    .85    .9       .95   1
                                                                                 2
                                                                     Prediction R

                                                                  ∆CS Ratio                ∆CSIP



                                                      Figure B.6: ∆CS Ratio and R2 .




                                                                          48
                                             Table B.7: Demand Estimation: First Stage

                                      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
                                  Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.
     Log(Population)                -0.946∗∗∗  -0.946∗∗∗  -1.173∗∗∗
                                    (0.12)     (0.12)     (0.13)
     Log(Number of songs)                                            -1.829∗∗∗  -1.829∗∗∗  -2.289∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.08)     (0.08)     (0.12)
     Sum of songs’ ages                                                                               -0.012∗∗∗  -0.012∗∗∗  -0.013∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
     Nb of songs from DE                                                                               0.133∗∗∗   0.134∗∗∗   0.158∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
     Nb of songs from FR                                                                              -0.131∗∗∗  -0.130∗∗∗  -0.166∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
     Nb of songs from UK                                                                               0.124∗∗∗   0.125∗∗∗   0.154∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
     Nb of songs from US                                                                              -0.488∗∗∗  -0.488∗∗∗  -0.554∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)
     Nb of songs from ES                                                                              -0.767∗∗∗  -0.768∗∗∗  -0.868∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.07)
     Nb of Electronic songs                                                                           -1.839∗∗∗  -1.840∗∗∗  -2.157∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.07)     (0.07)     (0.09)
     Nb of Jazz songs                                                                                  0.450∗∗∗   0.451∗∗∗   0.497∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.06)
     Nb of Pop/Rock songs                                                                              0.216∗∗∗   0.215∗∗∗   0.237∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
     Nb of Rap/R&B songs                                                                               0.497∗∗∗   0.496∗∗∗   0.607∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.04)
     Nb of other genres’ songs                                                                         0.620∗∗∗   0.619∗∗∗   0.689∗∗∗
49




                                                                                                      (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.05)
     Share of Digital Sales         -1.890∗    -1.881∗    -2.498∗∗   -1.372∗∗∗  -1.364∗∗∗  -2.061∗∗∗   1.084∗∗∗   1.086∗∗∗   1.072∗∗∗
                                    (0.97)     (0.97)     (1.16)     (0.36)     (0.36)     (0.49)     (0.24)     (0.24)     (0.36)
     GDP per capita                -18.761    -18.789    -23.154     6.529∗∗∗    6.496∗∗∗   9.072∗∗∗ -20.580∗∗∗ -20.595∗∗∗ -23.296∗∗∗
                                   (12.93)    (12.92)    (15.28)     (2.30)     (2.29)     (2.48)     (1.19)     (1.19)     (1.70)
     Urban Population               -0.007     -0.007     -0.009     0.006      0.006      0.007      0.030∗∗∗    0.030∗∗∗   0.036∗∗∗
                                    (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.00)     (0.01)     (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)
     Age of the song                 9.850∗∗    9.467∗∗  -16.818∗∗∗   7.915      7.836∗   -22.334∗∗∗   7.823∗∗∗   7.749∗∗∗ -23.698∗∗∗
                                    (4.62)     (4.42)     (3.18)     (4.87)     (4.63)     (1.74)     (2.54)     (2.58)     (1.47)
     (Age of the song)2              9.902      5.999    311.673∗∗∗ 26.012     17.811     368.587∗∗∗ 26.598     18.140     386.088∗∗∗
                                   (64.86)    (59.35)    (45.28)    (66.30)    (60.29)    (30.39)    (35.92)    (34.18)    (31.57)
     Years Since Last Release                  -0.008∗∗∗   0.020∗∗∗             -0.009∗∗∗   0.023∗∗∗             -0.009∗∗∗   0.024∗∗∗
                                               (0.00)     (0.00)                (0.00)     (0.00)                (0.00)     (0.00)
     Artist’s Age                               0.009∗∗∗  -0.016∗∗∗              0.008∗∗∗  -0.021∗∗∗              0.008∗∗∗  -0.022∗∗∗
                                               (0.00)     (0.00)                (0.00)     (0.00)                (0.00)     (0.00)
     (Artist’s Age)2                           -0.000∗∗∗   0.000                -0.000∗∗∗   0.000∗∗∗             -0.000∗∗∗   0.000∗∗
                                               (0.00)     (0.00)                (0.00)     (0.00)                (0.00)     (0.00)
     New Artist                                -0.008      0.310∗∗∗             -0.026      0.338∗∗∗             -0.025      0.348∗∗∗
                                               (0.02)     (0.06)                (0.02)     (0.05)                (0.03)     (0.02)

     Artists’ Past Sales              ✗            ✗            X            ✗             ✗           X             ✗            ✗          X
     F-Stat excl. instr            61.100        61.112       76.488      466.226       467.214      385.021     2027.350      2053.321    818.643
     P-value                        0.007         0.007        0.004       0.003         0.003        0.001        0.000         0.000      0.000

     No. of Obs.                  10800378     10800378     10800378      10800378     10800378     10800378     10800378     10800378     10800378
     † All specifications include genre and origin fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered on country level and are in parenthesis.
     ∗ Significant at the 10% level.
     ∗∗ Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗ Significant at the 1% level.
                                                             Table B.8: Demand Estimation

                                   (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)                   (7)               (8)              (9)
                                Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.             Coef./s.e.       Coef./s.e.       Coef./s.e.
     Ln(inside share)             0.645∗∗∗    0.645∗∗∗  0.751∗∗∗   0.415∗∗∗    0.415∗∗∗  0.533∗∗∗               0.383∗∗∗         0.383∗∗∗         0.511∗∗∗
                                  (0.13)     (0.13)     (0.10)     (0.11)     (0.11)     (0.09)                 (0.06)           (0.06)           (0.05)
     Share of Digital Sales       2.972∗∗     2.974∗∗   2.889∗∗    1.369       1.373      1.205                 1.146∗∗          1.151∗∗          1.032∗
                                  (1.26)     (1.26)     (1.30)     (1.05)     (1.05)     (1.07)                 (0.57)           (0.56)           (0.57)
     GDP per capita              20.645∗    20.635∗    20.745∗    28.282∗∗∗ 28.263∗∗∗ 28.716∗∗∗                29.343∗∗∗        29.320∗∗∗        29.534∗∗∗
                                 (11.62)    (11.62)    (11.73)     (7.66)     (7.66)     (7.51)                 (3.90)           (3.90)           (3.88)
     Urban Population             0.007       0.007      0.006     0.003       0.003      0.003                 0.003            0.003             0.003
                                  (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)                 (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)
     Age of the song              0.675       0.919    -12.626∗∗∗ 3.549        3.574    -11.614∗∗∗              3.948∗∗          3.942∗∗         -11.510∗∗∗
                                  (2.41)     (2.27)     (3.79)     (3.05)     (2.91)     (2.89)                 (1.69)           (1.71)           (1.64)
     (Age of the song)2          27.874     20.485     171.401∗∗∗ 29.859     22.048     186.377∗∗∗             30.135           22.264           187.914∗∗∗
                                 (26.48)    (23.70)    (54.32)    (40.29)    (36.19)    (43.54)                (23.92)          (22.60)          (27.22)
     Years Since Last Release                -0.003∗∗∗   0.010∗∗∗             -0.005∗∗∗   0.011∗∗∗                               -0.005∗∗∗         0.011∗∗∗
                                             (0.00)     (0.00)                (0.00)     (0.00)                                  (0.00)           (0.00)
                                                        -0.011∗∗∗              0.004∗∗   -0.011∗∗∗                               0.004∗∗∗         -0.011∗∗∗
50




     Artist’s Age                             0.002
                                             (0.00)     (0.00)                (0.00)     (0.00)                                  (0.00)           (0.00)
     (Artist’s Age)2                         -0.000      0.000∗∗∗             -0.000∗∗∗  0.000∗∗∗                                -0.000∗∗∗        0.000∗∗∗
                                             (0.00)     (0.00)                (0.00)     (0.00)                                  (0.00)           (0.00)
     New Artist                              -0.022∗    0.124∗∗∗              -0.012     0.164∗∗∗                                -0.010            0.168∗∗∗
                                             (0.01)     (0.04)                (0.01)     (0.03)                                  (0.02)           (0.02)

     Artists’ Past Sales            ✗            ✗           X            ✗            ✗           X              ✗                ✗                X
     Instruments                   Pop          Pop         Pop           N            N           N        Sum of Age,      Sum of Age,      Sum of Age,
                                                                                                            Origin, Genre    Origin, Genre    Origin, Genre

     R2                           0.821        0.821        0.871       0.684        0.685        0.806         0.657            0.657            0.794
     No. of Obs.                10800378     10800378     10800378    10800378     10800378     10800378      10800378         10800378         10800378
     †
       All specifications use 2011 data. Specifications (1) to (3) use log(population) as an instrument. Specifications (4) to (6) use log(number of products)
       as an instrument. Specifications (7) to (9) use and BLP-style instruments. All specifications include genre and origin fixed effects. Standard errors
       are clustered on country and year and are in parenthesis.
     ∗
       Significant at the 10% level.
     ∗∗
        Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗
         Significant at the 1% level.
                            Table B.9: Demand Estimation by Year Using 5% Sample - First Stage

                                          (2006)       (2007)           (2008)          (2009)        (2010)          (2011)           (All)
                                         Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.         Coef./s.e.     Coef./s.e.     Coef./s.e.      Coef./s.e.     Coef./s.e.
     ln(Population)                        -0.948∗∗∗ -1.072∗∗∗           -0.995∗∗∗      -0.892∗∗∗      -1.039∗∗∗       -1.173∗∗∗      -1.048∗∗∗
                                           (0.18)       (0.19)           (0.16)         (0.12)         (0.13)          (0.13)         (0.06)
     Share of Digital Sales                -2.809       -5.423           -4.756∗∗       -5.169∗∗∗      -3.592∗∗∗       -2.498∗∗       -3.394∗∗∗
                                           (5.49)       (3.39)           (1.89)         (1.13)         (1.09)          (1.16)         (0.63)
     GDP per capita                       -50.618∗∗ -46.960∗∗           -26.409∗∗      -15.988        -23.839         -23.154        -26.030∗∗∗
                                          (20.45)      (19.45)          (10.90)        (17.93)        (17.28)         (15.28)         (6.94)
     Urban Population                      -0.025∗∗     -0.019           -0.009         -0.013         -0.010          -0.009         -0.014∗∗
                                           (0.01)       (0.01)           (0.02)         (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.02)         (0.01)
                                                  ∗∗∗
     Age of the song                      36.733        -8.919∗∗∗       -12.333∗∗∗     -18.741∗∗∗     -20.615∗∗∗      -16.818∗∗∗      -7.571∗∗
                                          (10.49)       (2.65)           (3.45)         (3.22)         (3.06)          (3.18)         (3.64)
     (Age of the song)2                  -550.749  ∗∗∗
                                                       155.274∗∗∗       228.031∗∗∗     338.995∗∗∗     372.231∗∗∗      311.673∗∗∗     164.265∗∗∗
51




                                         (192.68)      (49.53)          (51.85)        (46.77)        (44.27)         (45.28)        (55.82)

     Genre Fixed Effects                      X              X              X              X              X               X              X
     Origin Fixed Effects                     X              X              X              X              X               X              X
     Year Fixed Effects                       -              -              -              -              -               -              X
     F-Stat excluded instruments           27.928         30.987         39.779         54.236         68.109          76.488        334.889
     P-value                               0.000           0.000         0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000          0.000

     No. of Obs.                          4692314        6793747        8305237        9851671        10384869       10800378        2541411
     †
        For each year, we use a randomly drawn 5 % sample of the underlying full data. All specifications include variables measuring
        artists’ past sales, artists’ age and its squared, an indicator for new artists, and time since last release. Specification (All) includes
        all years 2006-2011. Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered on country level for specifications (2006) to (2011), and on
        country and year level for specification (All).
     ∗
        Significant at the 10% level.
     ∗∗
         Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗
          Significant at the 1% level.
                                 Table B.10: Demand Estimation by Year Using 5% Sample

                                    (2006)      (2007)      (2008)      (2009)     (2010)     (2011)        (All)
                                   Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.
           s
     ln( 1−sj 0 )                    0.756∗∗∗    0.841∗∗∗     0.919∗∗∗   1.031∗∗∗   0.857∗∗∗   0.751∗∗∗    0.748∗∗∗
                                     (0.19)     (0.16)       (0.14)      (0.13)    (0.11)      (0.10)      (0.06)
     Share of Digital Sales         12.273∗∗     9.033∗∗      7.190∗∗∗   7.731∗∗∗   4.643∗∗∗   2.889∗∗     3.938∗∗∗
                                     (6.16)     (4.04)       (2.40)      (1.68)    (1.39)      (1.30)      (0.79)
     GDP per capita                 57.462∗∗∗ 46.248∗∗∗ 28.429∗∗∗ 20.672           24.530∗    20.745∗      29.159∗∗∗
                                    (18.95)    (13.61)       (9.33)     (17.21)   (13.97)     (11.73)      (5.95)
                                           ∗
     Urban Population                0.020       0.014        0.004      0.015      0.009      0.006       0.012∗
                                     (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)
                                                       ∗∗∗          ∗∗                    ∗∗          ∗∗∗
     Age of the song                 4.727      -8.191       -8.844      -6.219    -9.868     -12.626      -9.800∗∗∗
                                     (8.07)     (2.81)       (4.07)      (3.93)    (3.91)      (3.79)      (1.61)
     (Age of the song)2             -68.313    117.814  ∗∗∗
                                                            123.094  ∗∗
                                                                        74.714    137.836  ∗∗
                                                                                              171.401 ∗∗∗
                                                                                                          146.667∗∗∗
52




                                   (124.77)    (43.29)      (61.76)     (61.29)   (60.42)     (54.32)     (21.08)

     Genre Fixed Effects                X              X              X              X              X              X              X
     Origin Fixed Effects               X              X              X              X              X              X              X
     Year Fixed Effects                -              -              -              -              -              -               X
     Instruments                    ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)

     R2                              0.876          0.912          0.897          0.872          0.893          0.871          0.868
     No. of Obs.                    4692314        6793747        8305237        9851671       10384869       10800378        2541411
      †
         For each year, we use a randomly drawn 5 % sample of the underlying full data. All specifications include variables mea-
         suring artists’ past sales, artists’ age and its squared, an indicator for new artists, and time since last release. Specification
         (All) includes all years 2006-2011. Standard errors are in parenthesis and clustered on country level for specifications
         (2006) to (2011), and on country and year level for specification (All).
      ∗
         Significant at the 10% level.
      ∗∗
          Significant at the 5% level.
      ∗∗∗
           Significant at the 1% level.
                              Table B.11: Demand Estimation by Year - First Stage

                                        (2006)        (2007)         (2008)         (2009)          (2010)       (2011)
                                       Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.        Coef./s.e.     Coef./s.e.     Coef./s.e.    Coef./s.e.
     ln(Population)                      -0.948∗∗∗ -1.072∗∗∗          -0.995∗∗∗      -0.892∗∗∗      -1.039∗∗∗     -1.173∗∗∗
                                         (0.18)       (0.19)          (0.16)         (0.12)         (0.13)        (0.13)
     Share of Digital Sales              -2.809       -5.423          -4.756∗∗       -5.169∗∗∗      -3.592∗∗∗     -2.498∗∗
                                         (5.49)       (3.39)          (1.89)         (1.13)         (1.09)        (1.16)
                                                ∗∗
     GDP per capita                     -50.618      -46.960∗∗       -26.409∗∗      -15.988        -23.839       -23.154
                                        (20.45)      (19.45)         (10.90)        (17.93)        (17.28)       (15.28)
     Urban Population                    -0.025∗∗     -0.019          -0.009         -0.013         -0.010        -0.009
                                         (0.01)       (0.01)          (0.02)         (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.02)
     Age of the song                    36.733∗∗∗ -8.919∗∗∗          -12.333∗∗∗     -18.741∗∗∗     -20.615∗∗∗    -16.818∗∗∗
                                        (10.49)       (2.65)          (3.45)         (3.22)         (3.06)        (3.18)
53




     (Age of the song)2                -550.749  ∗∗∗
                                                     155.274∗∗∗      228.031∗∗∗     338.995∗∗∗     372.231∗∗∗    311.673∗∗∗
                                       (192.68)      (49.53)         (51.85)        (46.77)        (44.27)       (45.28)

     Genre Fixed Effects                    X              X             X              X             X              X
     Origin Fixed Effects                   X              X             X              X             X              X
     F-Stat excluded instruments         27.928         30.987        39.779         54.236         68.109        76.488
     P-value                              0.000         0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000

     No. of Obs.                        4692314        6793747       8305237        9851671       10384869       10800378
     †
        All specifications include variables measuring artists’ past sales, artists’ age and its squared, an indicator for new
        artists, and time since last release. Standard errors are clustered on country level and in parenthesis.
     ∗
        Significant at the 10% level.
     ∗∗
         Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗
          Significant at the 1% level.
                                    Table B.12: Demand Estimation by Year

                             (2006)     (2007)        (2008)     (2009)       (2010)     (2011)
                            Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.
          s
     ln( 1−sj 0 )             0.756∗∗∗   0.841∗∗∗      0.919∗∗∗    1.031∗∗∗    0.857∗∗∗   0.751∗∗∗
                              (0.19)     (0.16)       (0.14)      (0.13)      (0.11)      (0.10)
                                     ∗∗        ∗∗            ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
     Share of Digital Sales  12.273      9.033         7.190       7.731       4.643      2.889∗∗
                              (6.16)     (4.04)       (2.40)      (1.68)      (1.39)      (1.30)
     GDP per capita          57.462∗∗∗ 46.248∗∗∗ 28.429∗∗∗ 20.672             24.530∗    20.745∗
                             (18.95)    (13.61)       (9.33)     (17.21)     (13.97)     (11.73)
     Urban Population         0.020∗     0.014         0.004       0.015       0.009      0.006
                              (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)
                                                ∗∗∗          ∗∗                      ∗∗
     Age of the song          4.727      -8.191       -8.844      -6.219      -9.868     -12.626∗∗∗
                              (8.07)     (2.81)       (4.07)      (3.93)      (3.91)      (3.79)
54




                       2                         ∗∗∗          ∗∗                      ∗∗
     (Age of the song)       -68.313    117.814      123.094     74.714      137.836     171.401∗∗∗
                            (124.77)    (43.29)      (61.76)     (61.29)     (60.42)     (54.32)

     Genre Fixed Effects              X              X              X              X              X              X
     Origin Fixed Effects             X              X              X              X              X              X
     Instruments                   ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)       ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)        ln(Pop)

     R2                             0.876         0.912          0.897          0.872          0.893          0.871
     No. of Obs.                   4692314       6793747        8305237        9851671       10384869       10800378
     †
        All specifications include variables measuring artists’ past sales, artists’ age and its squared, an indicator for
        new artists, and time since last release. Standard errors are clustered on country level and in parenthesis.
     ∗
        Significant at the 10% level.
     ∗∗
         Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗
          Significant at the 1% level.
                                                               Table B.13: 2-level Nested Logit

                                      (1)        (2)                       (3)                         (4)                    (5)                   (6)
                                  Coef./s.e. Coef./s.e.                 Coef./s.e.                   Coef./s.e.            Coef./s.e.            Coef./s.e.
     ln(sj /sg )                    0.837∗∗∗    0.811∗∗∗                 0.541∗∗∗                     0.567∗∗∗               0.388∗∗∗              0.430∗∗∗
                                    (0.03)     (0.04)                    (0.06)                       (0.06)                 (0.06)                (0.06)
                                          ∗∗∗
     ln(sg /s0 )                    0.787       0.761∗∗∗                 0.354∗∗                      0.393∗∗∗               0.192                 0.248∗∗
                                    (0.09)     (0.09)                    (0.14)                       (0.13)                 (0.14)                (0.12)
     Share of Digital Sales         4.662∗∗∗    4.122∗∗∗                 2.719∗∗∗                     2.889∗∗∗               1.153∗                1.451∗∗
                                    (0.49)     (0.54)                    (0.56)                       (0.56)                 (0.60)                (0.59)
     GDP per capita                           15.185∗∗                                                                      29.282∗∗∗             27.864∗∗∗
                                               (6.98)                                                                        (4.11)                (4.38)
     Urban Population                           0.009                                                                        0.003                 0.004
                                               (0.01)                                                                        (0.01)                (0.01)
     Age of the song                -1.851∗    -1.960∗∗                   1.403                        1.127                 2.474                 2.019
                                    (0.94)     (0.93)                     (1.60)                       (1.58)                (1.83)                (1.77)
     (Age of the song)2            32.398  ∗∗
                                              34.875∗∗                   45.414∗                      44.114∗               52.550∗               50.938∗∗
55




                                   (16.31)    (15.87)                    (24.67)                      (24.47)               (27.02)               (25.84)

     Genre Fixed Effects               X             X                     X                            X                      X                    X
     Origin Fixed Effects              X             X                     X                            X                      X                    X
     Instruments (sums of)                                              Origin,                    Age, Origin,             Origin,            Age, Origin,
                                                               Origin within broad genre        Age within broad         Origin within      Age within broad
                                                                      broad genre              genre, Origin within      broad genre       genre, Origin within
                                                                                                   broad genre                                 broad genre

     P-val: Equal coeff test        0.536          0.496                  0.152                        0.146                 0.111                 0.089
     R2                             0.835          0.849                  0.733                        0.750                 0.656                 0.693
     No. of Obs.                  10800378       10800378               10800378                     10800378              10800378              10800378
     †
       All specifications use 2011 data and correspond to the two-level nested logit model using genres as nests. Specifications (1) and (2) use OLS, specifications
        (3) to (6) use IV estimation. Standard errors are clustered on country and year and are in parenthesis.
     ∗
        Significant at the 10% level.
     ∗∗
         Significant at the 5% level.
     ∗∗∗
          Significant at the 1% level.
                                               Table B.14: Counterfactual Results and Market Size Definition.†

     Market Size           Regime                                         σ      ∆CS     ∆CS Ratio   ∆Rev    ∆Rev Ratio   ∆T C.     ∆T C Ratio   ∆W       ∆W Ratio

     12 × Internet Users   Imperfect Predictability - 2010 Forecasting   0.720   9.93      19.82     9.94      19.83      -77.65      15.00      97.52      15.78

     12 × Internet Users   Imperfect Predictability - 2011 Forecasting   0.720   6.53      13.03     6.53      13.03      -51.55       9.96      64.61      10.46

     12 × Internet Users   Perfect Foresight                             0.720   0.50        1       0.50        1         -5.18        1         6.18       1

     12 × Population       Imperfect Predictability - 2010 Forecasting   0.751   10.09     19.82     10.09     19.82      -77.65      15.00      97.83      15.79

     12 × Population       Imperfect Predictability - 2011 Forecasting   0.751   6.63      13.03     6.63      13.03      -51.55       9.96      64.81      10.46

     12 × Population       Perfect Foresight                             0.751   0.51        1       0.51        1         -5.18        1         6.20       1

     24 × Internet Users   Imperfect Predictability - 2010 Forecasting   0.749   11.79     19.82     11.80     19.82      -38.82      17.80      62.40      18.52

     24 × Internet Users   Imperfect Predictability - 2011 Forecasting   0.749   7.75      13.03     7.75      13.03      -25.77      11.82      41.28      12.25

     24 × Internet Users   Perfect Foresight                             0.749   0.60        1       0.60        1         -2.18        1         3.37       1

     24 × Population       Imperfect Predictability - 2010 Forecasting   0.770   11.37     19.82     11.38     19.82      -38.82      17.80      61.57      18.50
56




     24 × Population       Imperfect Predictability - 2011 Forecasting   0.770   7.48      13.03     7.48      13.03      -25.77      11.82      40.73      12.24

     24 × Population       Perfect Foresight                             0.770   0.57        1       0.57        1         -2.18        1         3.33       1

     6 × Internet Users    Imperfect Predictability - 2010 Forecasting   0.596   5.07      19.83     5.08      19.85      -155.41     13.91      165.57     14.17

     6 × Internet Users    Imperfect Predictability - 2011 Forecasting   0.596   3.34      13.03     3.34      13.04      -103.14      9.23      109.81     9.40

     6 × Internet Users    Perfect Foresight                             0.596   0.26        1       0.26        1        -11.17        1        11.69       1

     6 × Population        Imperfect Predictability - 2010 Forecasting   0.690   7.04      19.82     7.04      19.83      -155.37     13.91      169.45     14.26

     6 × Population        Imperfect Predictability - 2011 Forecasting   0.690   4.63      13.03     4.63      13.03      -103.12      9.23      112.37     9.46

     6 × Population        Perfect Foresight                             0.690   0.36        1       0.36        1        -11.17        1        11.88       1

     †   ∆CS is the change in CS from the tripling of the vintage-2011 products made possible by digitization. The three regimes differ by which
         products are in the counterfactual (no digitization) choice set. Perfect foresight adds products with the lowest realized quality, while imperfect
         predictability adds products with the lowest expected quality. In the 2011 (2010) Forecasting rows of the table, expected quality is constructed
         using the forecasting model relying on 2011 (2010) data (see columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 in the main text, respectively). “∆CS Ratio” reports
         ∆CS relative to the perfect foresight estimate that corresponds to the traditional long tail. ∆Rev, ∆T C, ∆W , and the corresponding ratios are
         defined analogously. T C is the fixed cost per product times the number of entering products.
