NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAKING STOCK OF THE EVIDENCE ON MICRO-FINANCIAL INTERVENTIONS
Francisco J. Buera
Joseph P. Kaboski
Yongseok Shin
Working Paper 22674
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22674

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

We thank our discussant, Stephen Smith, Oriana Bandiera, and the conference participants for
useful comments and suggestions. All errors remain our own. The views expressed here do not
necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and St. Louis, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22674.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taking Stock of the Evidence on Micro-Financial Interventions
Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 22674
September 2016
JEL No. O1,O11,O12,O16
ABSTRACT
We review the empirical evidence on microfinance and asset grants to the ultra poor or
microentrepreneurs, and assess our ability to account for this evidence using quantitative theory.
Properly executed, these interventions can help segments of the population increase their income
and consumption, but neither the empirical micro nor quantitative macro literatures give much
reason to believe that such interventions can lead to wide-scale, transformative impacts akin to
escaping aggregate poverty traps.
Francisco J. Buera
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South La Salle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
francisco.buera@chi.frb.org
Joseph P. Kaboski
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu

Yongseok Shin
Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
yshin@wustl.edu

Taking Stock of the Evidence on
Micro-Financial Interventions∗
Francisco J. Buera†

Joseph P. Kaboski‡

Yongseok Shin§

September 2016

Abstract
We review the empirical evidence on microfinance and asset grants to the ultra
poor or microentrepreneurs, and assess our ability to account for this evidence using
quantitative theory. Properly executed, these interventions can help segments of the
population increase their income and consumption, but neither literature gives much
reason to believe that such interventions can lead to wide-scale, transformative impacts
akin to escaping aggregate poverty traps.

1

Introduction

The past decade of empirical development research has produced a host of highly insightful,
well-identified evaluations of the impacts of micro-financial interventions. These interventions include microcredit programs, asset grants to micro-entrepreneurs, and small asset
transfers to the very poor, regardless of their entrepreneurial status. The aim of this paper
is to take stock of the state of our knowledge.
The process involves at least two parts. A necessary part of taking stock is the review of
these findings that attempts to crystallize the salient patterns. Another equally necessary
part of taking stock is to assess our understanding of these empirical patterns through the
lens of economic theory. Reflecting on the policy lessons of the East Asian miracles, Robert E.
Lucas, Jr. once observed “If we understand the process of economic growth—or of anything
else—we ought to be capable of demonstrating this knowledge by creating it in these pen and
paper (and computer-equipped) laboratories of ours. If we know what an economic miracle
∗

We thank our discussant, Stephen Smith, Oriana Bandiera, and the conference participants for useful
comments and suggestions. All errors remain our own. The views expressed here do not necessarily reflect
the position of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and St. Louis or the Federal Reserve System.
†
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
‡
University of Notre Dame and NBER
§
Washington University in St. Louis, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and NBER

1

is, we ought to be able to make one” (Lucas, 1993, p. 271). The same is true for poverty
traps and financial interventions. If we truly understand why an intervention works, we
ought to be able to recreate the empirical patterns in our theories. Such an understanding
is necessary to design our policy interventions, apply them with confidence in new contexts,
and make projections for larger-scale programs that will have macroeconomic consequences.
Toward the first step, this essay reviews the lessons from the empirical literature on micro
interventions. At least three general lessons arise consistently. First, no policies produce
large scale miracle escapes from poverty traps. That is, although some of the policies have
led to sustained gains, none has been shown to lead to permanent increases in income or
consumption well beyond poverty levels nor to extended and sizable increases in the rate of
growth of income, consumption, and capital that predict such escapes. Second, take-up rates
for microcredit are typically low, while those of asset transfer programs are understandably
much higher. Third, heterogeneous responses to policies are evident in almost all studies,
where impacts vary by initial wealth, size of intervention, gender, ability, entrepreneurial
status, financial access, and time frame. Variation in measurement and context (e.g., rural
vs. urban, the degree of pre-existing financial development) may also play a role.
The most interesting patterns emerge from a comparison across interventions. Although
individual-level microcredit interventions can lead to increases in credit, entrepreneurial activity, and investments, they have been much less successful in leading to higher income or
consumption. Among these interventions, only the two studies of village funds microcredit
interventions uncovered gains to income and possibly consumption. They often show relatively larger impacts on existing or marginal entrepreneurs. Small asset grants of less than
$200 at purchasing power parity (PPP, hereafter) to entrepreneurs often lead to stronger
increases in capital and profits with typically high returns on assets. Grants to “ultra poor”
households often have led to changes in income generating activities, higher asset levels and
capital, and increases in consumption of up to 30 percent.
The natural question is what leads to such very different outcomes, and what do they say
about the relevant economic mechanisms at play. Even to replicate the outcomes of these
different policies in varying contexts, we need an understanding of these mechanisms. Lucas
(1993, p. 252) is again much more eloquent: “simply advising a society to ‘follow the Korean
model’ is a little like advising an aspiring basketball player to ‘follow the Michael Jordan
model’. To make use of someone else’s successful performance at any task, one needs to be
able to break this performance down into its component parts so that one can see what each
part contributes to the whole, which aspects of this performance are imitable and, of these,
which are worth imitating. One needs, in short, a theory.” A purely qualitative theory is
useful in terms of organizing ideas and checking the internal consistency of one’s reasoning,
2

but we also want to know how well such a theory can quantitatively explain our observations,
which is undoubtedly a higher hurdle.
Toward the second step, we review existing quantitative theory of financially constrained
entrepreneurial decisions. A representative model in this literature incorporates much of
what seems a priori essential in the economics involved: ex ante heterogeneity in wealth
and ability, entrepreneurial decisions on both the extensive (entry) and intensive margins
(scale), stochastic shocks, “necessity” entrepreneurs, and financial constraints that interact
with wealth and ability. The combination of heterogeneity, intensive margins, and stochastic
shocks provide enough smoothness and mixing so that poverty traps at the level of an
individual (where investment decisions and asset and income paths depend critically on
initial wealth levels) become irrelevant at the level of the economy (where a unique stationary
equilibrium exists). Using this model, we simulate analogs of microcredit interventions and
the asset grants targeted toward the poor and small entrepreneurs. Within our microcredit
interventions we further vary the interest rates faced by borrowers. Some of these simulations
reproduce results from our earlier work (Buera et al., 2012, 2014), while others are unique
to this paper.
We show that the model captures many of the qualitative and quantitative patterns
observed empirically in the interventions, but we also learn lessons from where it fails.
For asset grants, the model shows that marginal entrepreneurs enter, and that capital,
income, and consumption increase, while assets tend to decline over time. However, the
model does not generate the large increases in income, and we conjecture that the model
fails to account for increases in labor supply in certain economic situations (e.g., where
market labor is limited for women). Moreover, the training components of such interventions
might increase the effective ability of livestock “entrepreneurs”, or the real world projects
may somehow target the higher ability people (i.e., marginal entrepreneurs).1 Indeed, we
show that marginal products of capital to poor existing entrepreneurs are quite high in the
model. For microcredit, the simulations capture low take-up rates, borrowing and impacts
that are concentrated in the higher end of the ability distribution, and small increases in
entrepreneurship mostly due to the entry of marginal entrepreneurs. The baseline model
somewhat overpredicts the increases in investment. However, with realistically higher interest
rates on microloans, the model limits microcredit along the extensive and intensive margins
and dampens the impacts of microcredit.
Several key lessons from the simulations involve the long run and general equilibrium implications, however. First, although microfinancial interventions can have substantial steady
1

Business training interventions have not proven particularly effective, but the training in these programs
involves technical training regarding livestock rearing.

3

state and transitional impacts on development measures (income, consumption, productivity, etc.), no escape from aggregate poverty traps operating through wealth distributions
and general equilibrium effects occurs in the simulations, since these traps do not exist.
In this sense, we are unable to “make a miracle”. Second, the simulations show that onetime redistribution in the form of asset grants alone tends to have only short run aggregate
and distributional impacts, as eventually infused assets are depleted over time. In contrast,
microfinance—at least subsidized low interest microfinance—has potentially longer run impacts because of its permanent availability and general equilibrium impact through wages.
The cost effectiveness of smaller but sustained subsidies to microfinance vs. one-time asset grants is therefore of interest. It also suggests the importance of proper targeting and
technical training for asset grant programs to have persistent effects.2

2

Micro Empirical Estimates

In this section, we review the evidence on asset grants to microentrepreneurs and the ultra
poor, and on microcrediti nterventions. We then hypothesize about potential explanations
for the patterns that emerge.

2.1

Asset Grants to Microentrepreneurs

Field experiments involving asset grants to microentrepreneurs have been undertaken in
multiple countries: for example, Sri Lanka, Mexico, Ghana, and Nigeria. With one exception, all studies found significant profit increases from these asset grants. These findings are
important experimental evidence for the long-held conjecture that at least some microentrepreneurs can generate above-market returns to capital, which in turn is evidence of the
existence of financial constraints. We summarize these studies in Table 1.
The Sri Lanka study (de Mel et al., 2008) identified about 400 non-employer entrepreneurs
in urban areas of Sri Lanka, and gave them small one-time grants either in kind (inventories
or equipment) or in cash. They randomized between small and large grants equaling 460
or 920 PPP dollars, or roughly 3-6 months of average profits for these entrepreneurs. The
impacts on investment were sizable: capital had increased by 70-130 percent of the grant at
24 months (i.e., roughly the size of the grant), and monthly profits increased by 4-6 percent
of the original grant. The implied monthly return on the grant was substantially above
market interest rates, and would imply recovery of the original amount after 1.5-2 years,
2
Kaboski and Townsend (2011) compares asset grants to village funds, and finds that the latter are more
cost-effective overall. This model has indivisibilities but only an intensive investment margin, and is partial
equilibrium.

4

5

Profit (chg.
rel. to grant)
Capital (chg.
rel. to grant)

Time horizon

N/A

70–130%

20–105%

15% per month

$280 (cash or inkind)
12 months

793, self-employed

Ghana

Fafchamps et al.

-250%

-67%

N/A

23%

12 months

$98,200 (cash), plus
business training

1,831, young applicants, “ordinary
merit” winners

160, tailors employing 3 or fewer
$370 (cash), plus
consulting
14 months

Nigeria

McKenzie

Ghana

Karlan et al.

Table 1: Studies of Grants to Microentrepreneurs

20–33% per month

4–6% per month

$210 (cash or inkind)
12 months

$460 to 920 PPP
(cash or in-kind)
24 months

Intervention

198, self-employed

408, non-employer

Sample

Mexico

McKenzie Woodruff

Sri Lanka

de Mel et al.

Country

Study

if it were a loan. Moreover, the timing of the growth could be characterized as immediate
and stable. Indeed, the point estimates of the follow up work in de Mel et al. (2012) shows
stability of higher profits even after 5 years, and the results are statistically significant. The
sizable returns are evidence of potential financial frictions limiting profitable investments,
but the fact that these impacts are stable over time, rather than leading to virtuous cycles of
ever more reinvestment and growth indicate that the gains to relaxing these constraints may
be limited. The Mexican study by McKenzie and Woodruff (2008) is a similar study lending
further support to these findings. The study is smaller than the Sri Lankan study both in
the sample size (about 200) and in the grant size (210 PPP dollars). They found extremely
large returns to these small grants, between 20-33 percent per month at about one year, but
acknowledged that sample attrition rate of 35 percent was potentially problematic.
Although returns may be high, the original Sri Lanka study also emphasized the strong
heterogeneity in returns to capital, however. In particular, they found that the impacts were
driven by those with disproportionally low levels of wealth, those with higher ability (measured by education attainment or through digit recall tests). Consistent with the wealth
results, they found smaller returns on larger grants. Moreover, they were driven overwhelmingly by grants to men rather than to women. Fafchamps et al. (2013) further examine the
impact on women. They granted about 280 PPP dollars to about 800 microentrepreneurs in
Ghana and also found large impacts on monthly profits, which increased by about 15 percent of the original grant. These again imply high rates of return, but in contrast to the Sri
Lankan study, they found that in-kind grants yielded larger impacts than cash grants. Moreover, the in-kind grants generated increases in profits among female entrepreneurs, which
the Sri Lankan grants did not.
A study in Ghana provides a reminder that high returns to microentrepreneurs are not always and everywhere, however. Karlan et al. (2015) found that grants significantly decreased
profits, as much as by 67 percent of the size of the initial grant. Their study experimented
with a two-by-two intervention of grants and consulting, and neither intervention proved effective. They found some positive short run changes, which quickly reversed their course. A
few ways in which this study differs from the Fafchamps et al. (2013) study should be noted,
however. First, the sample size of 160 entrepreneurs was much smaller, about one-fifth of
the size of the other study. Given the multiple branches of the sample, it may simply be that
the control group was a statistical anomaly. Second, the grants were cash, while the impacts
in the Fafchamps et al. (2013) were larger for in-kind grants. Third, this study focused on
a particular occupation, tailors, and perhaps the industry differs from the typical microentrepreneur industry. Finally, their targeting rule allowed for slightly larger entrepreneurs
with up to 3 employees. In practice, the differences were not large as their entrepreneurs
6

averaged 0.35 employees and 0.86 apprentices. In addition, baseline profits were larger, so
that their larger grants of 370 PPP dollars amounted to about 6 weeks of profit, comparable
to the grant size in the other study.
Only one study has looked at the impacts of larger grants on larger firms. McKenzie
(2016) examines the impacts of large grants, averaging nearly 100,000 PPP on young, aspiring entrepreneurs. The experiment stems from a Nigerian entrepreneurship competition,
in which applicants submitted business plans and received business training, and the randomization was among a middle group of 1,200 applicants who were deemed of “ordinary
merit”—a selected group of applicants but not the most promising. Profits increased by 23
percent, implying a monthly rate of return of 1-2 percent, somewhat lower than in other
studies but comparable to market rates for SMEs in Nigeria. Thus, with more financial
access, the control group should have been able to invest in principle.
In summary, the bulk of the evidence shows sizable returns to capital grants of modest
sizes, equaling up to 6 months of profits on existing microentrepreneurs. On average, these
grants lead to higher investment and profits, though the impacts are heterogeneous. The
returns are somewhat lower for the wealthy, the less able, and female entrepreneurs.

2.2

Asset Grants to the Ultra-Poor

Microentrepreneurs are often not the poorest of the poor, those living on only a few PPP
dollars per day. A natural question for poverty alleviation is whether asset grants could have
substantial impacts on this population. Many of the ultra poor are involved in subsistence
agriculture, where the microentrepreneur results are less relevant. On the one hand, the
wealth results from the entrepreneur studies might make us expect high returns, but the
results for low ability and female entrepreneurs suggest otherwise. In any case, a wide set
of recent studies has given us strong evidence on the impact of asset grants to rural, ultra
poor households with female heads. We summarize them in Table 2.
Several of the studies focus on a standardized program developed in Bangladesh by
BRAC and exported to other countries. The studies focused on households headed by a
female, and experimented with in-kind transfers of livestock, amounting to roughly 4-8 goats
or 1-2 cattle/buffaloes. In PPP terms, the value of these assets are in the ballpark of the
microentrepreneur grants described above, but they are somewhat larger and certainly larger
as a fraction of the recipients’ income. More important, the program is not a simple asset
grant but is instead the lead part of a set of services offered to the participant households
that together are designed as a micro-level “big push.” These other services can include
required or encouraged savings, technical assistance often in the area of livestock rearing,
and a consumption supplement. One key purpose is to lower the chances that the household
7

8

§

48% increase in
hours worked,
income
from
business labor

Sig. positive

29%

Sig.
increase
in productive
asset in ETH,
GHA,
PAK;
sig. increase in
hours in ETH
(17%)
Sig.
in ETH
(83% of grant),
PAK (14%)
Sig.
in ETH
(18%),
GHA
(10%)

Sig. positive

34% of transfer,
68% of original
investment

No impact, except the prob.
of owning livestock
Insignificant

Non-agri hours
+56%, overall
labor
supply
+19%

+43%

47 months

$1,310, plus artisan training

Groups of 10–
40

1,900, younger
adults

Uganda

Blattman et al.
(14)

Increase in livestock income

Insignificant

$510, plus technical training,
forced saving,
health service,
group building
18 months

$330, plus consumption support, technical
training, forced
saving
18 months
+39%

Village

3,500, women

India (AP)

Morduch et al.

Individual

800, women

India (WB)

Sig. positive

36 months

$450–1,280,
plus consumption support

9,500 (900 to
2,600 per country), women
Village and individual

Five countries

Banerjee et al. Banerjee et al.
(15b), ex. India§ (11)

30%

Sig. positive

Hours +60%,
non-agri hours
+100%

+70–150%

16 months

$380, plus business training,
group building

Village

1,800, younger
women

Uganda

Blattman et al.
(16)

23%

35% of grant

Business, agri
expenses rise

+34%

≤ 4 months

$404–1,520,
plus
mobile
money access

Village
and
individual

1,380, men and
women

Kenya

Haushofer and
Shapiro

Table 2: Studies of Grants to the Ultra-Poor

Banerjee et al. (2015b) considers programs in six countries, one of which (India) is analyzed in depth in Banerjee et al. (2011). Since we report
on Banerjee et al. (2011) separately in this table, we show the results on the other five countries in Banerjee et al. (2015b).

10%

Increase in assets

Consumption
change

137% of grant

Income activity

+44%

48 months

Specialized selfemp +15 p.p.,
self-emp hours
+106%

Income change

Horizon

Intervention

$520 PPP or 2
cows, plus technical training

Village

6,700, women

Sample

Randomization
level

Bangladesh

Bandiera et al.

Country

Study

would need to liquidate the livestock assets for short-term needs.
Bandiera et al. (2016) evaluate the ultra poor program in the setting where it was developed, Bangladesh.3 Their results are the most impressive of these programs. Randomizing
at the village level, they report experimental results up to 4 years after the livestock grants
with a sample of 6,700 households. Four years out, the treatment has higher assets that exceed the original value of the asset grant by 40 percent. The fraction of women specializing
in self-employment increased by 15 percentage points, and labor hours in self-employment
doubled. Income is 44 percent higher as well. Putting this into perspective, this amounts
to an extra income equivalent to 22 percent of the initial asset grant per month, comparable
to the very high returns found with microentrepreneurs in Mexico. However, the program
also involved technical assistance costs.4 Moreover, they find that consumption is 10 percent
higher. Looking at the dynamics between 2 and 4 years, they find growth in assets, income,
and consumption, but labor supply remains stable.
The largest and broadest study is Banerjee et al. (2015b) which presents experimental
results for Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, Pakistan, Peru (and West Bengal, which we discuss
below.) The samples in these countries range from 900 to 2,600, and over 10,000 households
are involved in the analysis combined. They evaluate the impacts three years out, and find
that assets are higher, but by less than the initial asset transfer. There is a great deal
of variation across countries. Assets are significantly higher in Pakistan and Ethiopia, but
the point estimates constitute 14 and 83 percent of the initial transfer, respectively. The
study combines multiple measures into indices, which allows for more statistical power in
terms of finding significant tendencies but makes it difficult to compare the magnitudes they
report to other studies or theory. Nonetheless, they find statistically significant increases in
their income index, in productive assets in Ethiopia, Ghana and Pakistan, and a significant
17 percent increase in hours in Ethiopia. They find significant increases of 18 percent in
Ethiopia and 10 percent in Ghana.
The results in Banerjee et al. (2015b) are reported in more depth in Banerjee et al. (2011).
In a sample of 800, where individual rather than village randomization was used, they find
a substantial increase in assets, income, and consumption at 18 months. The measured
increase in income of 39 percent amounts to a monthly return of 12 percent on the value of
the asset. Here the cost of the program involves not only the grant and technical assistance,
but also up to 9 months of food supplements (tantamount to per-capita consumption) and a
saving requirement of 3 dollars per month. Nevertheless, the returns are sizable. Moreover,
3

Emran et al. (2014) find very similar results for the BRAC program in Bangladesh based on earlier data
but using non-experimental methods to account for selection bias.
4
In conversations, the authors also reported the presence of food supplements and savings encouragement.

9

the program led to an increase in consumption of 29 percent. Because measured consumption
exceeds measured income, as is typical in survey data from developing countries, the absolute
increase in consumption exceeds the increase in income. The consumption increase is thus
financed not only by increased income generating activities but also by sales of assets.
A larger study in another Indian state (Andhra Pradesh) finds less promising results,
however. In a sample of 3,500 households, Morduch et al. (2012) find no significant effects on
income or consumption. They find increases in livestock and livestock income, but these are
offset by lower levels of labor income. Like the Bengali program, this program incorporated
technical assistance and mandatory savings, but it also differed in that it had a health
component but no food supplement.
Looking across these studies, there is a pattern of sizable increases in income and consumption going together with increases in hours. In Bangladesh, West Bengal, and Ethiopia
are the countries with the most promising results, and all showed increases in labor supply. In Andhra Pradesh, where jobs were widely available because of the presence of the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), there was no increase in income or
consumption, but only movements from labor income to self-employed agricultural income.
Bandiera et al. (2016) build a model where labor supply plays a key role, and it may be that
such a model is only relevant in particular economic environments. Indeed, it is interesting
to note that the two places with the largest observed gains, Bangladesh and West Bengal,
have strong affinities, both cultural and socio-economic.
Other asset grant programs in east Africa exhibit positive yet relatively modest impacts.
Blattman et al. (2014) examine transfers targeted toward young adults (aged 18-35) rather
than women. The grants were cash, and sizable on average (1,310 PPP dollars), especially
relative to the recipients’ income. The grants were made at the group level, and in part
they were used to finance artisanal training. Four years after the grant, the grantees had
higher assets, with the difference being 34 percent of the original transfer or 68 percent of the
original asset investment. Nonetheless, income was 43 percent higher, and this additional
income constituted a monthly increase of about 5 percent, comparable to the returns to Sri
Lankan entrepreneurs. The grantees had 19 percent higher labor supply on average, and 56
percent higher labor supply in non-agricultural/skilled labor activities.
As mentioned, the additional assets 4 years out are only a fraction of the original transfer.
Indeed, the program had larger effects 2 years out. After 4 years, nearly half of the recipients
no longer practice their trade. Although the program did not have a gender focus, the
decline between years 2 and 4 is driven overwhelmingly by men. Nonetheless, the program
is estimated to have a positive net present value.
Blattman et al. (2016) examine another program in Uganda, but this targets women
10

in war torn areas of the country. The cash grants were considerably smaller (380 PPP
dollars) and constituted just 17 percent of the total costs of the program, which included
business skills training, follow up supervision, and group-building activities. The program
was evaluated at 16 months, and the recipients had 60 percent higher labor supply and
nearly twice as many hours in non-agriculture as those in the control, and their consumption
was 30 percent higher. The increase in monthly income amounted to 7 percent of the initial
transfer, again comparable to the Sri Lankan returns.
A final study is Haushofer and Shapiro (2013), which examines a program in Kenya offering grants averaging about 800 PPP dollars. The study had multiple levels of randomization
including the size of total grants, the gender of recipients, and the timing of payments.
Smaller grants were made over 9 months, while larger grants were made over 16 months.
In principle, the drawn out payments might help households that struggle with inconsistent
intertemporal preference unless a lump sum is needed for an indivisible, illiquid investment.
The overall time horizon is much shorter, however, averaging about 4 months, which overlaps
with the payment schedule. Over this short run, the program led to increases in income and
consumption, but the monthly increase in income constitutes just 2 percent of the average
total transfer, somewhat lower than the other studies. Using both a village and individual
level design, they find no evidence of spillovers to nonparticipants, which is in harmony with
the other studies.
In sum, the asset grant programs to poor rural, usually female-headed households lead
to substantial increases in assets, income, and consumption. With the exception of the
Bangladesh study, the initial increase in assets dissipates over time, however.

2.3

Microcredit Evaluations

The high apparent marginal returns on assets among portions of microentrepreneurs and
the ultra poor suggest that financial frictions may be prohibitive for these groups, and could
motivate microcredit as an alternative program for these populations that could potentially
improve on asset grant programs in terms of both cost-effectiveness and identifying those
with high returns. Indeed, this is the original, anecdote-based motivation for microcredit as
a transformative financial intervention. A host of recent research has given a more nuanced
and sober assessment of its impacts, however.
Banerjee et al. (2015c) report the results of six recent randomized evaluations of microcredit interventions in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Ethiopia, India, Mexico, Mongolia, and Morocco.
These are summarized in Table 3.5 In PPP terms, the average loans are of similar magnitudes
5
Some of the information reported comes from the individual papers, while others come from the Banerjee
et al. (2015c) overview article.

11

to the asset grants, although somewhat larger. The studies tend to find: (i) relatively low
take-up rates; (ii) increases in credit overall; (iii) increases in business activity, but (iv) little
impact on overall measures of profits, income, or consumption. Together with these studies,
Table 3 also includes two evaluations of village fund programs in China and Thailand, which
show more positive results. There are some common findings, but also remarkable differences
in both the programs and findings.
The first study (Attanasio et al., 2015) evaluates an expansion of microcredit within
villages in Mongolia. Although generally Mongolia has a strong microcredit presence, the
villages studied have relatively low baseline usage. The unique aspect of this study is the
variation between joint liability and individual liability loans. The loans are relatively shortterm (6 months), and after 19 months they find that roughly half of those surveyed have
taken up loans, which is higher than the other studies. The intervention increases the fraction
with loans by 26 percentage points and the level of credit overall by 67 percent. They also
find an 8 percentage point increase in the fraction of self-employed, and a 57 percent increase
in labor supply. This is the lone study of traditional microcredit that finds any evidence of
an increase in consumption, an 11 percent increase that seems to be driven by a significant
increase in food consumption.
Crépon et al. (2015) and Tarozzi et al. (2015) study expansions of microcredit programs
into rural areas, Morocco and Ethiopia, respectively. In Morocco, the program targeted
those already involved in activities other than crops. Thus, it is unsurprising to not see an
increase in the fraction of people involved in self-employment activities. After two years,
the program still had low take up, with just 13 percentage points more having borrowed,
but that led to a 64 percent increase in credit overall. Capital increased by 29 percent, and
there was a decrease in labor supplied to non-self-employment activities. This yielded an
increase in profits of 40 percent, which was marginally significant, but no significant impact
on consumption.
The Tarozzi et al. (2015) study involves repeated cross-sections of households, but effectively panels of villages and “peasant associations”, which are the unit of randomization.
The microcredit program was joint with a family planning intervention that was ex post
ineffectual. After three years, the fraction with loans was 25 percentage points higher in
treatment villages, and credit had increased by 195 percent. Still, they found no impacts on
businesses, capital, or profits, despite the program targeting potential entrepreneurs. The
survey did not measure consumption.
Banerjee et al. (2015a) evaluate an urban expansion of microcredit in India, while Angelucci et al. (2015) combine both rural and urban expansions in Mexico. They find take up
rates below 20 percent. Both programs find substantial increases in credit and its prevalence,
12

13

Insignificant

+57%

Insignificant

Change in
capital

Labor supply change

Profit chg.

+11%

Fraction of entrepre. +8 p.p.

Change in
Entrepre.

Consumption
change

+67%

24 months

19 months

Overall
credit chg.

16 months

6 months

Insignificant

+40%

Decreased nonself-emp hours

+29%

Insignificant,
as expected

+64%

13%

15%

27%

50–57%

$1,080

$700 PPP

Take-up

Village

Village

5,600,
rural,
at least partly
self-employed

600,
rural,
women microentrepre.

Sample

Random.
level
Average
loan size
Nominal
APR
Average
loan term
Horizon

Morocco

Crépon et al.

Mongolia

Attanasio et al.

Country

Study

Insignificant

Insignificant

N/A

-18%

Revenue and
crop exp. rise

+18 p.p. (frac.
with loan)

19%

27 months

4 months

110%

$450

Village, neigh.

16,600, women

Mexico

Angelucci et al.

Table 3: Studies of Microcredit

Insignificant

+57% insignificant point est.

+68% insignificant point est.
N/A

Insignificant

Insignificant

+25%

Fraction of entrepre. +2 p.p

Livestock revenue and crop
exp. rise
Insignificant

+63%

17%

39–42 months

12 months

24%

$600

Neighborhood

6,900, urban,
women

India

Banerjee et al.

+195%

31%

36 months

12 months

12%

$500

Peasant assoc.

6,300,
rural,
poor, potential
entrepre.

Ethiopia

Tarozzi et al.

-16% insignificant point est.

+34% insignificant point est.

Insignificant

Insignificant

Insignificant

+19 p.p. (frac.
with loan)

99%, by design

14 months

14 months

22%

$1,820

Individual

+10%

Income +35%

N/A

Insignificant

Insignificant

+50%

54%

24 months

12 months

7%

16,700 THB

Village

1,000, rural, no
targeting

Thailand

Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
1,000, marginal
borrower

Kaboski
and
Townsend

Augsburg et al.

+8%, driven by
migrant labor
Income +50%
(husbandry income +53%)
+8% insignificant point est.

+47%
(in
husbandry)

Cash crop land
+63%

+23 p.p. (frac.
with loan)

29%

24 months

12 months

8%

5,000 CNY

Village

1,200, rural, no
targeting

China

Cai et al.

and different measures of business activity, but neither finds a significant effect on profits
(although the point estimate for India is sizable) or consumption. India shows an increase
in assets, while Mexico shows a substantial decline. The Mexico intervention is unique in
that the loans were very short term (averaging 4 months).
The Bosnia-Herzegovina study (Augsburg et al., 2015) stands apart in several ways.
First, it randomized at the individual level, targeting marginal borrowers who otherwise
would not have qualified for loans.6 Second, the loan amounts were substantially higher,
averaging 1,820 PPP dollars. By design, the take up rate approaches 100 percent. Still,
they only find significant impacts on credit and nothing on entrepreneurship, profits, or
consumption. Naturally, marginal borrowers make a unique sample, which may partially
explain the none-result.
The two remaining studies examine village fund interventions and yield somewhat more
positive results. Village funds differ in that they are largely independent of existing microfinance institutions and instead involve a transfer of funds to a village in order to set up
its own quasi-formal institution. Kaboski and Townsend (2011, 2012) study introduction
of village funds in Thailand. Although they lack a randomized control, the fact that the
government gave the same amount of funds to all villages, regardless of their size, makes village sizes an effective instrument for the intensity of treatment. In the first two years, they
find a near doubling of the level of short-term credit in the villages, a 35-percent increase in
income, and a 10-percent increase in consumption. Followed over six years, the increase in
credit is stable, but the increases in consumption and income are concentrated in the early
years.
Cai et al. (2016) examine a similar village fund program in China, but had a randomized
introduction at the village level. After two years, there is a 23 percentage point increase in the
probability of having a loan, substantial increases in resources going to cash crops and animal
husbandry, and a 50-percent increase in income per capita. Interestingly, total working days
increase, but this is driven by migrant labor outside of the village (and province) rather than
self-employed labor or labor within the village.
The setup of the Cai et al. (2016) study allows us to compare the results using the experimental variation with the results using quasi-experimental variation in village size of Kaboski
and Townsend (2011, 2012). The results largely validate the village size approach, although
the standard errors rise, highlighting the improved identification with field experiments.
A few other nuanced findings from the empirical work deserve discussion.
First, impacts tend to be heterogeneous. Kaboski and Townsend (2011) showed that
households who are marginal for large indivisible investments benefited the most. Quantile
6

Karlan and Zinman (2010, 2011) follow a similar approach.

14

regressions in the special issue articles above show that impacts are often concentrated among
the very highest percentiles. Banerjee et al. (2015a) provide further evidence that positive
impacts are concentrated among existing entrepreneurs.
Second, Angelucci et al. (2015), Crépon et al. (2015), and Cai et al. (2016) examine
impacts on (expected) non-participants, and find no spillovers. In contrast, Kaboski and
Townsend (2012) find impacts of the Thai village fund intervention on local wages. Interacting the balance sheets of microfinance insititutions with government driven microfinance
crisis and subsequent collapse of microfinance in Andhra Pradesh as a source of quasiexperimental variation, Breza and Kinnan (2016) find that day wages declined in areas
where microcredit contracted more severely. Whether general equilibrium spillovers are important may depend greatly on the structure of the labor market and the relative importance
of microfinance.
Third, the impact of the introduction of the program on the use of other credit products
varies by study. Some find that the new intervention has no effect (Attanasio et al., 2015;
Tarozzi et al., 2015), others find that it crowds out other sources (Augsburg et al., 2015;
Banerjee et al., 2015a; Cai et al., 2016), while still others actually find crowding in (Kaboski
and Townsend, 2011, 2012; Angelucci et al., 2015; Crépon et al., 2015; Greaney et al., 2016).
Even at a more disaggregate level (e.g., bank loans, informal loans), the impacts vary from
crowding out to crowding in.
Fourth, the long term impacts have been examined in two papers with different results.
In Thailand, Kaboski and Townsend (2011) find that impacts fluctuate over six years, but
are concentrated in the early years. Banerjee et al. (2014) find fluctuations in treatment
effects over time but also finds some contrasting results, at least for existing entrepreneurs.
They examine the impact of the collapse of microcredit in Andhra Pradesh again, looking at whether the benefits persist even after microcredit has exogenously declined. They
find that existing entrepreneurs are more profitable six years later, but the more reluctant
entrepreneurs’ profitability has declined.
Finally, impacts tend to vary substantially based on program details.7 Attanasio et al.
(2015) found that only joint liability loans led to positive impacts. Although Field and Pande
(2008) found no impact of moving from weekly to biweekly payment frequency, Field et al.
(2013) shows that a two month delay before the onset of required repayment leads to higher
levels of entrepreneurial investments. Finally, Greaney et al. (2016) show that the contractual structure of the administrative agents in self-help groups impacts both entrepreneurial
activities and group membership.
7

Kaboski and Townsend (2005) is an early paper showing the importance of program policies for impacts
in a non-experimental setting.

15

2.4

Taking Stock across Interventions

The evaluations uncover some commonalities but also strong differences across the interventions.
Among the commonalities, one important theme is that of individual heterogeneity. The
entrepreneur grants focused on the dimensions of initial assets, ability, and gender. In many
countries, the ultra-poor programs showed broad-based impacts (Banerjee et al., 2015b), but
even they exhibit a factor of 20 difference in the impacts on income between the 90th and the
10th percentiles. Moreover, while those specializing in wage labor shifted activities toward
self-employment, the impacts on earnings were much larger for those already specialized in
self-employment (Bandiera et al., 2016). The microcredit work highlighted the low take-up,
and the concentration of largest impacts near the very top of the distribution.
A second, related generalization is that even among existing entrepreneurs, interventions
can increase profitability, indicating constraints along the intensive margin. The intensivemargin impacts of the entrepreneur grants are obvious, but we also find impacts of microcredit and ultra-poor grants among the existing self-employed. On the other hand, the
ultra-poor grants also show impacts along the extensive margin of entrepreneurship, perhaps
only for the severely constrained, however.
A third common finding was a general lack of sustained growth patterns, at least among
the bulk of the population. Among those studies with multiple endlines, impacts were
generally realized fairly rapidly, and either remained steady or fell over time. Across the
ultra-poor programs, the additional assets at endline were generally smaller than the initial
grants. The one exception is the Bangladesh ultra-poor program, which led to increases in
assets, income, and consumption even between years 2 and 4.
The key difference across the interventions is the smaller impact of microcredit on income
and consumption relative to the grants to entrepreneurs (which impacted profits positively)
and and to the ultra-poor. We hypothesize several possible reasons for this difference, along
with some supportive evidence.
The most obvious explanation is that the burden of repayment limits the impact of
microcredit relative to grants. Take-up tends to be low, and so—in the absence of strong
spillovers—much of the population is simply not affected. The need to repay could also
lower the impact on consumption, even among those who borrow. However, we also see
small impacts on income, indicating that this is unlikely to be the only factor. Repayment
can impact the income generating investments themselves. First, by definition, relatively
high interest rates make investments less profitable. Second, the need to make immediate
repayments may limit investments with longer horizons, even if they are otherwise profitable.
In considering the burden of repayment, the village fund programs in China and Thailand
16

are of particular interest, since they fall somewhere in between grants and pure microfinance.
The fund itself is a grant to the village, but it is channeled to the villagers in the form of
loans that need to be repaid. They had lower interest rates (8 and 7 percent, respectively)
and longer payment schedules (a single repayment at the end of the loan). They showed
relatively high take-up (54 and 29 percent, respectively) and resulted in strong increases in
income (in both) and consumption (significant in Thailand). In addition, the microcredit
study in Morocco allowed for a 2-month grace period for animal husbandry investments, and
it was the only pure microcredit study to find any evidence of higher profits. This is again
consistent with Field et al. (2013), which documents the impact of a 2-month grace period
in India.
Another explanation is the difference in the targeted population of microcredit relative
to the grant programs. The programs to the poor show that grants can have large impacts
on very poor populations (at least in the short run), and the entrepreneurship grants also
found larger impacts on those with fewer assets. Microfinance programs, however, often do
not lend to the poorest populations. Related, microcredit may be a “small” intervention in
the sense that, in many places, those with the most to gain by borrowing may already have
access to other forms of credit, and so the interventions are only changing the terms. Those
whose investments respond to small changes in terms are likely those with the most marginal
returns. This would be a good description of those areas in which significant crowding out
was observed.
Another difference is that microcredit programs have often targeted women, and with
cash. The entrepreneurship grants found that it was difficult to increase the profitability of
women entrepreneurs, at least with cash. They also found that more educated entrepreneurs
exhibited bigger impacts, but women tend to be less educated than men in many developing
countries. Here the village fund programs are again an interesting comparison, since they
did not target women specifically and the gender education gap is small in both China and
Thailand.

3

Taking Stock of Theory

We now turn to evaluating our understanding of these empirical patterns through the lens
of quantitative theory. We present the basic model as developed in a series of papers: Buera
and Shin (2013) and Buera et al. (2011, 2012, 2014). It captures many common elements
in the theoretical and quantitative literature and financial frictions have quantitative bite
both in the steady state (Buera et al., 2011) and transitionally (Buera and Shin, 2013) —
for a more comprehensive review of this literature see Buera et al. (2015). We evaluate
17

the theory a priori based on its consistency with many of the common patterns above,
discuss its implications on poverty traps, and then assess its ability to predict the variety of
interventions.

3.1

Basic Model

Consistent with the commonalities discussed above, the quantitative theory has focused on
models with (i) extensive entrepreneurship decisions, (ii) intensive investments, (iii) individual heterogeneity in wealth, productivity/ability, and whether or not their entrepreneurship
is simply a matter of necessity, and (iv) forward-looking decisions regarding entrepreneurship,
investment, and saving. We reproduce this basic model below.
Individuals differ in terms of their productivity as workers x and entrepreneurs z. As
entrepreneurs, they produce output using capital k, labor l, and a diminishing returns
to scale production function zk α lθ . Worker productivity and entrepreneurial productivity
follow Markov processes that are independent of each other. Specifically, with probability
γ, the value of the entrepreneurial productivity remains constant from one period to the
next, z 0 = z, and, with probability 1 − γ, it is a random draw from a Pareto distribution,
z 0 = ζ ∼ −ηζ −η−1 . A worker’s productivity or efficiency units of labor is assumed to follow
a two-state symmetric Markov chain, x ∈ {xl , xh }, with xl < xh . The probability of the
shocks remaining in its current value is π and E[x] is normalized to one.
The financial frictions in the model follow a simple yet useful form and stem from limited enforceability of contracts. In particular, by defaulting on their credit contracts, entrepreneurs can keep a fraction 1 − φ of the period’s output net of labor costs and the same
fraction of the undepreciated capital. Defaulting individuals regain access to credit markets
in the following period, and hence the limited commitment constraint has a simple static
representation.
Given the interest rate r and the wage per efficiency units of labor at time t, wt , the
problem of an individual with wealth a and worker/entrepreneurial productivity x and z at
time t is recursively formulated as:
n c1−σ
o
0
0 0
0
0
+
βE
[v
(a
,
x
,
z
)
|x,
z]
t+1
x ,z
c,a0 ,k,l≥0,e∈{0,1} 1 − σ
s.t. c + a0 + Tt (a) − St (a) ≤ e[zk α lθ − (r + δ)k − wt l] + (1 − e)xwt + (1 + r) a


and zk α lθ − wt l − (r + δ)k + (1 + r) a ≥ (1 − φ) zk α lθ − wt l + (1 − δ) k when e = 1
vt (a, x, z) =

max

where c is consumption and e is the discrete occupational choice (e = 1 for entrepreneur
and e = 0 for wage worker). The second inequality captures the financial friction for an
entrepreneurs, which places an upper bound on available capital. Buera et al. (2012) shows
18

this reduces to k ≤ k̄ (a, z; φ), where k̄ is increasing in wealth a, ability z, and φ. In
our modeling of financial frictions, φ is the unique parameter indexing the enforceability of
contracts across countries, and so it captures financial development and the availability of
credit.8 As φ varies from zero to one, the model spans the spectrum of cases from financial
autarky to perfect credit markets.
The basic components of the model can be calibrated quantitatively to key measurables,
including the firm size distribution (which identifies thick-tailed ability distributions), the
income distribution (which, given the thick tails, identifies the return to scale parameters),
and larger firms’ exit rates (which identify the frequency of shocks to productivity). The
parameters of the labor income process can be calibrated to the autocorrelation and standard deviation of income in rural areas of developing countries, which reflect the dearth of
labor market opportunities. Given the distribution of heterogeneous productivities in the
population, this model can be aggregated to solve for endogenous levels of financial intermediation, productivity, aggregate capital, etc. One can do this within the framework of a
partial equilibrium model (where wages and interest rates are taken as given), a small open
economy (where the wage is endogenous but the interest rate is given), or a fully general
equilibrium. Both steady-state and transitional analyses are computationally tractable.
A few words on some implicit modeling assumptions vis-a-vis real world empirics. First,
we follow the quantitative literature in fixing total labor supply (hours worked in business
or the labor market) exogenously. Although labor supply was often impacted in the experimental work cited above, this is a reasonable benchmark for looking across programs
because the sign of impacts varied across studies. Nonetheless, labor supply seemed to play
an important role in the more successful ultra-poor grants to women. Second, occupational
choice is binary. Empirically, we often observe households and even individuals whose income
and hours are attributed to both labor and business/self-employment. Nonetheless, we view
this as preferable to ignoring the natural indivisibility that comes from minimum efficient
scale or fixed costs. Buera et al. (2011) models these fixed costs explicitly and emphasizes
how they vary across sectors, and Buera et al. (2014) argue that such a fixed cost may be
necessary to explain the persistent effects on the right tail of the wealth distribution from
the land distribution in Bleakley and Ferrie (2013). Similarly, Banerjee et al. (2014) argues
that their microfinance results are consistent with a model with fixed costs and technology
choice within industries.9
One can easily consider the decisions of a single individual taking prices as given, or a full
8

Buera et al. (2015) reviews alternatives to this form in the literature.
Kaboski et al. (2014) develops an explicit quantitative model with this technology/scale choice and
assesses the relative role for cash-denominated vs. in-kind microfinance.
9

19

general equilibrium. One can consider either a stationary equilibrium where aggregates and
prices are stable or a dynamic equilibrium where these aggregates and prices transition over
time. The model therefore holds a theory for both household and aggregate behavior, and the
latter allows us to have insight into potential impacts of both scaled up micro-interventions
and macro policies.

3.2

Financial Frictions and Poverty Traps

When considering the role of poverty traps in the model, it is important to distinguish between individual and aggregate poverty traps. Within the model, we define poverty traps
as self-reinforcing differences in steady-state income that result from differences in initial
wealth conditions. Without financial frictions, agents with identical productivities would
have identical occupational and productive choices regardless of their wealth. Since all individual decisions coincide, aggregate productive behavior (and ultimately aggregate savings
behavior) is unaffected by the distribution of wealth.
However, when financial frictions are present, the model can lead to individual-level
poverty traps in which agents with identical productivities but different initial wealth levels
behave differently and their wealth levels diverge. Buera (2008) and later Banerjee and Moll
(2010) show the importance of self-financing in driving these poverty traps. Initial wealth
determines how quickly saving to self-finance would pay off, and agents with low initial wealth
do not find it optimal to save for so long. At the macro level, financial frictions lower the
demand for capital, while self-financing motives increase the supply. Both of these in turn
lower equilibrium interest rates, leading those with no intention of becoming entrepreneurs
to dissave instead.
We visually demonstrate this in Figure 1. The dashed lines illustrate the occupational
choice decision as a function of individual wealth and productivity. Under financial frictions
it is not only high productivity that leads people to become entrepreneurs but also high
wealth. The solid lines represent the thresholds above which agents save and below which
they dis-save. For agents with high productivity, the wealthiest agents save while the poorest
agents dis-save. The intersection of the occupational choice and poverty trap lines indicate
that there are workers who are saving to eventually escape poverty, while there are rich
entrepreneurs who are eventually converging to poverty. Of course, shocks to ability can
alter these dynamics, so that these “poverty traps” are not absorbing states in the long run.
Beyond individual level poverty traps, however, many stylized theories of entrepreneurial
choice predict the possibility that financial frictions can lead to poverty traps for entire
economies by distorting entrepreneurship, e.g., Banerjee and Newman (1993), Ghatak and

20

8
worker/entrepreneur | x=x

net−worth/ avg. wage

7

l

disaving/saving | x=xl

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

2
4
6
unconstrained profits/ avg. wage

8

Fig. 1: Occupation and Saving Decision Map

Jiang (2002), Aghion and Bolton (1997) and Piketty (1997).10 Poverty traps arise in these
models because initial distributions affect general equilibrium wages or interest rates, and
in turn aggregate dynamics. If few people have the required initial assets to become entrepreneurs, wages and interest rates will be low, which leads to a persistence of a wealth
distribution in which few have the resources to become entrepreneurs. The models typically
assume a small role for forward-looking self-financing motives and intensive margins in the
scale of establishments that to the low cost of labor and capital. For example, Banerjee and
Newman (1993) and Ghatak and Jiang (2002) lack an intensive margin in the demand for
labor that would make the equilibrium wage respond continuously rather than discretely.
Piketty (1997) lacks any labor market and, like Aghion and Bolton (1997), also abstracts
from an intensive margin for capital that could respond to the interest rate. Moreover, all
of these models have warm-glow savings behavior.
Qualitatively, the mechanisms emphasized in the poverty trap literature (lower interest
rates and wages due to constrained entrepreneurial borrowing) are present in our benchmark
model, and indeed with the self-financing motive, the impact on interest rates can be exacerbated. The benchmark model also contains non-convexities in production, which could
generate multiple equilibria. Nevertheless, quantitative versions of these models, when prop10

Matsuyama (2011) provides an excellent recent review of these and related results.

21

erly mapped to the data, do not lead to aggregate poverty traps—e.g., Giné and Townsend
(2004) and Buera et al. (2011)—but only slower convergence to a unique stationary distribution, the main point of Buera and Shin (2013).11 As explained in Buera et al. (2014),
aggregate poverty traps disappear once one relaxes the above mentioned simplifying assumptions needed for analytical tractability. In addition to the intensive margins, the productivity
shocks assure churning in the distribution of wealth and ability that leads to uniqueness.

3.3

Assessing Poverty Interventions

Variants of the above model have been simulated to assess asset grants (Buera et al., 2014)
and microcredit (Buera et al., 2012). In these papers, short run partial equilibrium simulations are compared to some of the above empirical results, and the longer run, general
equilibrium, and macroeconomic implications of the scaling up of these programs are assessed. We review these results before extending them to evaluate the role of high lending
rates on the impacts of microcredit.
3.3.1

Returns to capital among entrepreneurs

Before using the quantitative model to assess the aggregate and distributional impacts of
poverty interventions, we first illustrate the distribution of the marginal product of capital
in the model economy. These returns provide a natural benchmark to compare with the
estimates of the return to capital from the asset grants to micro-entrepreneurs in Section
2.1. The micro-estimates on the return to capital provide a natural test of the quantitative
theory.
In Figure 2 we present the marginal product of capital among entrepreneurs. In the
top panel, we show the average marginal product of capital among entrepreneurs in a given
wealth percentile. For entrepreneurs in the bottom 10 percentiles, the (annual) return to
capital net of depreciation is between 25 and 75 percent. The measured returns to capital
to large interventions in the Nigeria study (McKenzie, 2016) are close to the lower end of
this range, while the returns in the Sri Lanka study (de Mel et al., 2008) are slightly above
the upper end of this range. The large returns found in the Mexico study (McKenzie and
Woodruff, 2008) or the Ghana study (Fafchamps et al., 2013) are only rationalized if they
are interpreted as capturing an average return to capital for entrepreneurs in the lowest
percentile of the asset distribution. In the bottom panel, we plot the average marginal
product of capital among entrepreneurs with a given establishment size, measured by the
number of entrepreneurs. Since with few exceptions, the real world programs relate to the
11

See also Moll (2014) for a theoretical analysis of this point.

22

Ez[α z kα−1 lθ −δ|a,e=1]
Ez[α z kα−1 lθ −δ|l,e=1]

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Wealth Percentile | e=1

0.8

0.9

1

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−0.05
0

500

1000

1500
employment

2000

2500

3000

Fig. 2: Average Marginal Product of Capital, by Entrepreneurial Wealth and Size (Employment)

self-employed without employees, the relevant group in the model is non-employers in the far
right end, whose average annual return exceeds 15 percent. Overall, this figure shows that
the return to capital is very heterogenous among entrepreneurs in the calibrated model.
3.3.2

Asset grant programs

Buera et al. (2014) assesses the role of asset grant programs in the context of a small open
economy with fixed interest rate.12 In particular, the transitional dynamics following an
unexpected redistribution of wealth from the wealthiest toward the poorest are analyzed.
The redistribution establishes at that point in time a minimum wealth in the economy equal
to double the average annual wage in the initial stationary equilibrium, and is funded in
an extreme fashion by instituting a one-time, 100 percent tax on wealth above a particular
threshold, ā.13 The size of the redistribution is fairly comparable to the asset grants to the
poor summarized in Table 2, which is estimated to range from about 5 months of income
to 3 years of income.14 The cash grants to entrepreneurs in Table 1 are a bit smaller in
12

In order to capture the poor saving opportunities in developing countries, we set this interest rate to
zero, which is two percent lower than the historical average in developed economies.
13
Specifically, we implement in the initial period the wealth grant S0 (a) = max{2wE[x] − a, 0}, which
is financed by a one-time tax over the wealthiest individuals, T0 (a) = max{a − ā, 0}, where ā is chosen to
satisfy the static government budget constraint.
14
These calculations are complicated because income may be understimated (e.g., people underreport
noncash income or income of other household members), and also because many studies report household

23

absolute terms, but much smaller as a fraction of reported income of the entrepreneurs (0.5
to 6 months of baseline profits). The exercise in Buera et al. (2014) is less comparable
to the entrepreneurial grants, however, since they target the poor rather than small scale
entrepreneurs.
In medium run projections of Buera et al. (2014), the impacts dissipate over time but
largely remain after 4 years, but they are substantially smaller than those found in the
empirical study. The program matches the empirics in that the fraction of people that
pass over the poverty trap thresholds illustrated in Figure 1 is relatively small. Initially, 17
percent of the treated population switches to entrepreneurship. This compares well with the
15 percentage point increase in Bandiera et al. (2016). In terms of labor hours, it constitutes
a roughly 200 percent increase in hours to entrepreneurship for this population, which is
greater than the results in Table 2 that vary between 50 and 110 percent. In this sense, the
strict occupational choice may lead to too strong a result with hours.
Qualitatively, the model also predicts an increase in earnings, but quantitatively the effects on earnings are just 4 percent. This is in line with the negligible impact on income
reported in Morduch et al. (2012) but substantially smaller than the promising results found
in the other studies in Table 2. Recall that where increases in income and consumption were
substantial, they were accompanied by increases in labor supply, and the labor-leisure decision is not considered in the model. Alternatively, perhaps we can interpret these increases
in income as resulting from an increase in productivity z as a result of the technical training,
which is not in the benchmark model. Thus, the large and sustained increase in earnings
that some of the empirical work reports is not really a puzzle for theory.
The model matches most of the studies, with the exception of Bandiera et al. (2016),
in having the impacts fall over time, however. After 4 years, the entrepreneurship rate
is just 8 percentage points higher, and earnings are just 3 percent higher. Again, in line
with the empirics, the impacts in the model are very heterogeneous across individuals, with
the earnings of the treated individuals in the 90th (95th) percentile of the entrepreneurial
productivity increasing by 11 (15) percent in the second year. Thus, the model has potential
to have somewhat larger impacts for marginal entrepreneurs, but not the large gains reported
in Table 1. In any case, the model is certainly consistent with a lack of a virtuous cycle of
growth for the average recipient.
Although the model cannot match the magnitude of the observed income increase, the
long run macroeconomic impacts reported in Buera et al. (2014) are still of interest. These
aggregate effects include those on both the recipients, non-recipients, and those taxed by the
redistribution. The wealth grants have a positive effect on aggregate total factor productivity
income, which we need to convert into income per working age household member.

24

(TFP) but a relatively larger negative impact on aggregate capital. The increase in TFP is
due to the net entry of productive entrepreneurs and the capitalization of poor entrepreneurs
with relatively high marginal products of capital. On impact, the decline in capital arises for
the following reasons. The funds for the wealth grants come from rich active entrepreneurs
who decrease their capital input by more than the drop in their wealth, since the acquisition
of capital is based on leveraging wealth as collateral. This decrease is not completely offset
by the grant recipients, because not all of them choose to become active entrepreneurs. In
a small open economy, the redistribution of wealth therefore leads to a drop in the capital
used in production and a capital outflow.
The net effect of the increase in productivity but decrease in capital on aggregate percapita income is negative but small. Although these mechanisms may be offset by the
larger gains in income experienced by recipients in the empirical work, the capital decline
mechanism in the model may still be an important consideration at the macro level.
All of these impacts, however, are transitional. Since the overall distribution of ability
remains constant, wealth levels gradually return to their stationary distribution. There
is no aggregate poverty trap to begin with, and so in the long run, the one-time wealth
redistribution can cause no aggregate escape, and the economy returns to their original
state.
3.3.3

Microcredit programs

Buera et al. (2012) reports parallel results for the impacts of microfinance. They model
microcredit as a new alternative intermediation technology that allows anyone access to a
small level of credit for capital, bM F , regardless of wealth or ability. The financial constraint
on capital is thus relaxed to:
k ≤ max{k̄(a, z; φ), a + bM F }

(1)

where the second element of the maximum captures the microcredit option. They run
alternative models, but we report the results without the labor shock as it provides the
simplest benchmark.15
Their benchmark analysis sets bM F at 150% of annual wages, which implies a maximum
microloan size relative to per-capita expenditures of one and an average microloan size
relative to per capita expenditures of 0.1. This average is comparable to the levels of average
loan size to income of 6-43% reported by Banerjee et al. (2015c) in all but one of the empirical
15

In an extension they consider a stark calibration of a labor shock where xl = 0 to capture an individual
who is forced into entrepreneurship because he has no labor market option. They choose the process of the
labor shock to match the high rates of entrepreneurship that are typical in developing countries.

25

evaluations in the special issue. In the aggregate, it leads to total microcredit constituting
30 percent of overall credit, somewhat smaller than the 33 percent in Thailand (Kaboski and
Townsend, 2011, 2012) or the 44 percent in India (Banerjee et al., 2015c).
The model does well in generating small take-up rates, 11 percent in the population
overall, somewhat lower than the empirical estimates in Table 3, but those microcredit
programs targeted marginal populations. The model also does well in predicting heterogeneous impacts, where both take up and impacts are concentrated in the top decile of the
entrepreneurial ability distribution.
In the short run, partial equilibrium (i.e., small scale) simulations, the model predicts
significant impacts on entrepreneurship (an increase of 4 percentage point) overall and investment by borrowers (a 46 percent increase), but small effects on overall consumption (a
1 percent increase). The increase in entrepreneurship is on the high end of the empirical
studies, which ranges from no impact in several countries to 2 and 8 percentage points in
Indian and Mongolia, and the increase in investment is also larger than in most. The Chinese
study shows a 48% increase in investment, however, which is comparable to the simulation.
The small increase in consumption is in line with the majority of the studies. Thailand and
Mongolia show significant increases of roughly 10 percent, while the others exhibit negligible
increases. In sum, the model does well in predicting the impact on entrepreneurship and
consumption, but somewhat overpredicts the impact on investment.16
The aggregate impacts of microcredit are similar to those of the asset grants in the model.
Capital decreases as income and resources are redistributed toward the poor who have lower
saving rates. The impacts on TFP is positive, but on net, the impacts of microcredit on
per-capita income are small.17
The main long run impact of microcredit is that it is highly redistributive. Indeed, in
contrast to the one-time asset grants, the permanent availability of the microcredit option
to poor households has long run impacts. Despite low take up, the option to finance entrepreneurship leads to a general equilibrium increase in the wage level, which is consistent
with the findings of Kaboski and Townsend (2012) and Breza and Kinnan (2016). When
widely available, microcredit can therefore be highly redistributive, even if the take-up rates
are low. Of course, these impacts are within a model where microcredit has substantial
impacts on entrepreneurship and investment.
16

In the version of the model in which a sizable fraction of the population faces a lack of labor market
opportunities and therefore become necessity entrepreneurs, microcredit has a bigger impact on consumption
(a 20 percent increase).
17
In the case with necessity entrepreneurs, the effects on per-capita income can be even negative, although
consumption increases.

26

MF Lending rate
Wage
Output
Capital
TFP
Consumption
Avg. z (active entrepre.)
Fraction of entrep.§
§

-4%
1.07
1.03
1.00
1.01
1.01
+0.04 p.p.

Short Run PE
6%

36%

1 by definition
1.04
1.02
1.01
1.01
1.03
1.02
1.01
1.01
1.02
1.01
+0.01 p.p +0.00 p.p

-4%

Long Run GE
6%

36%

1.05
1.02
0.94
1.04
1.03
1.03
+0.03 p.p

1.04
1.02
0.96
1.03
1.03
1.04
+0.02 p.p

1.01
1.01
1.00
1.01
1.00
1.02
+0.00 p.p

Deviations from the no-microcredit economy. All other quantities are divided by their respective
values in the no-microcredit economy.

Table 4: Simulation with Different Interest Rates on Microloans

3.4

New Analysis with Interest Rate Spreads

In Section 2.4, we conjectured that the interest rate charged on microloans may contribute to
the varying impacts both within microfinance interventions, and across microcredit and the
asset grant interventions. We pursue this formally here within the context of our model. In
the model results of Section 3.3.3, the interest rate on microcredit was the same as the the low
rate available to savers and borrowers from formal finance. Here we add microcredit-specific
intermediation costs that lead to higher interest rates on microfinance loans. In principle,
the variation in these spreads may reflect different rates of subsidies toward microfinance.
We simulate each lending rate as its own unique scenario.
In the simulations below, the interest rate on savings is -0.04. Table 4 reports results for
interest rates charged on microcredit of -0.04, 0.06 (comparable to the low interest village
funds in Table 3) and 0.36 (toward the higher end of the interest rates reported in Table 3),
where all quantities are normalized by the respective levels in the no-microcredit economy.
Focusing on the short-run, partial equilibrium results in the first three columns, we see that
the interest rates matter considerably. At market interest rates, in the short run, the model
predicts a 3 percentage point increase in the fraction of entrepreneurs in the population, a
3 percent increase in capital, and 7 percent increase in output. At the intermediate interest
rates, comparable to the village funds, these impacts are smaller, but there is still a 4 percent
increase in output, and a 1 percentage point increase in the fraction of entrepreneurs. At
the high interest rates, the impact on output is just 2 percent and there is no impact on
entrepreneurship. In the short-run, the increase in consumption—in this model without
necessity entrepreneurs—is small across the board, just 1 percent, however.
Focusing on the long run, GE impacts, we see the patterns discussed above for the low
and moderate interest rates: increases in the wage, reductions in capital accumulation, and

27

Take−up Rates

MF to Total Credit

1
0.8
0.6

1
rMF = −0.04
= 0.06
= 0.36

0.8
0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0
0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

0
0.7

1

0.75

Income Growth
0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

0.95

1

Consumption Growth

0.2

−0.2
0.7

0.8

0.95

−0.2
0.7

1

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

Fig. 3: Short-Run Effect of Microcredit, with Different Lending Rates

increases in TFP leading to small changes in output, but a somewhat larger increase in
consumption. For the case, with high interest rates, even these modest impacts all but
disappear.
Figure 3 gives more insights into these patterns. It plots take up rates, microcredit as a
fraction of total credit, and impacts on income and consumption at different percentiles of
the entrepreneurial ability (z) distribution for microcredit with different lending rates. The
figure crystallizes the heterogeneous impacts in the model. At all interest rates, borrowing
and impacts are concentrated near the higher end of the ability distribution, but as interest
rates increase, take up falls and becomes even more concentrated near the top (top left
panel). Microcredit relative to total credit shows even sharper declines as interest rates
increase, showing that the intensive margin also responds negatively (top right panel). The
lower panels show that the impacts on income and consumption are even more muted than
those on credit.
In sum, higher interest rates, as expected, dampen the effects of microfinance, bringing
the short-run investment and entrepreneurship predictions closer to the existing empirical
evidence on the effect of microfinance reviewed in Table 3. Another implication is the stronger
positive selection in who uses microloans. As shown in Figure 3, the higher the lending rates,

28

the more concentrated the effect of microfinance at the top of the entrepreneurial ability
distribution.

4

Concluding Remarks

We first reviewed the empirical evidence on the effect of asset grants and microcredit programs and then showed how these findings, to the extent that a pattern exists, can be
explained by a model in which agents make optimal decisions subject to financial frictions.
The simplest model underestimated the impact of asset grants in the short run and overestimated that of microfinance, although the microfinance results were more comparable to
the estimates from village funds programs. We first conjecture that a modified version of
our model with technical training, a common element of real-world asset grant programs,
can replicate the empirical evidence on asset grants. We then show that introducing realistic
levels of spreads between lending and deposit rates makes the model short run results align
with the empirical evaluations of microfinance. A central finding from both empirical and
quantitative research is the lack of dramatic escapes from poverty traps.
Because the empirical studies are small-scale relative to the overall economy, and the
followups are performed at most a few years after the program implementation, we only
learn from them short run, partial equilibrium outcomes. Having a fully specified equilibrium
model allows us to consider the macro-level effect of scaled up programs and also over a longer
time horizon. We find that it would be erroneous to simply extrapolate the short run PE
empirical results to predict long run GE effects. While one-time asset grant programs hold a
lot of promise based on the empirical evidence, the model shows that it has negligible longer
run effects, since the economy, absent any other permanent change, will revert eventually to
its unique invariant distribution. On the other hand, while microcredit programs in the real
world have low take-up rates and small overall impact, the model shows that, once they are
scaled up, through the increase in wage, even non-borrowers will be positively affected by the
programs, consistent with village funds programs that showed local labor market equilibrium
effect. Again, neither intervention leads to escapes from poverty traps, even when scaled up
to the full economy.
More broadly, we see large gains from trade between micro and macro development.
The well-established micro-experimental evidence helps us enhance theoretical models, while
quantitative theory is a natural guide to interpreting the micro-evidence and making predictions on what can be expected when existing programs are scaled up over time.

29

References
Aghion, P. and P. Bolton (1997): “A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and Development,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 151–172.
Angelucci, M., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015): “Microcredit Impacts: Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos
Banco,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 151–82.
Attanasio, O., B. Augsburg, R. De Haas, E. Fitzsimons, and H. Harmgart
(2015): “The Impacts of Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending in Mongolia,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 90–122.
Augsburg, B., R. De Haas, H. Harmgart, and C. Meghir (2015): “The Impacts
of Microcredit: Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 7, 183–203.
Bandiera, O., R. Burgess, N. Das, S. Gulesci, I. Rasul, and M. Sulaiman (2016):
“Labor Markets and Poverty in Village Economies,” Manuscript.
Banerjee, A., E. Breza, E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. G. Kinnan (2014):
“Does Microfinance Foster Business Growth? The Importance of Entrepreneurial Heterogeneity,” MIT.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2015a): “The Miracle of
Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 7, 22–53.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, N. Goldberg, D. Karlan, R. Osei, W. Parienté,
J. Shapiro, B. Thuysbaert, and C. Udry (2015b): “A multifaceted program causes
lasting progress for the very poor: Evidence from six countries,” Science, 348.
Banerjee, A., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015c): “Six Randomized Evaluations
of Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 7, 1–21.
Banerjee, A. V., E. Duflo, R. Chattopadhyay, and J. Shapiro (2011): “Targeting
the Hardcore Poor: An Impact Assesstment,” Unpublished manuscript, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Banerjee, A. V. and B. Moll (2010): “Why Does Misallocation Persist?” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 189–206.
30

Banerjee, A. V. and A. F. Newman (1993): “Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 274–298.
Blattman, C., N. Fiala, and S. Martinez (2014):

“Generating Skilled Self-

Employment in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 697–752.
Blattman, C., E. P. Green, J. Jamison, M. C. Lehmann, and J. Annan (2016):
“The Returns to Microenterprise Support among the Ultrapoor: A Field Experiment in
Postwar Uganda,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8, 35–64.
Bleakley, H. and J. P. Ferrie (2013): “Up from Poverty? The 1832 Cherokee Land
Lottery and the Long-run Distribution of Wealth,” NBER Working Papers 19175, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Breza, E. and C. Kinnan (2016): “Measuring the Equilibrium Impacts of Credit: Evidence from the Indian Microfinance Cisis,” Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Buera, F. J. (2008): “Persistency of Poverty, Financial Frictions, and Entrepreneurship,”
Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011): “Finance and Development: A Tale
of Two Sectors,” American Economic Review, 101, 1964–2002.
——— (2012): “The Macroeconomics of Microfinance,” NBER Working Papers 17905, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
——— (2014): “Macro-Perspective on Asset Grants Programs: Occupational and Wealth
Mobility,” American Economic Review, 104, 159–64.
——— (2015): “Entrepreneurship and Financial Frictions: A Macrodevelopment Perspective,” Annual Review of Economics, 7, 409–436.
Buera, F. J. and Y. Shin (2013): “Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A
Quantitative Exploration,” Journal of Political Economy, 121, 221 – 272.
Cai, S., A. Park, and S. Wang (2016): “Microfinance Can Raise Incomes: Evidence
from a Randomized Control Trial in China,” Tech. rep., HKUST.
Crépon, B., F. Devoto, E. Duflo, and W. Parienté (2015): “Estimating the Impact
of Microcredit on Those Who Take It Up: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in
Morocco,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 123–50.
31

de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2008): “Returns to Capital in Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123,
1329–1372.
de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2012): “One-Time Transfers of Cash
or Capital Have Long-Lasting Effects on Microenterprises in Sri Lanka,” Science, 335,
962–966.
Emran, M. S., V. Robano, and S. C. Smith (2014): “Assessing the Frontiers of
Ultrapoverty Reduction: Evidence from Challenging the Frontiers of Poverty Reduction/Targeting the Ultra-poor, an Innovative Program in Bangladesh,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 62, 339–380.
Fafchamps, M., D. McKenzie, S. Quinn, and C. Woodruff (2013): “Microenterprise
Growth and the Flypaper Effect: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ghana,”
Tech. rep., University of Oxford.
Field, E. and R. Pande (2008): “Repayment Frequency and Default in Microfinance:
Evidence From India,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6, 501–509.
Field, E., R. Pande, J. Papp, and N. Rigol (2013): “Does the Classic Microfinance
Model Discourage Entrepreneurship among the Poor? Experimental Evidence from India,”
American Economic Review, 103, 2196–2226.
Ghatak, M. and N.-H. Jiang (2002): “A simple model of inequality, occupational choice,
and development,” Journal of Development Economics, 69, 205–226.
Giné, X. and R. M. Townsend (2004): “Evaluation of Financial Liberalization: A General Equilibrium Model with Constrained Occupation Choice,” Journal of Development
Economics, 74, 269–307.
Greaney, B., J. P. Kaboski, and E. V. Leemput (2016): “Can Self-Help Groups
Really Be “Self-Help”?” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Haushofer, J. and J. Shapiro (2013): “Household Response to Income Changes: Evidence from an Unconditional Cash Transfer Program in Kenya,” Tech. rep., Abdul Latif
Jameel Poverty Action Lab.
Kaboski, J. and R. Townsend (2005): “Policies and Impact: An Analysis of VillageLevel Microfinance Institutions,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 3, 1–50.

32

——— (2011): “A Structural Evaluation of a Large-Scale Quasi-Experimental Microfinance
Initiative,” Econometrica, 79, 1357–1406.
Kaboski, J. P., M. Lipscomb, and V. Midrigan (2014): “The Aggregate Impact of
Household Saving and Borrowing Constraints: Designing a Field Experiment in Uganda,”
American Economic Review, 104, 171–76.
Kaboski, J. P. and R. M. Townsend (2012): “The Impact of Credit on Village
Economies,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4, 98–133.
Karlan, D., R. Knight, and C. Udry (2015): “Consulting and Capital Experiments
with Microenterprise Tailors in Ghana,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
118, 281 – 302.
Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2010): “Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply
Decisions to Estimate the Impacts,” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 433–464.
——— (2011): “Microcredit in Theory and Practice: Using Randomized Credit Scoring for
Impact Evaluation,” Science, 332, 1278–1284.
Lucas, Robert E, J. (1993): “Making a Miracle,” Econometrica, 61, 251–72.
Matsuyama, K. (2011): “Imperfect Credit Markets, Household Wealth Distribution, and
Development,” Annual Review of Economics, 3, 339–362.
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2008): “Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital
and Access to Finance in Mexico,” World Bank Economic Review, 22, 457–482.
McKenzie, D. J. (2016): “Identifying and Spurring High-Growth Entrepreneurship: Experimental Evidence from a Business Plan Competition,” Manuscript, World Bank.
Moll, B. (2014): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-financing Undo
Capital Misallocation?” American Economic Review, 104, 3186–3221.
Morduch, J., S. Ravi, and J. Bauchet (2012): “Failure vs. Displacement: Why An
Innovative Anti-Poverty Program Showed No Net Impact,” Discussion Paper Series 32,
PRIMCED.
Piketty, T. (1997): “The Dynamics of the Wealth Distribution and the Interest Rate with
Credit Rationing,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 173–189.
Tarozzi, A., J. Desai, and K. Johnson (2015): “The Impacts of Microcredit: Evidence
from Ethiopia,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 54–89.
33

