                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       APPLYING BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS TO PUBLIC POLICY IN CANADA

                                        Robert French
                                       Philip Oreopoulos

                                      Working Paper 22671
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22671


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




We are extremely grateful to Raj Chande (Behavioral Insights Team), Urvashi Dhawan-Biswal
(Employment and Social Development Canada), Mireille Ethier (Canada Revenue Agency),
Reuben Ford (Social Research and Demonstration Corporation), Elizabeth Hardy (Privy Council
Office), Julian House (Treasury Board Secretariat), Kory Kroft (University of Toronto), Kathryn
Mills (Canada Revenue Agency), Hasti Rahbar (Employment and Social Development Canada),
Aaron Rosenberg (Canada Revenue Agency), Steven Ryan (Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action
Lab), Dilip Soman (Behavioural Economics in Action at Rotman), Will Tucker (Ideas42), Sasha
Tregebov (Deloitte), and Ekaterina Tyshchenko (Deloitte) for providing helpful comments and
information. Opinions expressed in this paper are by the authors only and do not necessarily
represent those from any government or institutional organization, nor those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. All omissions or errors are, of course, the authors’ sole
responsibility.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Robert French and Philip Oreopoulos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Applying Behavioral Economics to Public Policy in Canada
Robert French and Philip Oreopoulos
NBER Working Paper No. 22671
September 2016
JEL No. J10,J18,J24,J48

                                         ABSTRACT

Behavioral economics incorporates ideas from Psychology, Sociology, and Neuroscience to
better predict how individuals make long-term decisions. Often the ideas adopted include present
or inattention bias, both potentially leading to sub-optimal outcomes. But these models also point
to opportunities for effective, low-cost government policies that can have meaningful positive
effects on people’s long-term well-being. The last decade has been marked by a growing interest
from governments the world over in using behavioral economics to inform policy decisions. This
is true of Canada as well. In this paper we discuss the increasingly important role behavioral
economics plays in Canadian public policy. We first contextualize government policies that have
incorporated insights from behavioral economics by outlining a collection of models of
intertemporal choice. We then present examples of public policy initiatives that are based upon
findings in the field, placing particular emphasis on Canadian initiatives. We also document
future opportunities, challenges, and limitations.


Robert French
150 St. George St.
Toronto, Ontario
Canada
robert.french@mail.utoronto.ca

Philip Oreopoulos
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca
I. Introduction

        For decisions involving immediate costs and long-term benefits, standard investment

models in economics assume that individuals carefully consider every expected consequence from

one action against every expected consequence from each alternative action. Take, for example,

the choice that most commuters face each day on their way to work: the choice between walking

up a set of stairs or standing on an adjacent escalator. How does the commuter resolve this

decision? Under the traditional rational investment model, the commuter evaluates the immediate

cost of taking the stairs against the long-term and uncertain health benefits of doing so (and

likewise with the escalator). She then enacts the action with the largest associated lifetime net-

benefit.

        And yet, contrary to the traditional model's predictions, people often respond dramatically

to small environmental changes that make one action more salient or attractive without

significantly altering its consequences. In Hamburg, for instance, commuters suddenly started

taking the stairs to work after city officials painted them in the design of a running track, complete

with lane markers and pictures of other runners bounding forward.1 In Sweden, designing a set of

stairs in the form of piano keys – that actually played musical notes – caused 66% more people to

choose the stairs.2 In instances such as these, where the chief costs and benefits have not changed,

we often see markedly different behavior result from supposedly irrelevant environmental




1
  In 2015, in a new subway station, Jungfernstieg, in Hamburg, Germany, a red running track was painted on top of
a set of stairs with the goal of encouraging public transit use and the use of the stairs.
2
  In 2009 a small Swedish initiative sought to make the daily activity of taking the stairs more fun. You can watch
the video of this particular initiative here.
changes, and perhaps for a very simple reason: it is fun to pretend you are racing along a track or

playing the piano.3

        While traditional economic models may have a difficult time explaining such

interventions’ effects, the emerging field of behavioral economics seeks to refine the standard

neoclassical assumptions of human behavior in an attempt to better predict these apparent

anomalous actions. To do this, behavioral economics incorporates findings from Psychology,

Neuroscience, and Sociology into its models of human behaviour. These models often allow for

deviations from the standard assumption of economic rationality, capturing the cognitive and

perceptual biases of our brains. Yet, at the same time, behavioral economics does not seek to reject

neoclassical utility maximization models, but rather to refine them, to incorporate human

tendencies that are not always in our best long-run interests, but nevertheless prevalent.

        Incorporating more realistic assumptions of human behavior into economic models can

lead to profound differences in predicted actions, many of which are of interest to practitioners

and policy makers. To this end, the field has attracted wide and growing attention: compared to

traditional programs with the same goals, interventions that draw from insights in behavioral

economics may be more cost-effective, given that research suggests that even small changes in the

way choices are presented or in the way information is conveyed can lead to large changes in

behavior.4

        As a consequence of this research, the last decade has been marked by a growing interest

from governments across the world in using behavioral economics to inform policy decisions. The



3
  Richard Thaler, in his book ‘Misbehaving’, terms such irrelevant environmental factors as SIFs, standing for
‘Supposedly Irrelevant Factors.’
4
  For a summary of such research, see Madrian (2014).
pioneering example of government engagement with this field of research is the UK’s Behavioural

Insights Team (BIT). This team, known as the “nudge unit”, was established in 2010 after Cass

Sunstein and Richard Thaler’s book “Nudge” made it to the British Conservative Party’s summer

reading list (Thaler, 2015). The stated objective of the UK’s BIT is to spread the understanding of

behavioral economics among British policy makers as well as to conduct trials and policy work

that utilise findings from the field (Service et al., 2014). After the first two years of the BIT’s

inception, the team coined four principles that undergird their interaction with public policy and

in turn succinctly summarize the way in which policy makers the world over seek to incorporate

findings from behavioral economics into their policies more generally: 1) make it Easy; 2) make

it Attractive; 3) make it Social; and 4) make it Timely (Service et al., 2014).

        The appeal of applying behavioral economics to public policy has been the low costs

associated with many of the behavioral economic interventions, the effectiveness of such

interventions, and the ease of testing these interventions through randomized control trials. That

the UK’s BIT successfully introduced many cost saving and effective policies has served to propel

the use of behaviorally based initiatives across a wide range of government departments in many

countries; many government initiatives have explicitly stated that they intend to model their

respective behavioral insight teams after the UK’s BIT.5 Departments utilizing behavioral insights

have subsequently developed in many countries within both the private sector and the public

sector, and with collaboration between the two sectors (Whitehead et al., 2014).

        Within the last few years behavioral economics has played an increasingly important role

in policy making within Canada. At the federal level, the Innovation Hub at the Privy Council


5
 See, for example, the official announcement concerning Ontario’s Behavioural Insights Unit and the White
House’s Social and Behavioral Sciences Team 2015 Annual Report (Ministry of Finance, 2015) & (Social and
Behavioral Sciences Team, 2015).
Office was established in February of 2015. The Innovation Hub is a resource that works alongside

other federal departments, acting as a source of expertise on areas such as behavioral economics

and design thinking. Similarly, the Canada Revenue Agency and the Ministry of Employment and

Social Development Canada have recently established Innovation Labs. The Canada Revenue

Agency has been using insights from the behavioral economics literature for some time now and

its Lab helps frame the experiments and disseminate the results across the organization.

Additionally, at the provincial level, Ontario’s Behavioural Insights Unit was officially established

in 2015 and has since conducted several successful pilot projects all based upon some of the core

principles of behavioral economics. We believe there is presently a growing enthusiasm for

incorporating behavioral economics into public policy within Canada.

       The purpose of this paper is not to provide an exhaustive literature review of studies

documenting behavioral economic insights, but rather to provide an up-to-date report on the role

that behavioral economics plays in Canadian public policy. In the next section, we contextualize

government policies that have incorporated insights from behavioral economics by presenting a

recent collection of behavioral economic models of intertemporal choice. We then provide a set of

examples of policy initiatives that have incorporated insights from behavioral economics, with a

particular focus on initiatives occurring in Canada. The set of examples is not intended to be

comprehensive, but rather representative of the current policies that are being enacted within

Canada. Finally, we consider the Canadian experience of behavioral economics in an international

framework, comparing its experience to that of other countries. This final section will also

document future opportunities, challenges, and limitations to incorporating behavioral economics

into public policy more generally.
II. Behavioral Models of Intertemporal Choice

        In this section we outline three models that are frequently used in behavioral economics as

alternatives to the standard time-consistent intertemporal model of utility maximization. We do

this to contextualize the government policies we discuss in the next section. All three models –

present-bias, inattentiveness, and social identity, which incorporate tendencies observed in

Psychology and Sociology – suggest new opportunities for effective, low-cost government policies

that can have meaningful positive effects on people’s long-term well-being. We also underscore

how behavioral economics should not be perceived as a rejection of neoclassical economics, but

rather as an add-on that refines some of its underlying assumptions about human behaviour.

        Many decisions in life involve immediate costs and long-term, uncertain benefits. Many

of them matter substantially over the long-run, such as decisions to smoke, exercise, use sunscreen,

save, study, and practice.         Paul Samuelson, in his classic 1937 article titled, "A Note on

Measurement of Utility", proposed an approach for formalizing an individual's decision-making

process when considering such intertemporal trade-offs. Samuelson, in formulating his model of

intertemporal choice wanted to extend Irving Fisher’s two period indifference-curve depiction of

intertemporal choice into multiple time periods and, further, to show that “representing

intertemporal trade-offs [in utility] required a cardinal measure of utility” (Frederick, Loewenstein,

& O’Donoghue, 2002, p.355). Yet, despite his fervent reservations regarding the applicability of

his model to questions of public policy, Samuelson’s formulation of intertemporal decision making

became the bedrock of contemporary intertemporal utility maximization.6 The model's parsimony




6
  Samuelson rejected the idea that the discounted model of intertemporal utility maximization be used in
policymaking. He famously concluded his 1937 article by noting that the idea of using the geometric discount rate to
influence “ethical judgements of policy is one which deserves the impatience of modern economists.”
and convenience for working with dynamic optimization problems explains its overwhelming use

within the economics profession (Frederick, Loewenstein, & O’Donoghue, 2002).

       Consider a discrete-time version of Samuelson’s model, wherein each time period the

individual faces a binary choice:




𝑉(𝑥) = ∑𝑇𝑡=0 𝛿 𝑡 𝑢(𝑥, 𝑡), where 𝑥 ∈ {0,1} and 0 < 𝛿 ≤ 1.                                       (1)




       The crux of this model lies in 𝛿 𝑡 , the geometric discount rate. This captures all the relevant

information pertaining to the intertemporal portion of the individual’s choice-set. It is constant,

implying that the individual compares taking the stairs now versus next week in the same manner

she compares taking them a year from now versus a year and one week. Importantly, decisions are

time-consistent on behalf of the individual; evaluated over any point in time, the individual is

always satisfied with her earlier decision.

       In discussing possible errors in intertemporal decision making, it helps to think normatively

about how a person should trade off present versus future consumption to maximize her true well-

being. Economists often assume individuals are best off in this model with 0 < 𝛿 < 1, even

though this implies that teenagers value themselves now more than themselves 20 years from now,

and parents value their younger children more than their older children. While more challenging

to work with in solving dynamic optimization problems, O'Donoghue and Rabin (2001) argue that

δ should be one. A δ value of one "is more in accord with the intuition that everybody...views as

a more sensible welfare criterion: that we should wish on ourselves, our children, our neighbors,

and society the equal weighting of the expected hedonic well-being at different moments"
(O’Donoghue & Rabin, 2001, p.37). For the remainder of the section, assume that an individual

indeed maximizes lifetime welfare when δ=1, though the discussion would remain the same if

choosing some other constant.

       To further simplify the exposition, and to bring the model to life, we also frame the decision

regarding taking the stairs (x=1) versus the escalator (x=0) on our daily commute in terms of the

model. Taking the stairs is costly; in the present moment we would much rather relax on an

adjacent escalator. Yet, we know that our future health, and thus well-being will likely be higher

if we do undergo the small cost of taking the stairs on a regular basis. Therefore, each time facing

this decision the individual must evaluate the immediate cost of taking the stairs against the

corresponding long-term and uncertain health benefits of doing so.

Present-bias:

       One of the most documented deviations in human behavior from the rational economic

agent is that we are often impatient. When contemplating future events, we tend to place greater

weight on earlier events as they get closer to the present moment, violating the neo-classical

assumption of time-consistency (O’Donoghue & Rabin, 1999). O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999)

document and label this behavioral insight, ‘present-bias’.

       Consider again our commuter deciding whether or not to take the stairs each day. If the

commuter has present-bias preferences, we can imagine them thinking to themselves on Monday:

“tomorrow I will start taking those stairs”, and on Tuesday: “tomorrow I will start taking those

stairs”, and on… Each day the present-bias commuter may earnestly want to start taking the stairs

the following day, yet when tomorrow is realized – because they place a greater weight on the
present moment – the cost of taking the stairs outweighs any expected long-term benefits of future

good health.

       David Laibson’s (1997) model of hyperbolic discounting attempts to describe this

phenomenon more formally:




𝑈(𝑥) = 𝑢(𝑥, 0) + 𝛽 ∑𝑇𝑡=0 𝑢(𝑥, 𝑡), where 0 ≤ 𝛽 < 1.                                    (2)




       Here, the 𝛽 captures the reduced weight placed on all future outcomes relative to immediate

ones, and a smaller 𝛽 implies higher impatience on behalf of the decision maker. Deciding whether

or not to take the stairs is a particularly interesting example to use when contemplating this model

since the action of taking the stairs only once is unlikely to make a long-term difference; the

commuter has to resolve not only to take the stairs that day, but virtually every day on their

commute in order for them to achieve future health benefits. We can therefore empathise with the

commuter who in the present moment neglects the option to take the stairs today in favour of

tomorrow, especially when feeling hurried or tired.

       This model highlights the difficulty traditional neo-classical models of intertemporal

choice have in formalizing how large short-term psychic costs (as represented by 𝛽) of actions

such as taking the stairs are compatible with individuals’ corresponding desires for future good

health and wellbeing. If we assume any realized costs of actually taking the stairs are small relative

to the resulting health benefits of doing so, then to accommodate tendencies to procrastinate we

have to place a very large weight on the immediate cost of the action relative to the same cost in

the future. To do this would necessitate violating the neo-classical assumption of time-consistency
inherent in traditional models of intertemporal choice, highlighting an important conceptual

distinction between traditional and behavioral models of intertemporal choice.

       Interestingly, BIs such as present-bias are increasingly being grounded in neuroscience.

There exists ample neurological evidence that the human brain treats decisions involving

immediate consequences differently to ones that do not. Notably, McClure et al. (2007) reports

students’ brain activity during an experiment that tested how these students responded to decisions

involving different time horizons. In the experiment, students arrived to a lab thirsty. These

students were then asked to choose between having sips of juice/water at one of two specified

times in the future. For instance, one of the choices involved choosing between one sip of

refreshing juice in 20 minutes, or two in 25 minutes, and another choice was between one sip of

juice now, or two sips of juice in five minutes.

       Under the assumption of geometric (or no) discounting, these two choices are identical: in

both cases, waiting an additional five minutes provides an extra sip of juice. Yet, the results from

these two particular choices are markedly different. When deciding between one sip in 20 minutes

and two sips in 25 minutes, roughly 70% of the students were willing to wait the extra five minutes

for an additional sip of juice. In contrast, when deciding between one sip of juice immediately and

two sips of juice in just five minutes time, only around 40% of the students elected to wait the

additional five minutes for an extra sip of juice.

       Furthermore, in addition to waiting up to 25 minutes for a sip of juice or water – and

perhaps to the displeasure of the participants – the students were asked to make their decisions

while in an MRI scanner, allowing the researchers to examine which areas of the students’ brains

were being stimulated during the decision making processes. The MRI scans indicated that the

brain activity of the students when making the decision involving the distant sips of juice was
strongest in the prefrontal cortex (the area of the brain most associated with more complex decision

making), whereas brain activity of the students when making the decision involving the

opportunity to have an immediate sip of juice was strongest in the amygdala (an area of the brain

associated with emotional responses).

           While economists are not necessarily interested in the underlying mechanisms between

causal interactions, grounding economic decision making processes in neuroscience can help

better model the economic relationships they are interested in (Krajibich & Dean, 2015).

Furthermore, as in this example of present-bias preferences, evidence from neuroscience can help

ensure that one’s postulates regarding human behavior are applicable across a variety of settings;

neuroscience can provide a solid foundation for further economic investigation by refining our

underlying assumptions about human behaviour.




Inattention:

           While impatience may be a product of our neurological networks processing decisions

involving immediate outcomes differently to those involving future ones, other sub-optimal

economic behavior may result from our brain simply not paying attention. Sometimes we may

overlook a decision because we are unaware it, or we discern (consciously or subconsciously) the

cost of deliberating upon a decision to be too high relative to any benefits associated with the

decision itself.7 Sub-optimal economic behavior may thus arise when particular options are not

salient.




7
    For an interesting attempt to incorporate these ideas into neo-classical theory, see (Woodford, 2012).
         Xavier Gabaix (2015) incorporates this idea into the intertemporal model of utility

maximization in a tractable manner:




𝑈(𝑥, 𝑦) = ∑𝑇𝑡=0 𝑢(𝑚𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑡) where 𝑚 ∈ (0,1) .                                                         (3)




         In this model there are two possible actions: x and y. We assume that y is an outcome

associated with an inherently salient decision, such as where to go after ascending either the stairs

or the escalator. In contrast, assume that x is a decision that is unimportant relative to our final

destination such as the commuter’s decision itself. Specifically, the model places an attention

weight, m, on the action x. In the extreme case when m=0, we just do not think about the action x

as an option.8

         This model can be related to the work of Daniel Kahneman, who in his book “Thinking,

Fast and Slow” discusses how we tend to treat decisions of various complexities with two different

cognitive ‘Systems.’ Building off the work of previous psychologists, Kahneman (2011) notes that

we tend to make simple decisions (such as whether or not to take the escalator) automatically, and

that these automatic decisions are conducted by our ‘System 1’, without much deliberate thought.

This is in contrast to our ‘System 2’, which is preserved for more complex decisions, and which

operates under our direct attention. That the decisions made by our ‘System 1’ are automatic, they

tend to be determined by habits and heuristics. Thus, if our habits or heuristics do not align with


8
  Notice here that the attention weight, m, is exogenous to the individual’s utility function in equation 3), even though
we consider it to be something that is determined (consciously or subconsciously) by the individual herself. With m
being exogenous, it is thus possible for us to talk about the individual acting sub-optimally with respect to her true
liftetime utility function, in which m would be endogenous and consequently set at an optimal level by the individual
in each time period.
our long-term best interests, we may be unwittingly enacting sub-optimal economic behaviour; if

we were forced to stop and consider the trade-off between taking the stairs or the escalator, we

may act differently than if we were acting under the guidance of our heuristics.

        Additionally, recent research by Sendhil Mullainathan and Eldar Shafir points to the fact

that inattention to decisions involving trade-offs – including intertemporal ones – is exacerbated

when individuals have less cognitive ‘bandwidth’ to devote to thinking about said decisions.9 They

suggest that an individual’s bandwidth is particularly affected by stress (e.g. from money, time, or

family), which in turn can be directly related to external factors such as poverty. Through this lens,

stressful circumstances make it hard for us to contemplate decisions, forcing us to rely on heuristics

and habits, which in turn may explain much non-rational economic behaviour.




Social-Identity:

        Social-Psychologists often emphasize the enormous role social-identity plays in shaping

preferences. They argue that questions like "what kind of person am I?" and “what are others like

me doing?” serve as powerful reference points for deciding how to act. Akerlof and Kranton (2000)

formalize this tendency in a simple theoretical model that incorporates into an individual's utility

function a social identity function, in which deviations in one’s actions from their own reference

group’s actions creates dissonance and declining utility. Here we combine a simplified version of

this social identity function with Laibson’s model of present-bias preferences to highlight how




9
 Mullainathan and Shafir (2013) use ‘bandwidth’ as an umbrella term to measure our “computational capacity, our
ability to pay attention, to make good decisions, to stick with our plans, and to resist temptations.”
immediate social influences coupled with an over-emphasis of the present can have a very large

impact on one’s economic decisions. Formally, consider:




𝑉(𝑥) = 𝑢 (𝑥, 𝑡, Ω(𝑥, 𝑥̅𝑔 )) + 𝛽 ∑𝑇𝑡=1 𝑢 (𝑥, 𝑡, Ω(𝑥, 𝑥̅𝑔 )),                     (4)




where we define Ω(𝑥, 𝑥̅𝑔 ) as the social identity function which is a decreasing function of |𝑥 − 𝑥̅𝑔 |,

and 𝑥̅𝑔 is the mean action performed by the individual’s peer group. Individuals receive utility not

only from how their own actions impact them directly, but from how those actions relate to what

others in a group they identify with typically take or consider desirable.

        If a present-bias individual discounts the future and cares a lot about how she fits in

socially, what others around her are doing or what advice she gets from her group could be

extremely important to her actions now, while having long-term, consequences later. For example,

surrounded by co-workers that celebrate taking the stairs each day instead of the escalator can lead

to long-term health benefits through a desire to share common social experiences.




Implications:

        The behavioral economic models presented above, which all deviate from the one in which

individuals maximize their true long-term welfare, suggest cost-effective opportunities for

government policy to improve lives. They formally suggest many different ways in which

governments can affect change without altering the chief costs and benefits of individuals’ choice

sets. They provide an economic lens to interpret the effectiveness – or lack thereof – of such policy
interventions, often incorporating practices from marketing and other consumer behavior driven

fields of inquiry into a formal economic framework.

       In this regard, we consider two broad types of government interventions. First, let us

consider choice limiting interventions. By way of example, if we assume that taking the stairs as

opposed to the escalator is in most people’s long-term best interest, then a choice limiting

intervention would be to ban the use of the escalator. Aside from not respecting the individuals for

whom the escalator is clearly the better choice (e.g. a broken leg, or just finished a marathon), this

intervention removes the choice of the escalator entirely. In addition to any moral considerations,

as economists we are reluctant to impose choice constraints on individuals when trade-offs exist,

especially when these trade-offs are not fully observed by the policy maker. This does not mean

that bans or mandates do not occasionally serve a purpose in public policy (consider seat-belt use

mandates), but improving individuals’ behavior through such means usually comes at the expense

of making other individuals worse off.

       Consider instead choice preserving interventions, where particular actions by the

individual are encouraged without removing the individual’s liberty to choose alternative actions.

Such choice preserving policy interventions typically prompt people to think of the benefits of a

particular action, or make a particular action appear more appealing than the alternatives without

actually altering any outcomes of the options available to the decision maker. Cass Sunstein uses

an apt example of a GPS device in one’s car to illustrate this idea. He notes that “A GPS steers

people in a certain direction, but people are at liberty to select their own route instead” (Sunstein,

2014, p.2). It is these choice preserving policy interventions that Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein

termed as “Nudges.”
       However, one criticism often raised against the use of nudging in public policy is the

potential for manipulation since individuals may not be aware that they are being encouraged to

act in a particular manner. That nudges have the potential to encourage behavior that is in conflict

with their own long-term interests further validates this concern. Yet, a potential way of assuaging

this criticism is to make the use of the nudge public knowledge. For instance, Sunstein (2014)

maintains that any official nudge should be transparent and open; if a nudge is openly subject to

public scrutiny, the chances of manipulation are minimized.

       In contrast, an argument defending the use of nudging in public policy is that organizations

or policy makers cannot avoid nudging, regardless of their policy proposal; every policy

intervention is embedded in a framework that is not directly considered part of the intervention

itself. For example, when a new policy is introduced, it is often obliged to feature a default option.

Behavioral economics just takes this one step further and carefully considers what this default

option should be in order to maximize the welfare of the program’s participants, given knowledge

of cognitive and perceptual biases present in human behaviour.

       Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the very fact that nudges do influence behavior may

validate their use. It suggests that people do overreact to immediate circumstances and thus may

deviate from the actions that are in accord with the standard intertemporal investment model.

Given this discussion though, one thing is certain: nudges cross many different boundaries such as

economics, politics, and ethics, and must be considered carefully before being implemented.




III. Interventions
        In this section we present policies and pilot projects that are based, at least in-part, upon

the models outlined in section II. We place an emphasis on Canadian interventions, and while our

examples are not comprehensive, we believe they are representative of the initiatives currently

underway in Canada. We focus on the following areas of public policy: Saving, Health, Education,

Employment, and Taxation.




Saving:

        One of the most well-known applications of behavioral economics concerns saving for

retirement. When deciding how much to save, the standard economic investment model assumes

that individuals are forward looking, able to forecast their needs, and face little difficulty following

through with their plans. Several studies note, however, that the behavior of at least some people

deviate from this model (e.g., Benartzi and Thaler, 2007). Many seem to recognize this and report

feeling they are not saving enough. For instance, Choi et al. (2002) presents results from a survey

at a large U.S. food corporation showing that, out of every 100 respondents, 68 believe their

savings rate to be too low. Yet, of these 68 individuals only 24 plan to increase their savings rate

in the coming months, and further still, only 3 of these 24 respondents actually do.

        A very successful approach used to encourage more savings among workers is to change

the default enrollment option in employer pension programs.10 When employees have to opt-in to

their employer’s pension plan, take-up tends to be much lower than when employees are enrolled




10
  One cannot rule out the possibility of changes to other savings accounts negating any increase in savings induced
by workplace pension enrollment. However, recent evidence from Canada suggests crowd-out rates from workplace
pension plans may be significantly less than one on average; Messacar (2015) estimates that a $1 increase in
employer contributions to workplace pension plans crowd out private savings by $0.50 on average.
automatically. This is especially true within the earlier years of employees’ tenure at a firm.11

Madrian and Shea (2001) document this phenomenon for a large U.S. company that introduced

automatic enrollment into its 401(k) plan in 1998 (with the option to opt-out). The authors found

that participation in the company’s plan was 38 percent higher among employees who were

automatically enrolled. Further, after accounting for the difference in tenure and demographic

characteristics between the group prior to automatic enrollment, who could not join until one year

of tenure at the firm, and the group after, who were automatically enrolled when they started

working at the firm, the estimated comparable gap in participation rates increased to a remarkable

50%, showing the power that default enrollment options have on saving rates.

        The results from this study are indicative of other, larger initiatives in retirement-saving

plans the world over. Perhaps most notable is the UK’s 2008 Pension Act. Concerned by declining

saving rates among working adults, the UK phased in a requirement whereby employers are

mandated to enroll their employees into a workplace pension plan (National Audit Office, 2015).12

After becoming enrolled, employees can opt-out of their workplace pension plan, yet so far only

between 8% and 14% have chosen to do so, leading to a huge increase in the number of private

sector workers being enrolled in workplace pensions (Figure 1). The legislation is estimated to

have encouraged an additional £6.6 billion into workplace pensions since its first two years of

implementation, and this number is predicted to increase to between £14 billion and £16 billion by

2019-2020 (National Audit Office, 2015).

                                             [Insert Figure I here]




11
   For a summary of the empirical literature surrounding this phenomenon, see Beshears et al. (2009).
12
   The minimum contribution rate for employers is currently 1% of each employee’s salary, but is increasing to 2%
in October 2017, and 3% in October 2018 (National Audit Office, 2015).
        Motivated by similar concerns of undersaving, the Canadian government announced in

June its plan to enhance the Canada Pension Plan (CPP) (Department of Finance Canada, 2016).13

The federal government is seeking to increase the CPP’s replacement rate from 25 to 33.3%, and

to expand the maximum amount of income subject to CPP contributions, from $54,900 to $82,700

(Department of Finance Canada, 2016 & Milligan, 2016). Support for the CPP enhancement has

been buttressed by research suggesting that increases in workplace pension plans in Canada do not

fully crowd-out private savings, and that such increases are more effective in raising saving rates

among individuals with weaker saving histories (Messacar, 2015).

        Another means to increase saving among working Canadians is to encourage the use of

private workplace pension plans, whereby employers and employees contribute to a company

fund.14 An immediate response to this goal is to mandate automatic enrollment into workplace

plans, as has occurred in the UK. However, in Canada, there are currently legislative barriers to

imposing an opt-out default policy for workplace pension plans (Palameta, Vincent, & Voyer,

2011). One alternative approach to encourage participation is to ensure every employee makes an

affirmative choice between whether or not to enroll in any such program. Not choosing is not an

option. This approach necessarily makes the decision more salient, discouraging the use of

heuristics and combatting tendencies to procrastinate. Such choices have been termed ‘active

choices’ or ‘active decisions’ within the behavioral economics literature.

        Carrol et al. (2009) demonstrates the effectiveness of ‘active choice’ in promoting

participation in workplace pension plans. The authors analysed a large financial services firm that



13
  Many studies have analysed undersaving in Canada. See, for example, Wolfson (2011) and Moore et al. (2010).
14
  Prior to the announcement by the federal government that they are to work on enhancing the CPP, the Ontario
government sought to mandate enrollment into workplace pension plans, through the Ontario Retirement Pension
Plan (ORPP).
changed its 401(k) enrollment policy. Prior to November 1997, new hires to this firm were required

to submit a form indicating their 401(k) enrollment preference. In contrast, after November 1997,

new hires did not receive this form but were instead given a toll-free phone number to call if they

wanted to enroll in the firm’s plan. The former enrollment process required employees to make an

active choice between either being enrolled in the plan or not, whereas the latter enrollment process

assumed a default of non-enrollment. The authors show that after three months of employment,

participation rates were 28 percentage points higher among employees hired prior to November

1997 (those who had to make an active choice), and that this gap persisted between for at least 42

months after being hired.

         The goal of Canadian policy makers to increase saving rates is not limited to retirement-

saving either. The Canadian government is actively encouraging families to save more for their

children’s future education. As part of the Registered Education Savings Plan (RESP) (a tax-

deferred savings account for post-secondary education), the federal government offers low-income

families up to $2,000 in the form of a grant, called the Canada Learning Bond (CLB). However,

despite no minimum contribution needed to receive the grant, it is estimated that in 2008 only 16%

of eligible households had claimed their CLB (Nayar Consulting, 2013).

         A lack of awareness of the RESP as well as the complexity of its sign-up process contribute

to these low participation rates (Nayar Consulting, 2013 and Milligan, 2002).15 For example,

parents are required to apply for and provide a Social Insurance Number for their children and

meet with a private bank representative to process a lengthy application. Here, seemingly



15
  Another potential contributor to these low take-up rates is that when the CLB was introduced in 2004, only
children born after the introduction of the policy were eligible for the grant. Since many parents may consider saving
for their children’s education more seriously when their children are above the age of four, this feature of the
program may have inadvertently contributed to the low take-up rates recorded in 2008.
innocuous up-front costs may be unintentionally affecting individuals’ propensity to take actions

that are in accord with their long-term best interest. Working with these setup constraints, the

Omega Foundation established a national program called SmartSAVER that encourages eligible

families to claim the CLB by simplifying the application process and placing more onus on banks

to complete the eligibility process. To do this, SmartSAVER first collaborates with both private

and public organizations to promote awareness of the CLB and RESP through numerous marketing

schemes. Second, it simplifies the RESP application process by taking applicants through an online

application with five simple steps (figure II). Third, upon completing the online application, an

experienced bank representative contacts the potential client to arrange an appointment and finalise

registration, further simplifying the enrollment process by turning the onus upon the financial

institution to complete the application (Kenter, 2015).

       Throughout the pilot project in Toronto, CLB take-up rates increased from 27.7% in 2009

to 39.3% in 2012 (Nayar Consulting, 2013). Yet, there remains a wide disparity in CLB take-up

rates across regions in Canada, signalling potential for improvement; take-up rates are as low as

1% in areas of Manitoba, and as high as 48% in regions of Toronto, where the initiative first began

(SmartSaver, 2014). Government 'Nudge Units' such as Ontario's Behavioural Insights Unit and

the Privy Council’s Innovation Hub are currently exploring ways to simplify the CLB take-up

process, which may require coordination with the Canada Revenue Agency to help verify low-

income status.    A system by which Canadian newborn and landed immigrant children are

automatically enrolled in an RESP, with regular updates sent to parents and easy ways to deposit,

would circumvent many issues related to the program’s salience and enrollment process. In the

meantime, the Omega Foundation’s ‘SmartSAVER’ program provides a good example for how an
organization can help encourage greater take-up of public services while working with existing

legal and procedural constraints.

                                       [Insert Figure II here]

Health:

          There is a long waiting list for organ donors in many countries, including Canada

(Shimazono, 2007 & Canadian Institute for Health Information, 2016). In 2014, for example, 278

Canadians died while waiting for an organ transplant (Canadian Institute for Health Information,

2016). Survey evidence from Ontario suggests a majority of citizens are willing to register as

donors, but only 29% of those eligible are actually registered (Trillium Gift of Life Network,

2016). Our models from behavioral economics suggest that the upfront discomfort from thinking

about donating (in case of death) may prevent lives from being saved, or that the act of donating

simply is not a salient option for consideration. One policy tool often used to combat these

potentialities is ‘presumed consent’. Individuals residing in countries with a policy of presumed

consent are automatically registered as organ donors and have to purposefully opt-out of this

default position if they decide against being a donor. Many studies, including Johnson and

Goldstein (2003), have shown that organ donation consent rates are much higher in countries with

policies of presumed consent than those without (figure III).

                                       [Insert Figure III here]

          Efforts to increase organ donation consent rates have also occurred in Canada within the

province of Ontario. Yet, though a policy of presumed consent is likely to increase consent rates,

a survey conducted by the market research firm Ipsos shows that the large majority of Ontarians

do not favour such a system; Ontarians appear to view organ donation as a personal choice and
prefer the current opt-in default (Trillium Gift of Life Network, 2015). In fact, Ontario’s opt-in

default policy is situated within a prompted-choice system: when conducting a health card, driver’s

licence, or photo card transaction at a ServiceOntario centre, Ontarians are asked by a customer

service representative whether they would like to register as a donor.16

         Conscious of the possibility of behavioral barriers affecting donation rates, Ontario's

recently established Behavioural Insights Unit, in collaboration with the Behavioural Economics

in Action at Rotman Centre (BEAR), partnered with the Trillium Gift of Life Network, Ontario’s

Ministry of Health and Long Term Care, and the Ministry of Government and Consumer Services

to test various interventions aimed at increasing consent rates within the confinements of the

province's prompted-choice system. The interventions focussed on increasing the salience of the

long-term benefits, the simplicity of the registration process by altering the registration form itself

(figure IV), and the time at which potential donors received the registration form during their visit

to a ServiceOntario centre.17 To determine the most effective registration process, these

interventions were trialed across six different treatment periods at a single ServiceOntario centre,

and the results from the treatment periods were compared to a control period at that same

ServiceOntario centre (Treasury Board Secretariat, 2016 & Robitaille et al., 2016).

                                             [Insert Figure IV here]

         On average, organ donation rates for individuals assigned to any one of the treatments

increased by up to 143%. The most persuasive nudge statements asked potential donors to imagine

herself or a loved one needing an organ donation. And as a consequence of these results, the most



16
   Ontarians can also register to be a donor online, but only 15% of registrants do so (Treasury Board Secretariat,
2016 & Robitaille et al., 2016).
17
   There were four such variations of the registration form, each including a different nudge statement. One of the
treatments also included a brochure including information pertaining to organ donations.
effective organ donation registration form has been adopted across all ServiceOntario Centres as

of June 2016 (Treasury Board Secretariat, 2016 & Robitaille et al., 2016).

         Another public health issue that has been of interest to governments in Canada is influenza

vaccination rates. This is because each year an average of 3,500 Canadian residents die from

influenza (Gionet, 2015). For most provinces and territories in Canada, influenza vaccination rates

increased between 2003 and 2013-2014 (Gionet, 2015). However, in Ontario the opposite is true:

the vaccination rate decreased from 38% in 2003 to 34% in 2013-2014 (Gionet, 2015). One factor

that may be in part responsible for the lower vaccination rates in Ontario over this period is that

unlike most other provinces and territories in Canada, until late 2012, it was illegal for pharmacists

to administer the influenza vaccine (Canadian Pharmacists Association, 2012). By introducing

legislation in 2012 that allowed pharmacists in Ontario to administer the influenza vaccine, the

Ontario government made it more convenient for individuals to receive the vaccine, reducing the

up-front costs for the recipients.

         The change in Ontario’s legislation is in accord with other efforts and research the world

over to make flu shots more convenient and more salient.18 Notably, Milkman et al. (2011) reports

the results of a field experiment at a large U.S. firm that tested to see how prompting employees

to write down the date and/or time of their respective free on-site influenza clinic affected

vaccination rates. For this field experiment, all employees at the firm received an email informing

them of their respective on-site vaccination clinic. In the email, some employees were also

prompted either to write down the date or to write down the date and time of their vaccination

clinic. Vaccination rates between these three groups differed meaningfully, with those receiving


 See Chen and Stevens (2016) for a discussion on using behavioural economics to increase vaccination rates, as
18

well as Corace et al. (2016) for a review of different methods used to increase vaccination rates among healthcare
workers.
the prompt to write down both the date and time of their respective clinic having a 4.2 percentage

points higher vaccination rate.

Education:

        A discipline that has received less attention from behavioral economists is education,

despite the fact that youth, with their developing brains, are particularly predisposed to inattention

and present-bias (Levecchia, Liu, & Oreopoulos, Forthcoming). The research area is growing,

however, and there have been increasing attempts to nudge children and their parents toward

decisions that promote education attainment and academic performance.

        We first examine an intervention that simplified the submission of the U.S. Free

Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) form. All college and university students in the

United States must complete the FAFSA in order to receive public financial assistance. The

application process itself, however, is not straightforward, especially for students left on their own

to navigate through it. Students must learn how to access the form and collect the information

needed complete it, including information about parents' Social Security Numbers, exact income

reported on their most recent tax files, vehicle ownership, and other assets. Concerns regarding

the complexity and inconvenience of filing the FAFSA have prompted calls to amend the process

(ACSFA, 2005 & Dynarski and Scott-Clayton, 2006). To explore how much difference application

simplification could make, Bettinger et al. (2012) conducted a field experiment in conjunction with

H&R Block, known as the FAFSA study.

        The FAFSA study identified eligible parents visiting H&R Block with children in their

senior year at high school.19 After agreeing to participate in the experiment, parents were


 The study also found college enrollment effects for a separate sample of individuals visiting H&R Block with not
19

more than a high school education and who were offered FAFSA completion assistance for themselves.
designated into one of two treatment groups and a control group. Individuals in the first treatment

group (the 'Information Treatment') were provided with an estimate of the amount of financial aid

their children could obtain from completing the FAFSA, along with information about tuition costs

at four nearby colleges.     Parents in the second treatment group (the 'Personal Assistance

Treatment') were provided the same information as those in the Information Treatment and also

offered direct assistance with completing the application. Since many of the questions to complete

the FAFSA form are the same as those asked on the tax form, the assistance took roughly 8 extra

minutes in the H&R Block office.

       As can be seen in figure IV, personal assistance in the FAFSA application process had a

considerable impact on both the FAFSA submission rates and the propensity for individuals to

attend postsecondary. High school seniors with parents receiving the FAFSA application

assistance had FAFSA filing rates 16 percentage points higher than the control group (56 versus

40 percent). The assistance would have increased rates even more if the FAFSA did not require

the students' signature. Instead, H&R Block sent the complete, or near complete FAFSA home

first, with a pre-paid envelope and instructions for the student to sign and mail to the Department

of Education. Still, when looking at enrollment effects, those from the assistance group were 8

percentage points more likely to attend a postsecondary institution than those from the control.

The study also found similar affects for attending at least two years of college, even though the

treatment helped with entry for only the first year. Interestingly, receiving information pertaining

to the amount of financial aid one is likely to receive as well as the cost of nearby colleges, had no

significant effect on FAFSA applications or postsecondary enrollment. Information on its own

was not enough to change behaviour. The study demonstrates a nudge with personal interaction

may be more effective (yet more costly) - a result we return to below.
                                             [Insert Figure V here]

         Applying for financial aid is just one step of many that must be taken to attend college or

university. When transitioning to postsecondary education, students must also determine which

schools and programs to apply to, pay application fees, make additional financial arrangements,

and modify their daily routine – all of which can pose barriers to those not familiar with the

process. To help overcome these, Oreopoulos and Ford (2016) develop a program called

'LifeAfterhighSchool', that integrates both program and financial aid application assistance into

the grade 12 curriculum at low-transition high-schools in Ontario.20 The program provides all high

school seniors with in-class assistance, regardless of their current postsecondary plans. The slogan

of the program is 'Keep Your Options Open'. Even for students not intending to continue their

education, an offer of acceptance from a program that students themselves helped choose, plus a

financial aid package, makes the postsecondary option last longer and makes it more salient. The

bridge to postsecondary becomes an easier one to take. The program also keeps students'

immediate costs down by offering assistance during class and covering the application fees.

         LifeAfterHighSchool, was supported by the Ontario Ministry of Training, Colleges, and

Universities (MTCU) in partnership with the Ministry of Education (MOE). The program

consisted of three hour-long workshops whereby graduating seniors were guided through the

college and financial aid application processes. The first workshop encouraged students to consider

local postsecondary programs that they could get into based on their high school grades, as well

as provided a simple financial aid calculator to demonstrate how they can afford to attend. The

second workshop had students apply for real to colleges or universities, with the application fees



20
  Low transition schools are schools with roughly less than half of its graduating seniors enrolling in postsecondary
education the following year.
covered from cutting and pasting the application number to the LifeAfterHighSchool website. The

third workshop helped students open and get started on the Ontario Student Assistance Program

application and send follow-up emails and letters to parents with instructions to complete the task.

During these workshops, either external facilitators or teachers trained in the application processes

were also available to help the students if they required it.

       For students at low-transition schools that were randomly provided LifeAfterHighSchool,

postsecondary application rates increased from 64 to 78 percent, while enrollment increased the

following school year by 5 percentage points, with the greatest impact for students who were not

taking any university-track courses in their last year of high school (a 9 percentage point increase

in enrollment for them). The experiment provides a good example of collaboration between policy

makers, academics, and evaluators to produce evidence for whether a new program might be worth

scaling up.

                                       [Insert Figure VI here]

       Our last example concerns the role that social support has in educational achievement. It

comes from a forthcoming paper, Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2016), which reports results from

a field experiment involving first year economics students at one of the University of Toronto's

satellite campuses in Mississauga. In this study, students were randomized into a control group or

one of two treatment groups in which students received additional support and encouragement.

Students in the first treatment group received weekly email and text messages throughout the

academic year, designed to provide information, support, tips, and encouragement in their

academic endeavours. Students were also able to respond to these messages and ask questions

themselves. Students from the second treatment group received support from personal coaches -

academically successful and keen upper-year undergraduate coach who were responsible for
meeting with their assigned students at least once per week, and instructed to engage with their

coachees throughout the year in person, by text, email, or skype to respond regularly to their

academic struggles and questions.

       Students from the first treatment group finished the school year with an average economics’

grade 1.5 percentage points higher than students in the control group. And, students from the

second treatment group finished the school year with an average 6 percentage points higher than

students in the control group. These results, while promising, highlight an interesting potential

trade-off between the effectiveness of interventions in social support and the cost/intensity of such

interventions. The intervention involving a personal coach had a much greater impact on

individuals’ academic performance, but involved a larger time cost on behalf of the coaches.

Coaches could only help about 7 students with 10 hours of work per week. In comparison, the

intervention involving supportive text and email messages had a much smaller effect on

individuals’ academic performance, but had a marginal cost close to zero.




Employment:

       Another transition that behavioral economists consider closely is the transition from

unemployment to employment. As with the transition from high-school to postsecondary,

interventions incorporating insights from behavioral economics have tended to focus on making

the process simpler, more salient, and easier to follow. Currently, interventions to this effect are

underway in Canada. We present three of them by the Federal Ministry of Employment and Social

Development (ESDC), and the Social Research and Demonstration Corporation (SRDC).
Additionally, by presenting these interventions, we distinguish between what have been termed

‘low-touch’ and ‘high-touch’ nudges.

        We first consider two pilot projects organized by ESDC's 'Innovation Lab' that sought to

increase the use of a new initiative known as ‘Job Match’ (JM). JM is an employment service that

both employers and job seekers can access through ESDC’s ‘Job Bank’ (JB) database. 21 The

employer details the education, skills, and experience required for the job and JM uses an algorithm

to match job seekers based on these characteristics. However, in order for the JM service to work,

job seekers are required to input their skills, education, and experience into the system (Parent &

Audet, 2016).

        Enrolling in Job Match requires: 1) registering an account on the Job Bank website; 2)

clicking on the 'Sign up to Job Match' hyperlink; and, 3) uploading relevant skills, education, and

experience - a process that can take more than 20 minutes. Many individuals with JB accounts do

not initiate the JM enrollment process, and of those who do, some do not provide all of the

requested information and thereby fail to complete their account. ESDC cites behavioral barriers

such as inattention to the JM option, inertia with having to take 20 minutes to enroll, and

discounting uncertain, long-run benefits from sign-up as possible explanations for the low take-up

rates (Parent & Audet, 2016). It is with the stated goal of increasing account completion rates to

allow the JM service to facilitate more rapid job matches that the ESDC conducted the two pilot

projects.

        In the first pilot project we discuss, ESDC trialed five different designs of a web-link that

directed web-surfers from the JB database to the JM service webpage (figure VII) (Parent & Audet,


21
  The Job Bank is a federally administered database that hosts searchable job listings from employers across
Canada, delivered by ESDC.
2016). The web-links were designed to compel more JB browsers to click-through to the JM

webpage, and consequently enroll in the JM service. Three of the five web-link designs included

a different “nudge” statement, each drawing inspiration from one of three behavioral economic

principles: developing social norms, priming/salience, and framing.22 The web-link designs were

then trialed on a weekly rotation over four and a half months, allowing each of the five designs to

be measured for a total of three to four weeks.23 To assess the relative success of each web-link

design, there were three outcomes of interest: 1) the rate at which web-surfers on the JB database

clicked through to the JM service webpage; 2) the number of web-surfers who started to create a

JM account; and 3) the number of new complete JM accounts.

                                                [Insert figure VII here]

        Using google analytics, ESDC estimates that the most effective web-link design – framing

(design 4) – may have been responsible for 15% of new JM accounts during the weeks it was

trialed (Parent & Audet, 2016). This was estimated by measuring the increase in the proportion of

JB web-browsers completing a JM account when presented with the ‘framing’ web-link design,

relative to web-browsers in the control weeks. Similarly, the nudge statements that either primed

the job-seeker to consider the benefits of the JM service (design 5), or conveyed a social norm

surrounding the use of the JM service (design 3), are also estimated to have had comparable effects.

However, the ‘call to action’ web-link design, which only focussed on the salience of the web-link

and did not include any accompanying nudge statement, was less than half as effective as the other

web-link designs in encouraging job-seekers to create a JM account (Parent & Audet, 2016). The

results of this pilot project demonstrates how small tweaks to modes of communication can


22
  For a detailed explanation of these behavioural economic principles, see Samson et al. (2015).
23
  A randomised control trial was not feasible given the nature of the JB and JM website platforms, and thus, weekly
rotations of the web-link designs were the next best alternative.
substantially affect individuals’ decisions. Moreover, because of this pilot project, ESDC has made

the ‘framing’ web-link design permanent – a policy intervention that was not self-evident prior to

the experiment.

         To the same end, ESDC conducted another similar pilot project, this time sending emails

to Canadians who had started their JM account but had not completed it. These emails contained

a link to the JM application page, encouraging recipients to complete their JM account. Because

the experimenters could customize the emails sent to individual recipients they were able to

implement a randomized control trial (RCT) design, testing the effectiveness of different links in

compelling job-seekers to complete their JM account. By monitoring the sent emails, the

experimenters contrasted the rate at which email recipients clicked on the different email-links and

the corresponding probability they completed their JM account.

         Throughout the study, four treatment emails and one control email were monitored, and

among the treatment emails, four different behavioral economic principles were employed.24

Although the overall effectiveness of the emails was modest (a 5% increase in account

completion), there was a profound difference in the click-through rates between those who

received the control email and those who received the treatment emails.25 On average, the

recipients receiving emails including nudge statements were 77% more likely to click on the JM

link than those who received the control email. Again, this pilot project demonstrates how small

tweaks to an intervention can make a meaningful difference on the take-up rate of programs, and




24
   The nudge statements either, 1) framed the decision to complete the JM profile in terms of its benefits on the
recipients’ employment prospects; 2) attempted to build a sense of commitment on behalf of the recipients by
highlighting how far they had already gone in setting up their JM account; 3) inculcate a social norm by informing
the recipients how many Canadians had completed their JM account; or 4) make the email link especially salient.
25
   The click through rate is the percentage of email recipients who clicked on the emails links, directing them to the
JM website.
thus on individuals’ long-term wellbeing. Both pilot projects by the ESDC show how policy

makers can regularly test different designs and communication approaches based on behavioral

economics to discover what methods work best.

           These interventions by the ESDC are a good example of what are termed ‘low-touch’

nudges; the interventions involved small tweaks in modes of communication for the job seeker.

More generally, low-touch nudges are often cheaper to implement and focus on making decisions

more salient and simpler for the individual. This is in contrast to ‘high-touch’ nudges, which

involve significant changes to one’s environment and often include personal interaction.

           An example of a high-touch nudge is the application of motivational interviewing (MI).

MI is a unique style of interviewing that is client-centered and explorative; interviewees are

encouraged to consider and develop resolutions to problems themselves (Ford et al., 2014). One

particularly distinct feature of MI is the assumption that interviewees each possess an intrinsic

capacity to affect positive change. MI then attempts to engender such change by encouraging

interviewees to realise this capacity, and to develop plans that achieve their desired goals (Ford et

al., 2014).26 Here in Canada, MI has been trialed as a means to assist the transition to employment.

           Working with funding from the Manitoba government, Canada’s Social Research and

Demonstration Corporation (SRDC) piloted MI among a sample of Employment and Income

Assistance (EIA) recipients in Winnipeg, Manitoba, from March 2015 to March 2016 (Palamar et

al., 2016). In the pilot project, 1,113 EIA recipients were assigned – at the EIA office level – to

either a treatment group in which participants partook in MI with their caseworkers, or a control




26
     For more information on motivational interviewing, see Miller and Rollnick (2002).
group in which participants did not.27, 28 These treatment and control groups were comprised of

13 Winnipeg EIA offices, in which each office’s caseworkers either received MI training or did

not (Palamar et al., 2016). During the pilot project, EIA recipients received otherwise regular

counselling from their caseworkers. Thus, under the assumption that aside from partaking in MI

the clients in the treatment offices were otherwise identical to those in the control offices, and that

there were no other factors common to each of the two groups of offices, the experimental design

allows for unbiased comparisons between EIA recipients who received MI, and EIA recipients

who did not.

         In this pilot project there were three key outcomes of interest: 1) EIA exit – the probability

participants continued to receive EIA benefits; 2) Employment service usage – the probability

participants started to receive employment services one month or more after the commencement

of the pilot project; and, 3) Pursuit of goals – the amount of progress participants made towards

achieving goals which they specified prior to the initiation of the pilot project (Palamar et al.,

2016).29 Most notably, Palamar et al. (2016) finds that participants who were in offices with

caseworkers trained in MI were significantly more likely to exit EIA than participants in offices

with caseworkers who did not receive MI training; 9 to 12 months after enrolment in the pilot

project, participants in the treatment group were 6.8 percentage points more likely than participants



27
   Participants in the control group received intentional practice (IP) whereby their caseworkers were encouraged to
have deliberate conversations with the participants to help them reach their goals, but the caseworkers were not
directed on how these conversations were to occur.
28
   5 EIA offices’ caseworkers’ received MI training, and 6 EIA offices’ caseworkers’ did not. Further, historical
statistics from the EIA offices were used to ensure similar client characteristics across both the control and treatment
offices. Palamar et al. (2016) also reports that the baseline characteristics of the clients were very similar across the
two sets of offices, and they record adjusted versions of their estimates accounting for the slight differences in
baseline characteristics between the treatment and control offices. Palamar et al. (2016) finds that results were very
similar across both the adjusted and unadjusted estimates, and hence only report the unadjusted version of their
estimates.
29
   Prior to the pilot project, all participants were asked to identify specific steps they wanted to take, and these steps
were categorized into 9 separate goal types, ranging from language to educational goals.
in the control group to exit EIA (Palamar et al., 2016). Figure VIII shows how the difference in

EIA exit rates manifested itself over time. Similarly, MI had a positive impact on participants’

progress toward reaching their pre-specified goals.30 However, no identifiable impact of MI on

employment service usage was observed between the initiation of the pilot project and November

2015 – 8 months after the first EIA clients were enrolled in the project.

                                                 [Insert figure VIII here]

         To put these results in context, Palamar et al. (2016) estimates the net-benefit of the pilot

project to be $405 per program participant. This figure is driven by reduced EIA payments to those

in the treatment group relative to those in the control group. Furthermore, this estimate was

constructed using only the difference in EIA payments over the pilot project period, and does not

account for the fact that differences in EIA receipt likely continued after the end of the pilot project.

Palamar et al. (2016) thus concludes that MI has a significant positive impact on EIA and other

indicators of goal attainment for many clients, and further recommends that the training of MI be

extended to all EIA client-facing staff (Palamar et al., 2016).

         Yet, the remarkable success of this project masks one important feature of high-touch

nudges such as MI: it is far more difficult to implement and evaluate high-touch nudges than low-

touch nudges. High-touch nudges are necessarily more involved than low-touch nudges, tend to

be more expensive, and are thus harder to trial on a wider scale, making it difficult to attain

definitive results. This is perhaps best evinced by the fact that this particular pilot project acted as




30
  Palamar et al. (2016) reports that participants in the treatment offices were 3.3 percentage points more likely to
make progress toward reaching their goals as specified by the participants prior to undergoing MI (Palamar et al.,
2016).
a follow-up to a previous intervention by SRDC that did not find conclusive evidence that MI

affected participants’ propensity to become re-employed.

       Ford et al. (2014) report on this initial pilot project that involved a sample of 155 long-term

Income Assistance (IA) recipients in British Columbia. As with the aforementioned MI pilot

project in Winnipeg, these long-term IA recipients were assigned to either a control group that

underwent regular employment counselling or a treatment group that received employment

counselling from caseworkers trained in MI. Notably, Ford et al. (2014) report that the program

was “inconclusive with respect to its impacts” (Ford et al., 2014, p.4). Here, the small sample size

constrained the power of the experiment, necessitating the follow-up study to clarify the potential

effects of MI on re-employment rates. Since pilot projects involving high-touch nudges are often

expensive and time consuming to administer there is potentially large costs to trialing interventions

large enough to effectively evaluate.




       Taxation:

       Our last example of the application of behavioral economics to public policy is in the

domain of taxation. This is an area that has received a lot of attention from behavioral economists,

signalling the potential for incorporating behavioral economic insights into tax policy design.

Researchers have shown that the salience of tax rates, the ease of tax compliance, and the framing

of tax policy more broadly, all matter in determining our economic behavior (e.g. Chetty et al.

(2009), Chetty et al. (2013), Hallsworth et al. (2014)).

       Perhaps the most notable behavioral economic interventions in tax policy concern tax

compliance. Traditional policies to increase tax compliance typically include placing an economic
cost – such as a fee – on non-compliance, but audits and legal enforcement are often expensive to

carry out. Yet, alternate policies based on findings from behavioral economics can achieve marked

improvements on compliance rates at relatively low costs. For instance, in the UK, there have been

field experiments showing that altering the wording on late-payment notices emphasising high tax

compliance among local residents are much more effective in encouraging people to submit their

taxes than regular late notices (Behavioral Insights Team, 2011). Further, simple and personalised

text message reminders encouraging people to pay fines on time were effective in raising on-time

payments during another UK field experiment (Behavioral Insights Team, 2011).

       Inspired by the work of the UK’s BIT, the Canada Revenue Agency has also conducted

similar experiments. In doing so, the Canada Revenue Agency has become a prominent exemplar

for using RCTs in policy work. For instance, the Canada Revenue Agency has experimented with

nudge statements in its letters encouraging compliance with Tax Free Saving Account rules, tested

the effectiveness of highlighting social norms in tax-collection letters, and trialed different

messaging techniques encouraging the disclosure of unreported income by workers in a sub-sector

with higher-than-usual underground economic activity (Canada Revenue Agency, 2014, 2015, &

Dutil and Mackey, 2016).

       A particularly interesting recent experiment by the Canada Revenue Agency involves

changing the signature block on the personal version of personal income tax returns, where tax

filers attest to the accuracy of the information they submit. The experiment involves moving the

signature block from the end of the form to its beginning. The text is also enlarged, the wording

surrounding the block simplified, the warning for providing inaccurate information bolded, and

tax filers are asked to print their name besides their signature (figure VIII). The rationalisation
behind this experiment proceeds from previous research suggesting people are more likely to be

truthful after they are prompted to think about honesty (e.g. Shu et al., 2012).

                                      [Insert Figure IX here]

       To evaluate the effectiveness of this intervention, paper tax returns containing the altered

signature block were distributed in two Canadian cities. The Canada Revenue Agency is currently

analysing the tax returns from these two cities, checking to see how they differ between the

treatment group and a control group comprised of tax filers who filled out the regular tax returns

with special attention paid to parts of the return that are susceptible to dishonest disclosure by

individuals. Pending differences between the treatment and control groups, we may see this

intervention rolled-out extensively in the future.

       We think that this intervention is an especially nice one to finish with. It is a quintessential

example of how incorporating findings from research in behavioral economics into public policy

can suggest policy changes that are very cheap and have the potential to affect dramatic change.

Even if altering the signature block compels a moderate increase in per person tax revenue, this

costless intervention could garner substantial savings for the government.




IV.

       Over the past decade there has been a tremendous rise in the application of behavioral

economics to public policy. This rise is a direct result of the purposeful development of

governmental agencies dedicated to incorporating findings from behavioral economics into public

policy. Most formative in the proliferation of these governmental agencies was the establishment

of the UK’s Behavioural Insights Team (BIT). After witnessing successful and low cost public
policy interventions by the BIT, governments from around the world have sought to construct their

own such agencies (Whitehead et al., 2014). That governments the world over have looked upon

the UK’s BIT for inspiration is evinced by the active consulting role the BIT has played to many

of these governments.31

         The Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) estimates that at least 51 countries

have initiated some type of centrally administered agency designed to promote the use of

behavioral economics in public policy (Whitehead et al., 2014). Aside from the BIT, the most

notable federal-level agency promoting the use of behavioral economics in public policy is the

U.S.’s Social and Behavioral Sciences Team (SBST). Established in 2014, and buttressed by a

recent presidential executive order to encourage the use of behavioral economics in public policy,

the SBST seeks to integrate findings from behavioral economics into federal government programs

(SBST, 2015).32 Since the first two years of its inception, the SBST has worked on a plethora of

projects, ranging from promoting workplace savings among Federal employees through an email

campaign, to encouraging truthful disclosure of self-reported sales of goods and services to the

government, by simply including a signature box on the top of an online data-entry form (SBST,

2015).

         Many sub-national governments have also established similar agencies. For example, in

2012, Australia’s New South Wales (NSW) government started a partnership with the UK’s BIT

that resulted in the establishment of its own Behavioural Insights Unit (NSW Behavioural Insights

Unit, 2014). NSW’s Behavioural Insights Unit runs its own trials and interventions as well as


31
   The UK’s BIT has international offices in New York and Sydney, and it has collaborated with and consulted for
various federal and provincial/state governments – see, for example: http://www.behaviouralinsights.co.uk/who-we-
work-with/ and http://www.behaviouralinsights.co.uk/behavioural-insights-team-australia/.
32
   In September, 2015, President Obama enacted an Executive Order encouraging the use of behavioural sciences to
inform policy decisions across government departments.
supports other NSW government initiatives. Notably, one of the NSW’s Behavioral Insight Unit’s

stated goals is to “contribute to the global body of BI evidence” (NSW Behavioural Insights Unit,

2014). This stated goal highlights an interesting feature typical to such governmental agencies:

many of the trials and interventions conducted by agencies such as NSW’s Behavioural Insights

Unit are publicly documented, promoting the dissemination and use of effective policy

interventions the world over.

       There are also non-governmental initiatives and agencies dedicated to integrating

behavioral economics into public policy. At the trans-national level, the most notable is perhaps

the World Bank’s Global INsights Initiative (GINI). Launched in 2015 the GINI consults to

government clients and assists various World Bank teams in implementing and evaluating projects

that utilise behavioral insights (The World Bank, 2016). Additionally, many international

development organizations such as USAID, AusAID, UNICEF, and the WHO have also started to

apply findings from behavioral economics into their practices (Whitehead et al., 2014).

       To the same end, many private-sector consulting groups and demonstration corporations

have worked closely with government entities. For instance, here in Canada, BEWorks – a Toronto

based behavioral economics consulting group – partnered with the Ontario Energy Board to

investigate methods to promote energy conservation among its clients (BEworks, 2014). Other

organizations such as Deloitte and the University of Toronto’s ‘Behavioural Economics in Action

at Rotman’ research centre have also conducted work in similar contexts.

       As is evident from the examples in the previous section, Canada is no exception to the

international trend in applying findings from behavioral economics to public policy. At the federal

level, the Privy Council Office established its own Innovation Hub in 2015 with the goal of acting

as a resource to other federal departments that seek to “adopt new and innovative approaches to
solving complex policy, programming and service delivery challenges” (Privy Council Office,

2016). Among the Innovation Hub’s stated areas of expertise is the use of behavioral economics.

They presently have a number of projects completed and underway, with published results

expected in early 2017. In addition, the Innovation Hub has been involved in supporting the Public

Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) on an interesting project focussed on expanding the use of a

mobile phone application called ‘Carrot Rewards’. The Carrot Rewards application seeks to

promote healthy living by offering users of the application loyalty points from the loyalty-points

provider of their choice if they undergo what is deemed to be healthy and/or educational activities

(British Columbia Ministry of Health, 2016). First implemented in March, 2016, in British

Columbia, and currently being expanded by PHAC, the Carrots Reward mobile application is an

example of how the government can potentially motivate healthy behavior on a large scale.

       As discussed in the previous section, the Canada Revenue Agency is enthusiastically

incorporating behavioral economics into its design of tax and benefits administration policy. While

the Canada Revenue Agency has historically sought to improve tax compliance through various

initiatives, it has started through its innovation lab to implement more broadly pilot projects that

make explicit use of findings from within the behavioral economics literature. Furthermore, these

pilot projects tend to be in the form of RCTs, allowing for rigorous comparisons of alternative

nudges. The pilot projects range from trialing automated telephone messages reminding employers

to submit their payroll and sales taxes, to the aforementioned signature block experiment. The

work being conducted by the Canada Revenue Agency is very exciting; since most citizens interact

with the agency in one way or another, just tweaking certain aspects of these interactions has the

potential to garner tremendous savings for the government.
       Another very recent development at the federal level is the establishment of ESDC’s

Innovation Lab. Launched in April 2015, ESDC established its Innovation Lab, with a mandate to

find innovative solutions to service delivery challenges, while promoting greater integration

between policy, program and service delivery. The Lab brings together key partners across ESDC

and outside the department, right from the outset, to develop new thinking on ESDC’s most

pressing problems and to foster sustainable solutions that are responsive to the changing needs of

Canadians. The Lab creates space and provides expertise in facilitation and design thinking, to

apply and test new methods, to prototype and quickly learn what works and what does not, and to

de-risk experimentation by putting both ideas and processes through iterative testing with clients.

       Since its opening, ESDC’s Innovation Lab has focused on organizational development,

scoping and designing projects, engaging employees, and acting as a catalyst for innovation within

the department. The Lab has benefitted from external advice such as from the Mind Lab in

Denmark as it establishes the fundamentals of a design-lab organization including governance,

evaluation, communications engagement, and project development. The Lab’s first official project

is to make the online application for the CPP the premier method for Canadians applying to the

country’s pension plan.

       In Ontario’s 2015 Budget, the province officially announced the establishment of its

Behavioural Insights Unit, specifically citing the success of other countries such as the UK in

implementing similar agencies (Ministry of Finance, 2015). The Behavioural Insights Unit

operates within Ontario’s Treasury Board Secretariat and works with various ministries and

agencies to develop services that take into consideration findings from behavioral economics.

Despite the relatively quiet announcement proclaiming its establishment – only capturing half a

page of the Ontario Budget’s 426 pages – since its inauguration, the Behavioural Insights Unit has
published the results of three completed pilot projects. The projects include attempts to increase

the use of online renewals for licence plate stickers, to encourage Ontarian homeowners to conduct

roofing inside the formal economy, and as already discussed, to encourage more organ donor

registrations through Ontario’s prompted choice system. All of these projects are available on their

website, complete with their experimental designs.

       We believe it is important that Canada have its own departments and agencies dedicated to

trialing new initiatives incorporating insights from behavioral economics, even despite other

jurisdictions the world over running similar initiatives. This is because policy interventions

incorporating behavioral economics are very context specific; these interventions often occur

within an existing policy framework, and it is not always obvious what the best way to alter the

status-quo is. A good example of this is Ontario’s attempt to increase organ donation consent rates.

Ontario had a very unique procedure to elicit organ donation consent, and there was no obvious

way to simplify the process or to make consent appear more attractive. A specific intervention was

needed to find what process worked best for Ontario.

       Despite the growing enthusiasm for behavioral economics and its application to public

policy, there is disagreement with regards to its promise. Critics argue that its findings are often

too trivial to substantiate meaningful positive change. They argue that relative to traditional

economic interventions, accounting for behavioral biases in policy formulation often has only a

marginal impact on individuals’ behaviour, and may not be sufficient to affect systemic problems

such as poverty (e.g. Loewenstein & Ubel, 2010). Under this lens, focussing on formulating and

trialing different nudges may be distracting away from implementing traditional and proven public

policy interventions.
       Here, our claim that behavioral economics is an add-on to neo-classical economics, and

not a substitute, is particularly important. We hence agree with Bhargava and Lowenstein (2015)

that behavioral economic models should not replace traditional economic models in informing

public policy, but should complement them. In particular, we believe that the policy problem

should inform the policy response; if the economic incentives are in place to encourage desirable

behaviour, but individuals are still not acting in their best interests because of known

cognitive/behavioral biases, then perhaps it is necessary to inform future policy interventions with

behavioral economics. However, we are still in a learning phase, and more work is needed to

understand how precisely to incorporate behavioral economics in public policy.
References
Akerlof , G. A., & Kranton, R. E. (2000). Economics and Identity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  115(3): 715-753.
Behavioral Insights Team. (2011). Annual update 2010-2011. London: Cabinet Office Behavioral
  Insights Team.
Benartzi, S., & Thaler, R. (2007). Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings Behavior. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 81-104.
Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D. I., & Madrian, B. C. (2009). The Importance of Default Options for
  Retirement Savings Outcomes: Evidence from the United States. In J. Brown, J. Liebman, & D. A.
  Wise, Social Security Policy in a Changing Environment (pp. 167-195). National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P., & Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). The Role of Application
   Assistance and Information in College Decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA Experiment.
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1205-1242.
BEworks. (2014). Analyzing and Nudging Energy Conservation and Demand Shifting Through Time of
  Use Compliance. Prepared for the Ontario Energy Board.
Bhargava, S., & Loewenstein, G. (2015). Behavioral Economics and Public Policy 102: Beyond Nudging.
  American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 105(5), 396-401.
British Columbia Ministry of Health. (2016). Canada's First Wellness Rewards program Launches in B.C.
   Retrieved August 16, 2016, from https://archive.news.gov.bc.ca/releases/news_releases_2013-
   2017/2016HLTH0013-000326.htm
Canada Revenue Agency. (2014). Reducing Participation in the Underground Economy - Canada
  Revenue Agency 2014–2015 to 2017–2018. Retrieved August 16, 2016, from http://www.cra-
  arc.gc.ca/gncy/lrt/strtgy-eng.html
Canada Revenue Agency. (2015). Report on Plans and Priorities 2015-2016. Canada.
Canadian Institute for Health Information. (2016). More Organs Needed than Available in Canada.
  Retrieved August 16, 2016, from
  https://www.cihi.ca/sites/default/files/document/corr_2016_publicsummary_en.pdf
Canadian Pharmacists Association. (2012). Leading Pharmacy Through Change Management: A Toolkit
  For Assessing and Supporting Practice Change. Secretariat for the Blueprint for Pharmacy
  Coordinating Office.
Carroll, G. D., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Metrick, A. (2009). Optimal Defaults and
   Active Decisions. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4) 1639-1674.
Chen, F., & Stevens, R. (2016). Applying Lessons from Behavioral Economics to Increase Flu
  Vaccination Rates. Health Promotion International, daw031.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., & Saez, E. (2013). Using Differences in Knowledge Across Neighborhoods
  to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings. American Economic Review, 103(7), 2683-2721.
Chetty, R., Looney, A., & Kroft, K. (2009). Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence. American
  Economic Review, 99(4), 1145-1177.
Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C., & Metrick, A. (2002). Defined Contribution Pensions: Plan
  Rules, Participant Choices, and the Path of Least Resistance. In J. M. Porterba, Tax Policy and the
  Economy, Volume 16 (pp. 67-112). MIT Press.
Corace, K. M., Srigley, J. A., Hargadon, D. P., Yu, D., MacDonald, T. K., Fabrigar, L. R., & Garber, G.
  E. (2016). Using Behaviour Change Frameworks to Improve Healthcare Worker Influenza
  Vaccination Rates: A Systematic Review. Vaccine, 34(28), 3235-3242.
Department of Finance Canada. (2016). Canada’s Finance Ministers Agree to Strengthen Canada Pension
  Plan. Retrieved 08 16, 2016, from Department of Finance Canada: http://www.fin.gc.ca/n16/16-081-
  eng.asp
Dutil, P., & Mackey, J. (2016). CRA's Nudging Ways. Retrieved August 16, 2016, from Canadian
  Government Executive: http://canadiangovernmentexecutive.ca/cras-nudging-ways/
Dynarski, S., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2006). The Cost of Complexity in Federal Student Aid: Lessons from
  Optimal Tax Theory and Behavioral Economics. National Tax Journal, 59, 319-356.
Ford, R., Dixon, J., Hui, S.-w., & Kwakye, I. (2014). Motivational Interviewing Pilot Project: Project
   Final Report. Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., & O'Donoghue, T. (2002). Time Discounting and Time Preference: A
   Critical Review. Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XL, 351-401.
Gabaix, X. (2014). A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  129(4) 1661-1710.
Gionet, L. (2015). Flu Vaccination Rates in Canada. Statistics Canada.
Hallsworth, M., List, J. A., Metcalfe, R. D., & Vlaev, I. (2014). The Behavioralist As Tax Collector:
  Using Natural Field Experiments to Enhance Tax Compliance. NBER Working Paper No. 20007.
Johnson, E. J., & Goldstein, D. (2003). Do Defaults Save Lives? Science, Vol 302(5649), 1338-1339.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kenter, P. (2015). Advisers, SmartSAVER Program Aim to Increase Uptake of RESP Benefits. Retrieved
  August 16, 2016, from Financial Post: http://business.financialpost.com/resp/advisers-smartsaver-
  program-aim-to-increase-uptake-of-resp-benefits?__lsa=fa75-1fa6
Krajibich, I., & Dean, M. (2015). How Can Neuroscience Inform Economics? Current Opinion in
   Behavioral Sciences, 5, 51-57.
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2),
   443-477.
Lavecchia, A., Liu, H., & Oreopoulos, P. (Forthcoming). Behavioral Economics of Education: Progress
  and Possibilities. Handbook of Economics and Education, 5.
Madrian, B. C. (2014). Applying Insights from Behavioral Economics to Policy Design. Annual Review
  of Economics, 6, 663-668.
Madrian, B., & Shea, D. (2001). The Power of Suggestion: Intertia in 401(k) Participation and Savings
  Behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1149-1187.
McClure, S. M., Ericson, K. M., Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G., & Cohen, J. (2007). Time Discounting
  for Primary Rewards. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27(21), 5796-5804.
Messacar, D. (2015). Do Workplace Pensions Crowd Out Other Retirement Savings? Evidence from
  Canadian Tax Records. Social Analysis and Modelling Division. Statistics Canada.
Milkman, K. L., Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2011). Using Implementation
  Intentions Prompts to Enhance Influenza Vaccination Rates. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences of the United States of America, 108(26), 10415-10420.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People for Change. Guilford
  Press.
Milligan, K. (2002). Tax Preferences for Education Savings. C.D. Howe Institute. Commentary.
Milligan, K. (2016). Making sense of the CPP expansion. Retrieved 08 16, 2016, from Macleans:
  http://www.macleans.ca/economy/economicanalysis/making-sense-of-the-cpp-expansion/
Ministry of Finance. (2015). Ontario Budget. Government of Ontario.
Moore, K. D., Robson, W., & Laurin, A. (2010). Canada's Looming Retirement Challenge: Will Future
  Retirees Be Able to Maintain Their Living Standards Upon Retirement. Toronto: C.D. Howe Institute.
Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2013). Scarcity: Why having too little means so much. London: Allen
  Lane.
National Audit Office. (2015). Automatic Enrollment to Workplace Pensions. Department for Work &
  Pensions, London.
Nayar Consulting. (2013). SmartSaver: Final Evaluation Report.
New South Wales Behavioral Insights Unit. (2014). Understanding People, Better Outcomes: Behavioral
  Inisghts in NSW. Premier & Cabinet, Behavioral Insights Unit.
O'Donoghue, T., & Rabin, M. (1999). Doing it Now or Later. The American Economic Review, 89(1),
103-124.
O'Donoghue, T., & Rabin, M. (2001). Risky Behaviour among Youths: Some Issues from Behavioral
   Economics. In J. Gruber, Risky Behaviour Among Youths: An Economic Analysis (pp. 29-68).
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Oreopoulos, P., & Ford, R. (2016). Keeping College Applications Open: A Field Experiment to Help All
   High School Seniors Through the College Application Process. NBER Working Paper Series,
   Working Paper 22320.
Oreopoulos, P., & Petronijevic, U. (2016). Texting Students to Help Achieve Their Goals. In Progress.
Palameta, B., Vincent, C., & Voyer, J.-P. (2011). Challenges to Canada's Retirement Income System:
   Simplified Enrolment in Retirement Savings Plans. Ottawa: Social Research and Demonstration
   Corporation.
Palamar, M., McKerrow, M., Myers, K., & Palameta, B. (2016). Motivational interviewing in the context
   of social assistance – Evaluating the effectiveness of motivational interviewing in reducing social
   assistance dependence [PowerPoint slides]. The presentation was provided to the authors through
   email correspondence with the Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.
Parent, A., & Audet, M. (2016). Job Match Nudge Trials: Job Postings. Behavioral Economics and
   Service Innovation Research Unit, Strategic Policy Branch in partnership with Employment and Social
   Development Canada.
Privy Council Office. (2016). Retrieved August 16, 2016, from The Innovation Hub: Our ventures:
   http://www.pco-bcp.gc.ca/index.asp?lang=eng&page=innovation&doc=1-eng.htm
Robitaille, Nicole, Nina Mazar, Claire I. Tsai, and Elizabeth Hardy. (2016). Nudging to Increase Organ
  Donor Registrations in a Prompted Choice Context. Working Paper, BEAR, Rotman School of
  Management, University of Toronto
Samson, A., Ariely, D., Barden, P., Fehr, G., Gohmann, T., Jager, M., . . . Scott, H. (2015). The
  Behavioral Economics Guide 2015. Retrieved from https://www.behavioraleconomics.com/
Samuelson, P. A. (1937). A Note on Measurement of Utility. The Review of Economic Studies, 4(2), 155-
  161.
Service, O., Hallsworth, M., Halpern, D., Algate, F., Gallagher, R., Nguyen, S., . . . Kirkman, E. (2014).
   EAST: Four Simple Ways to Apply Behavioral Insights. London: The Behavioral Insights Team.
Shimazono, Y. (2007). The State of the International Organ Trade: A Provisional Picture Based on
   Integration of Available Information. Retrieved August 16, 2016, from Bulletin of the World Health
   Organization: http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/85/12/06-039370/en/
Shu, L. L., Mazar, N., Gino, F., Ariely, D., & Bazerman, M. H. (2012). Signing at the Beginning Makes
  Ethics Salient and Decreases Dishonest Self-Reports in Comparison to Signing at the End.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(38), 15197-15200.
SmartSaver. (2014). CANADA LEARNING BOND TAKE-UP MAP FOR CANADA, 2014. Retrieved
  09 11, 2016, from SmartSaver: http://community.smartsaver.org/seize-the-opportunity/#take-up-map
Social and Behavioral Sciences Team. (2015). Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the
   President and National Science and Technology Council.
Sunstein, C. R. (2014). Nudging: A Very Short Guide. Journal of Consumer Policy, 583.
Thaler, R. (2015). Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics. New York: W. W. Norton &
  Company, Inc.
The Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance. (2005). The Student Aid Gauntlet: Making
  Access to College Simple and Certain. Final Report of the Special Study of Simplification of Need
  Analysis and Application for Title IV Aid. Washington, D.C.: Department of Education.
The World Bank. (2016). Global INsights Initiative. Retrieved August 16, 2016, from
  http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/gini#1
Treasury Board Secretariat. (2016). Behavioral Insights Pilot Project - Organ Donor Registration.
   Retrieved August 16, 2016, from https://www.ontario.ca/page/behavioral-insights-pilot-project-organ-
   donor-registration#foot-2
Trillium Gift of Life Network. (2015). Organ Donation: Opt-In vs. Opt-Out. Retrieved August 08, 2016,
   from https://www.giftoflife.on.ca/img/Opt-In-vs-Opt-Out-Infographic-Dec2015.png
Trillium Gift of Life Network. (2016). Registration Stats. Retrieved August 16, 2016, from beadonor:
   https://beadonor.ca/scoreboard
Whitehead, M., Jones, R., Howell, R., Lilley, R., & Pykett, J. (2014). Nudging all Over the World:
  Assessing the Global Impact of the Behavioral Science on Public Policy. Economic & Social Research
  Council.
Wolfson, M. (2011). Projecting the Adequacy of Canadians' Retirement Incomes: Current Prospects and
  Possible Reform Options. Montreal: Institute for Research on Public Policy.
Woodford, M. (2012). Inattentive Valuation and Reference-Dependent Choice. Working Paper, Columbia
  University.
Figures:
           Figure I:
                                         Figure II:




This is an image of SmartSaver’s online RESP enrollment procedure. Source:
https://www.smartsaver.org/
Figure III:
                                           Figure IV:




Left: Ontario’s old organ donor consent registration form. Right: An experimental organ donor
consent registration form used in a pilot project conducted by the Ontario Ministry of Health,
Trillium Gift of Life Network, Service Ontario, and the Treasury Board Secretariat’s Behavioral
Insights Unit. This experimental consent form simplifies the original form and includes the nudge
statement: “If you needed a transplant, would you have one?” Source: Treasury Board Secretariat,
2016.
Figure V:
Figure VI:
                                          Figure VII:




ESDC trialed five different designs of a web-link that directed web-surfers from the ESDC Job
Bank database to the Job Match service webpage. Designs three, four, and five include a different
“nudge” statement, each drawing inspiration from one of three behavioral economic principles:
developing social norms, framing, and priming/salience. Source: Parent & Audet, 2016.
Figure VIII:
                                           Figure IX:




Top: Original signature block on Canadian personal income tax returns. Bottom: Experimental
signature block on Canadian personal income tax returns as implemented by the Canada Revenue
Agency in a recent pilot project. This signature block was moved to the top of the tax return, its
text enlarged, the wording surrounding the block simplified, the warning for providing inaccurate
information bolded, and tax filers were asked to print their name besides their signature. Source:
Authors’ correspondence with the Canada Revenue Agency.
