NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA LAWS ON
THE HEALTH AND LABOR SUPPLY OF OLDER ADULTS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE HEALTH AND RETIREMENT STUDY
Lauren Hersch Nicholas
Johanna Catherine Maclean
Working Paper 22688
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22688

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016, Revised March 2018

Previously circulated as "The Impact of Medical Marijuana Laws on the Labor Supply and Health
of Older Adults: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study." This work was supported by
the National Institute on Aging (K01AG041763). We are grateful for support from Hopkins
Population Center (NICHD R24HD042854) for use of restricted data sets in their cold room.
Findings do not represent the views of the sponsor. We thank Stefanie Deluca, Brady Horn, Sean
Lyons, Ian McCarthy, Dan Rees, Douglas Webber, and seminar participants at McMaster
University, Cornell University, the 2016 Midwestern Health Economics Conference, the 2016
American Society of Health Economists Biennial Conference, and the 2016 Association for
Public Policy and Management for helpful comments. We thank Kevin Zhang for excellent
research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22688.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Lauren Hersch Nicholas and Johanna Catherine Maclean. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The effect of medical marijuana laws on the health and labor supply of older adults: Evidence
from the Health and Retirement Study
Lauren Hersch Nicholas and Johanna Catherine Maclean
NBER Working Paper No. 22688
September 2016, Revised March 2018
JEL No. I10,I18,J20
ABSTRACT
Older adults have the highest rates of many health conditions for which medical marijuana may
be effective in moderating symptoms and are at elevated risk of reducing labor supply due to poor
health. Surprisingly little is known about how this group responds to medical marijuana laws. We
provide the first estimates of the effects of state medical marijuana laws on the health and labor
supply of adults age 51 and older, focusing on those with medical conditions that may respond to
medical marijuana. We use longitudinal data from the Health and Retirement Study to study these
questions using differences-in-differences regression models. Three principle findings emerge
from our analysis. First, we document that medical marijuana law passage leads to reductions in
chronic pain and improvements in self-assessed health among older adults. Second, we show that
passage of a state medical marijuana law leads to increases in older adult labor supply, with
effects concentrated on the intensive margin. Third, effects are largest among older adults with a
health condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use under current state laws.
Findings highlight the role of health policy in supporting work among older adults.

Lauren Hersch Nicholas
Johns Hopkins School of Public Health
624 N Broadway, Room 450
Baltimore, MD 21205
USA
lauren.nicholas@jhu.edu
Johanna Catherine Maclean
Department of Economics
Temple University
Ritter Annex 869
Philadelphia, PA 19122
and NBER
catherine.maclean@temple.edu

1

Introduction

Legalization of marijuana, for medicinal or recreational use, is highly controversial in the
United States (Anderson & Rees, 2014). On the one hand, critics argue that any legalization
of marijuana will increase marijuana addiction, misuse of related substances, crime and
violence, traffic accidents, and healthcare costs. Advocates, on the other hand, highlight the
potential health benefits of medical marijuana, in particular in terms of managing symptom
burden. Public support for legalization of medical marijuana has surged with well over three
quarters of U.S. residents supporting some form of legalization of this product for medical
purposes1 and, as of 2017, 29 U.S states and the District of Columbia (DC) have passed laws
legalizing medical use of marijuana (‘MMLs’). Given this tension, policymakers must have
a solid evidence base on both the potential costs and benefits of expanded access as they
determine how best to regulate marijuana for medical use.
The available clinical trial evidence suggests that medical marijuana is effective in treating symptoms associated with several health conditions including chronic pain, nausea and
vomiting, and sleep disorders (Hill, 2015; Goldenberg, Reid, IsHak, & Danovitch, 2017; McCormick et al., 2017). Older adults adults experience higher prevalence of many of the health
conditions with symptoms that can be effectively treated with medical marijuana (Morgan,
2003; Unruh et al., 2008; Nahin, 2015) and are more likely to use prescription medications
to treat symptom burden (National Center for Health Statistics, 2017). In 2015, 29 percent
of the overall adult population reported lower back pain, 35 percent of adults age 45 years
and older reported this condition (Barbour, 2017). In addition, while 22.7 percent of all
adults suffer from arthritis, the prevalence of this condition is 29.3 percent among adults 45
to 64 years and 49.6 percent among adults 65 years and older (Barbour, 2017). Despite high
rates of conditions that might respond to medical marijuana, older adults are understud1

See, for example, https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2017/apr/18/83-percent-americans-favorlegalizing-medical-weed/ (accessed December 15th, 2017).

1

ied in medical marijuana trials, raising questions of whether the available findings can be
extrapolated to the older adult population. A recent National Academies of Science report
emphasized the need for observational and experimental research to inform clinical decisionmaking related to medical marijuana use among understudied populations including older
adults (McCormick et al., 2017).
Given typical age patterns of disease, the health benefits of MML passage may be concentrated among older adults if medical marijuana access leads to improved symptom control.
If access to marijuana for medical purposes through passage of an MML reduces symptoms
associated with work-impeding health conditions such as arthritis and chronic pain, this
access could lead to enhanced participation in the labor market within the fastest growing
segment of the population. Extending the work lives of older Americans can facilitate greater
retirement savings and potentially delay Social Security benefit claiming.
To date, studies of MML health and labor effects have focused on youth and working
age/pre-retirement age populations and, in particular, have not considered outcomes for
those over age 65. However, understanding the effects for older adults is important given that
poor health is frequently cited as a reason for older adult labor force exit (Dwyer & Mitchell,
1999; McGarry, 2004; Case & Deaton, 2005; Datta Gupta & Larsen, 2010; Garthwaite, 2012;
Kaila-Kangas et al., 2014). Rapid growth in the size of the aging population, predicted to
reach 20.9 percent of the population by 2050, suggests a particular need to understand the
effects of MMLs for this demographic (Ortman, Velkoff, Hogan, et al., 2014).
In this paper, we help address this critical gap in the literature by testing the effect
of medical marijuana laws on several health outcomes (chronic pain, work-limiting health
conditions, self-assessed health, and depression), and measures of labor supply along both
the extensive and intensive margins. We study the extent that our results are concentrated
among patients with one or more health conditions that would typically qualify a patient
for medical marijuana use, isolating individuals who plausibly use marijuana gained through
2

MMLs for primarily medical purposes or obtain an improved treatment regime after MML
passage prompts additional visits to a healthcare provider in response to new treatment
availability (Sabia, Swigert, & Young, 2017; Bradford & Bradford, 2016). We estimate
differences-in-differences regression models using panel data from the 1992 - 2012 waves
of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) that control for a wide range of state-level
characteristics that may predict our outcomes and the propensity of a state to pass an
MML, and state-specific time trends. We are able to leverage within-person variation in
MML exposure in addition to the within-state variation typically studied in this literature.
We have three principle findings in our study. (i) Our analysis of health outcomes suggests
that passage of an MML leads to reductions in chronic pain and improved self-assessed health
among older adults. For example, post-MML the probability of assessing one’s health as very
good or excellent increases by 3 percent. (ii) Passage of an MML leads to an increase in the
probability of full-time employment by 3 percent and weekly hours worked (conditional on
working) by 3 percent. Because we do not find evidence that passage of an MML changes the
probability of any work, we interpret our findings to imply that passage of an MML allows
currently working older adults to increase their participation in the labor market rather
than motivating a return to paid employment for those older adults who have previously
left the labor market due to health conditions. We hypothesize that the observed health
improvements may drive the labor supply effects. (iii) Overall, we find that MML effects,
both for health and labor supply, are concentrated among older adults likely to use marijuana
for medical purposes based on their health histories, suggesting that any adverse health and
labor supply reductions attributable to medical marijuana use in this population are more
than offset by improved symptom management.
Our results have immediate implications for both state and federal policymakers considering the fate of medical marijuana law passage and enforcement. More generally, they
contribute to a growing literature highlighting the role of health policy and access to medical
3

care in older adult labor supply.

2

Background and related literature

2.1

Marijuana regulation in the U.S.

Marijuana is a controlled substance under U.S. federal law, thus its possession and distribution are illegal. The Controlled Substances Act of 1970 classifies marijuana as a Schedule I
drug; the strictest regulation category used for ‘Drugs with no currently accepted medical
use and a high potential for abuse.’ Schedule I drugs include ecstasy and heroin while cocaine
is Schedule II and Valium is Schedule IV drug. Schedule I status severely limits researchers’
capacity to utilize marijuana for clinical trials, resulting in a very small number of studies
restricted to low potency tetrahydrocannabinol, which is markedly weaker than the medical
marijuana available to patients through home cultivation or dispensaries (Williams, Olfson,
Kim, Martins, & Kleber, 2016; Stith & Vigil, 2016). Existing clinical evidence is likely insufficient to inform medical marijuana policies and treatment decisions for many patients,
especially older adults.
As of 2017, 29 states and DC have implemented an MML. To legally access marijuana,
patients must receive a recommendation from a medical doctor indicating their need for
this medication and provide evidence of legal residence within the state. State laws differ
in terms of the conditions that qualify patients for medical marijuana. Common qualifying
conditions are cachexia, cancer, digestive conditions, epilepsy, HIV/AIDS, glaucoma, muscle
spasms, multiple sclerosis, and pain (Bradford & Bradford, 2017; Sabia et al., 2017). Table
1 Column 1 outlines the MML effective date for each state that has passed an MML through
2013 (Sabia & Nguyen, 2016); the last year of our study period.2 The first state to pass an
2
We list law changes that occurred after 2013 in table notes for completeness; we do not incorporate these
laws changes in our analyses.

4

MML was California in 1996. This law removed criminal penalties for marijuana possession,
cultivation, and use for a set of health conditions. Other early adopting states include Oregon
(1998), Washington (1999), Alaska (1999), and Maine (1999). Florida and West Virginia are
the most recent states to pass an MML (2017), after our study period.

2.2

Clinical evidence and medical marijuana use among older adults

Although clinical evidence is limited, randomized control trials have found that medical
marijuana is an effective treatment for symptoms associated with pain, anxiety, depression,
nausea, psychosis, sleep disorders, and spasticity (Hill, 2015; Whiting et al., 2015; Goldenberg et al., 2017; McCormick et al., 2017). Pain is the most common condition reported as
the reason for medical marijuana use (Nunberg, Kilmer, Pacula, & Burgdorf, 2011; Reiman,
Welty, & Solomon, 2017). Reiman et al. (2017) document that 63 percent of 2,897 medical marijuana patients reported using the drug to treat chronic pain symptoms. The vast
majority of patients in their study reported that medical marijuana addressed chronic pain
symptoms as well as prescription medications but without side effects, and use of medical
marijuana reduced prescription opioid use. Enrolless in the New Mexico Medical Cannabis
Program were more likely to cease using prescription opioids and reported less pain than
non-enrollee controls (Vigil, Stith, Adams, & Reeve, 2017).
Although states do not release individual-level data, our analysis of available data suggests that 20 percent to 60 percent of all registered medical marijuana users in U.S. states
reporting demographic information are over age 50.3 Recent studies of medical users registering in their state (Anderson, Hansen, & Rees, 2013; Yi, 2015; Fairman, 2016; Kaskie,
Ayyagari, Milavetz, Shane, & Arora, 2017) and convenience samples of medical marijuana
patients (Nunberg et al., 2011; Ilgen et al., 2013) also suggest that older adults represent a
3

Authors’ calculation using data from eleven states (Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Delaware,
Hawaii, Illinois, Minnesota, Montana, Nevada, and Oregon) that, at the time of writing, require patients to
register with the state to legally use medical marijuana and publicly report patient demographics.

5

substantial share of medical marijuana patients.
Data from the National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) collected by the federal
government to monitor substance use indicate that 5.8 percent of adults ages 45 to 54, 6.1
percent of adults ages 55 to 64 years, and 1.3 percent of adults age 65 years and older reported
any form of marijuana use in the past month in 2014, reflecting a 48 percent, 455 percent,
and 333 percent increase since 2002 (Azofeifa, 2016). Rates of use in the past year are higher,
but show similar increases, over the period 2002 to 2014: 2.9 percent to 9.0 percent among
adults 50 to 64 years and 0.2 percent to 2.1 percent among adults 65 years and older (Stoner,
2016). Older adult medical marijuana use is increasingly noticed by marketers and popular
press.4

2.3

Economic analyses of state medical marijuana laws

A growing economic literature explores the effect of MMLs on a range of outcomes. We
provide a brief review of the studies most relevant to our work on older adults, who are
currently understudied in the medical marijuana literature (McCormick et al., 2017). Using
NSDUH, Wen, Hockenberry, and Cummings (2015) show that among adults 21 years and
older passage of an MML leads to a 14 percent (15 percent) increase in prior month marijuana
consumption (near daily use). The authors note that the estimated increases likely reflect
some spillover effects from medical to recreational use (Wen et al., 2015). Choi (2014),
also using NSDUH, finds a similar relationship between MMLs and marijuana use among
those 21 years and older. Chu shows that passage of an MML leads to a 10 percent to 20
percent increase in arrests for marijuana-related possession and substance use disorder (SUD)
admissions within the general population (Chu, 2014, 2015). Effects of MMLs on marijuana4

https://mjbizmagazine.com/serving-the-senior-demographic/; https://skillednursingnews.com/2017/11/formerlong-term-care-exec-bets-cannabis-demand-canada/;
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/seniors-andmarijuana/;
http://ualrpublicradio.org/post/marijuana-expo-brings-together-seniors-veterans-scientistssons-arkansas;
and
http://www.cpr.org/news/story/more-aging-coloradans-are-turning-to-medicalmarijuana-but-data-is-sparse.

6

related arrests among adults aged 45 years and above range from 1.1 percent to 11.9 percent
and are often statistically indistinguishable from zero. Anderson and Rees (2014) show that
passage of an MML increases the amount of marijuana plants eradicated under the Drug
Enforcement Agency’s Domestic Cannabis Eradication/Suppression Program.
There is also evidence that MML passage leads to changes in health outcomes. Sabia et al.
(2017) find that passage of an MML leads to a 2 percent to 6 percent decline in the probability
of obesity. The authors show that, following passage of an MML, days in poor physical and
mental health decline while physical activity increases although the effects are sensitive to the
inclusion of state trends. Findings for older adults are broadly comparable to the full sample,
but are generally imprecise in models that include state trends. Anderson, Rees, and Sabia
(2014) document that MML passage leads to a decline in completed suicides among men aged
20 to 29 and 30 to 39, but not other demographic groups. Abouk and Adams (2018) show
that, post-MML, cardiovascular deaths increase by 2.3 percent among men and 1.2 percent
among women. Effect sizes are even larger among older adults (defined as adults 65 years
and older). Finally, Ullman (2016) shows that passage of an MML reduces work absences
by 8.4 percent to 8.7 percent among workers 15 to 65 years of age in the Current Population
Survey (CPS), although MML effects are somewhat sensitive to alternative specifications for
workers ages 50 to 65.
Evidence suggests that patients are using marijuana medically to treat symptoms associated with a range of health conditions following passage of an MML. While currently
available survey data does not, to the best of our knowledge, allow researchers to separately
examine medical and recreational marijuana use, insight can be gleaned from medication use
patterns. Two recent studies take this indirect approach. Bradford and Bradford (2016) analyze prescription drug use patterns among Medicare patients, documenting declines in filled
prescriptions for therapeutic substitutes for a number of conditions including pain, anxiety,
depression, nausea, psychosis, seizures, and sleep disorders among patients in states with
7

legal access to medical marijuana. The magnitude of the prescription declines is non-trivial;
5.7 percent for pain medications, 5.0 percent for anxiety medications, 5.4 percent for nausea
medications, and 4.5 percent for psychosis medications. In a follow up study, Bradford and
Bradford (2017) document similar drops in use for therapeutic substitutes following passage
of MML passage within the Medicaid population.
Three studies suggest that passage of an MML leads to a reduction in opioid use, opioids
are used to treat chronic pain and thus are plausibly therapeutic substitutes for marijuana.
Bachhuber, Saloner, Cunningham, and Barry (2014) use mortality data to show that passage
of an MML reduces the opioid overdose rate by 24.8 percent. Similarly, Powell, Pacula, and
Jacobson (2015) document that legal access to medical marijuana reduces admissions to
SUD treatment for opioid use and overdose deaths attributable to opioids. Finally, Ozluk
(2017) finds lower prescription opioid spending following MML passage. Collectively, these
findings suggest that (i) some individuals, in particular older individuals, are using marijauna
medically post-MML and (ii) passage of an MML leads to substitution towards medical
marijuana and away from more conventional treatment options.
To the best of our knowledge, only one study explores the effect of MML implementation
on labor market outcomes. Sabia and Nguyen (2016) leverage data from the CPS among
adults ages 18 to 64. The authors document that passage of an MML decreases wages by
2.8 percent among males ages 20 to 29 years, but passage is largely unrelated to wages
among other groups and unrelated to measures of considered labor supply (any work and
conditional hours worked). The authors do not find evidence that passage of an MML affects
these measures among individuals ages 50 to 64 years.
Our study makes several contributions that extend the medical marijuana literature. We
focus on older adults, 51 years and above, the population that is most likely to suffer from the
health conditions for which marijuana may be effective in treating symptoms. Because we
have detailed health history information, we are able to isolate samples of older adults who
8

suffer from the health conditions with symptoms treatable with marijuana. We can carefully
consider a range of clinically relevant mechanisms including chronic pain and mental health
problems. Finally, we are able to include person fixed effects as an alternative control for
omitted variable bias. Our study of older adults fills a knowledge gap for policymakers,
healthcare providers, and patients.

3

Mechanisms

3.1

Health

Medical marijuana offers a new treatment option for patients suffering from a number of
health conditions. While marijuana cannot cure underlying conditions, medicinal use may
reduce symptoms. As noted in the previous section, there is evidence that patients may
substitute medical marijuana for other conventional treatments (Bachhuber et al., 2014;
Powell et al., 2015; Bradford & Bradford, 2016, 2017; Ozluk, 2017). These substitution
patterns are particularly relevant for older adults, as this population is much more likely to
use prescription medications to treat symptoms associated with chronic health conditions
than younger populations (National Center for Health Statistics, 2017). However, the extent
to which such medication substitution affects patient health outcomes is ex ante ambiguous.
A complicating factor in predicting the health effects of MML passage is that medication –
be it marijuana or any other medication – effectiveness varies across patients (Porter, 2010).
Patient health and symptom burden should improve if medical marijuana is more effective
than a patient’s previous treatment program (which may include no treatment) and/or has
a less aggressive side effect profile, and worsen if marijuana is a less effective treatment. If
MML passage primarily leads to increases in recreational use (Wen et al., 2015), then we
expect no improvement, and perhaps a decline, in health for the new recreational users.
Even if marijuana is more effective than a patient’s previous treatment, switching to
9

medical marijuana may also have adverse patient health effects if this substitution induces
patients to terminate treatments addressing a broader set of symptoms. For instance, the
treatment of chronic pain is often characterized by utilization of both prescription medications designed specifically to minimize pain symptoms and anti-depressants (Sansone &
Sansone, 2008). Healthcare providers prescribe these medications in combination because
some anti-depressants directly act on a different set of pain receptors than typical pain relievers, and because depression and pain can co-occur. Patients who opt to use medical
marijuana (which is generally obtained outside the conventional healthcare system) may
lose access to valuable secondary treatments. Moreover, regular interactions with healthcare
providers, who may be better able to assess changes in health than patients themselves, may
also decline as patients withdraw from conventional healthcare. Finally, if patients co-use
marijuana with other medications (Ozluk, 2017), drug interactions could harm health (U.S.
National Library of Medicine, 2017).

3.2

Labor supply

Older adults may increase labor supply following medical marijuana access if the new treatment more effectively alleviates symptoms or provides similar efficacy with fewer side effects.
Standard economic models of labor supply highlight the importance of health (Currie &
Madrian, 1999). Moreover, there is substantial empirical evidence documenting that poor
health prompts older adults to reduce labor supply (Dwyer & Mitchell, 1999; McGarry, 2004;
Case & Deaton, 2005; Datta Gupta & Larsen, 2010; Garthwaite, 2012). Conventional prescription medications for many medical marijuana-qualifying health conditions often present
patients with non-trivial side effects that can impede work. Anti-anxiety medications side
effects include addiction, confusion, headaches, irritability, trouble concentrating, and worsening of depressive symptoms (Longo & Johnson, 2000; Stewart, Ricci, Chee, Morganstein, &
Lipton, 2003). Patients using opioid pain relievers often suffer from cardiovascular problems,
10

central nervous system complications, constipation, impaired judgment, itching, nausea or
vomiting, and respiratory problems (Swegle & Logemann, 2006; Chau, Walker, Pai, & Cho,
2008).
However, marijuana is a drug that can have intoxicating effects on the user and that has
serious side effects including addiction, amotivational syndrome, anxiety, depression, inattention, increased heart rate, lethargy, memory problems, and respiratory problems (Van Ours
& Williams, 2011, 2012; Hill, 2015; Volkow et al., 2016). These attributes can harm health
and impede labor supply, even among adults who use marijuana for medical purposes. If
older adults increase recreational marijuana use in response to easier or access or perceived
safety following MML passage, we expect labor supply to remain unchanged or decline. Labor supply could also decline if use of medical marijuana improves health and the increased
value of leisure time decreases the desire to work and, for example, prompts older adults to
enter retirement.

4

Data, variables, and methods

Given the ambiguous predicted implications of MMLs for older adult health and labor supply,
we use quasi-experimental methods to evaluate the empirical question.

4.1

Health and Retirement Study

We draw data collected between 1992 through early 2013 from the Health and Retirement
Study (HRS) 1992 to 2012 interview waves. We truncate the sample in 2012-2013 to avoid
confounding from passage of state recreational marijuana laws that were passed post-2012.
The HRS is a nationally representative panel survey of Americans over 50 and their spouses
administered biennially since 1992. The survey is designed to track health and labor market
outcomes among older adults, and is therefore well-suited to our study objectives. Through
11

the 2012 wave, the HRS includes 247,233 interviews with 38,008 older persons. After excluding respondents based on residence outside the U.S., missing state, or proxy response,
our analysis sample includes 183,032 respondent/year observations.
A limitation of the HRS, similar to all major surveys containing large samples of older
adults and measures of health and labor supply of which we are aware, is that it does not
collect information on marijuana use, either for medical or recreational purposes. Therefore,
our results have a an intent-to-treat (ITT) interpretation and reflect the numerous secondary
pathways through which MMLs can affect health and labor supply in addition to medical
use. We discuss the plausibility of our effect sizes later in the manuscript.

4.2

State-level medical marijuana laws

Our source for MML effective dates is Sabia and Nguyen (2016). We match the MML
effective dates to the HRS interview on month and year. We construct an indicator variable
coded one if a state has an MML in place and zero otherwise. Table 1 Column 1 reports
each state that has passed an MML by the end of our study period (2013) and the effective
dates.

4.3

Outcome variables

We examine four health outcomes which have some clinical support for the use of medical
marijuana as a treatment option, are measured in the HRS, and have a plausible link to
labor supply. Specifically, (i) any chronic pain, (ii) depressive symptoms (measured by an
abbreviated eight question version of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies - Depression Scale
[CES-D] used in the HRS), (iii) health limiting the ability to work, and (iv) self-assessed
health (we construct an indicator for reporting very good or excellent health).
These HRS survey items mirror questions that healthcare providers would use to diagnose

12

and treat conditions such as pain and depression; conditions that are are subjective by nature
(National Institutes of Health, 2011). For example, the National Institutes of Health advises
that ‘Pain is a very personal and subjective experience. There is no test that can measure and
locate pain with precision’ (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2011). Self-assessed health has
been shown to predict, even after conditioning on observable characteristics, more objective
measures of health status such as mortality and healthcare utilization (Benjamins, Hummer,
Eberstein, & Nam, 2004; Nielsen, 2016). This measure is believed to capture aspects of
mental and physical health (Apouey & Clark, 2015). The CES-D measures of depressive
symptomatology have been validated in numerous settings (Radloff, 1977; Turvey, Wallace,
& Herzog, 1999). These measures are frequently used in the economics and policy analysis
literatures (Tian, Robinson, & Sturm, 2005; Kapteyn, Smith, & Van Soest, 2008; McInerney,
Mellor, & Nicholas, 2013; Horn, Maclean, & Strain, 2017).
We examine three measures of labor supply: (i) any work in the past year (0/1), (ii)
whether currently working full-time (0/1), working 35 or more hours per week for at least
36 weeks of the year), and (iii) usual hours worked per week among those who report any
work. We take the logarithm of usual hours worked, thus coefficient estimates have the
interpretation of an approximation of the percent change.

4.4

Control variables

We control for respondent age, race, Hispanic ethnicity, and education in all regressions.5 We
account for several time-varying state characteristics that may be correlated with both the
passage of an MML and our outcomes to minimize bias due to omitted policy variables. To
this end, we include an indicator for whether a state has decriminalized marijuana (Pacula,
5

To preserve sample size we assign an indicator variable for observations with missing personal characteristics and assign that observation the mean (modal) value for continuous (binary) variables. Results are
not appreciably different if we instead exclude observations with missing personal characteristics from the
analysis sample or exclude the personal characteristic variables from the regression models.

13

Chriqui, & King, 2003), the beer tax per gallon from the Brewers’ Almanac, the unemployment rate and average wage among adults 51 years and older from the Current Population
Survey Outgoing Rotation Group (CPS-ORG). We also control for a set of labor market and
social policies: effective minimum wage (i.e., the higher value of the state or federal wage),
state Earned Income Tax (EITC) as a proportion of the Federal EITC, and maximum food
stamp benefit for a family of four from the University of Kentucky Poverty Research Center. Finally, we control for the governor’s (DC mayor’s) political affiliation. We inflate all
nominal values to 2012 terms using the Consumer Price Index.

4.5

Empirical model

We estimate the following differences-in-differences regression model:
0

0

Yist = α0 + α1 Mst + Xist α2 + τst α3 + δs + γt + Ωst + ist

(1)

Yist is a labor supply or health outcome for older adult i in state s in year t. Mst is an
indicator for an MML in state s in year t. Xist is a vector of individual characteristics and
τst is a vector of time-varying state characteristics. δs is a vector of state fixed effects which
capture unobservable (to the econometrician) and fixed factors for each state, and γt is a
vector of interview wave dummy variables which capture factors that affect the national as
a whole. Ωst is a vector of state-specific linear wave trends. These trends (linearly) capture
unobservable, time-varying factors. ist is the error term. We utilize linear probability
models (LPMs) for binary outcomes and least squares for continuous outcomes. We cluster
the standard errors around the state (Bertrand, Duflo, & Mullainathan, 2004). All results
are unweighted. In a complimentary set of regressions, we replace state fixed effects with
person fixed effects. Thus, we leverage within-person variation in exposure to MMLs and can,
arguably, better mitigate bias from omitted, but time-invariant, respondent-level variables.
14

Although the HRS does not include information on medical marijuana use, the survey
collects information about many of the underlying symptoms and health conditions that
would qualify for medical marijuana within states that have passed an MML. We construct an
indicator of whether a respondent appears to qualify for medical marijuana (the ‘qualifying
sample’) if they report (i) current cancer treatment, (ii) current glaucoma, (iii) current
arthritis, and / or (iv) severe pain in the current or any previous wave. 101,112 observations
(or 55 percent of the full sample) meet this diagnosis. This is a conservative approach as it
fails to identify those respondents with rare diagnoses such as multiple sclerosis, HIV/AIDS,
and epilepsy, which are not measured in the HRS. We estimate all specifications of Equation
1 in the full sample and the qualifying sample. We expect that the relationships between
MMLs and our outcome variables will be stronger in the qualifying sample than the full
sample if MMLs increases access to medical marijuana among patients who benefit from its
clinical use. To the best of our knowledge, the HRS is the only large scale survey of older
adults that includes sufficient information to identify the population most likely to benefit
from access to medical marijuana, and assess whether health and labor supply change in
response to this access.

5
5.1

Results
Summary statistics

Table 2 reports summary statistics. In the full sample, 31 percent report experiencing
pain, 29 percent report that health limits work ability, and 41 percent report their health
as excellent or very good, and the mean number of depressive symptoms is 1.6 (out of a
maximum of 8 symptoms). The qualifying sample, as expected, appears to have worse
health than the full sample: 43 percent reports experiencing pain, 39 percent reports that
health limits the ability to work, 32 percent reports very good or excellent health, and the
15

mean number of depressive symptoms is 1.8. Turning to labor supply, in the full (qualifying)
sample 39 percent (31 percent) reports working and 26 percent (19 percent) reports working
full time, while the mean hours worked per week conditional on any work is 36.7 (34.8). 13
percent of the full sample and 15 percent of the qualifying sample reside in a state with an
MML. The individual characteristics are comparable to an older sample and the state-level
characteristics reflect the national as a whole.

5.2

Regression analysis of health outcomes

We first explore the effect of MML passage on older adult health. Results are reported in
Table 3. Overall, we find that the health effects of MML passage are concentrated in pain
and self-assessed health, we find no statistically significant evidence that MMLs are linked
with either the probability of reporting that health limits the ability to work or depressive
symptomology. We find that the health effects are more substantial in the qualifying sample
than in the full sample. We interpret the more substantial (in terms of magnitude) effects in
the qualifying sample to imply that marijuana obtained following an MML is used medically
by a non-trivial share of respondents in this sample. More specifically, passage of an MML
leads to a 0.2 percentage point (0.6 percent) reduction in chronic pain and a 1.4 percentage
point (3.4 percent) increase in the probability of reporting very good or excellent self-assessed
health; although the MML estimate in the pain regression is imprecise. Within the qualifying
sample we find that passage of an MML leads to a statistically significant 2.2 percentage
point (5.1 percent) reduction in reporting pain and a 2.5 percentage point (7.8 percent)
increase in the probability of reporting very good or excellent health.
Based on age alone, the Azofeifa (2016) results suggest that 3.6 percent of our full sample
and 3.3 percent of the qualifying sample had marijuana use in the past month. Our point
estimates are consistent with a portion of these users receiving therapeutic benefit. For
example, the pain results translate to one-sixth of all-cause marijuana users in the age
16

group experiencing a reduction in pain based on the full sample and one-third based on the
qualifying sample results.

5.3

Regression analysis of labor supply outcomes

Table 4 reports results on the effect of MML passage on older adult labor supply. We find no
statistically significant evidence that MML passage leads to changes on the extensive margin
of labor supply: the coefficient estimates, in both the full sample and the qualifying sample,
in the any employment regressions are small in magnitude and imprecise. We interpret this
finding to suggest that MML passage does not draw older workers into the labor market
(or, perhaps more accurately, allow older workers to re-enter the labor market). We next
consider the effect of MML passage on the intensive margin of labor supply: full time work
propensity and conditional hours worked per week. We observe that passage of an MML
leads to increases in labor supply along both of these measures. More specifically, passage of
a MML leads to a 0.8 percentage point (3.1 percent) increase in the probability of fulltime
work and a 3.3 percent increase in hours worked per week in the full sample.6
The magnitude of the MML effects are more substantial within the qualifying sample:
passage of an MML leads to a 1.1 percentage point (5.8 percent) increase in the probability of
working fulltime and a 6 percent increase in weekly hours worked (conditional on any work).
The combination of our health and labor supply effects suggest that, on average, improved
capacity to work dominates any work-impeding effects of marijuana use (recreational or
medical). In particular, we hypothesize that reductions in symptoms associated with chronic
health conditions (e.g., pain) and overall well-being, as measured by self-assessed health,
6

In line with the null findings for any employment, including those respondents who do not report any
work leads to a small positive, but imprecise, coefficient estimate. We interpret these null findings generated
in the unconditional sample as further evidence that labor supply effects are driven by changes on the
intensive margin. Moreover, because we do not observe MML effects on the extensive margin, we believe
that our conditional hours worked findings are not likely driven by conditional-on-positive bias (Angrist &
Pischke, 2009).

17

allow older adult workers to increase the amount of time they allocate to paid employment
post-MML.

5.4

Person fixed effects

An advantage of the HRS is that the survey is longitudinal and thus we can include person
fixed effects as an alternative control for omitted variables. Tables 5 (health outcomes) and
6 report these results. Findings are broadly robust to including person fixed effects; we
continue to find improvements in pain, self-rated health, and hours worked in the qualifying
sample. Although the beta coefficient estimates decline and standard error estimates increase
in some specifications, the direction of the relationship is stable across this alternative, but
more demanding, specification and 95 percent confidence intervals for estimates generated
in the baseline and person fixed effect models generally overlap.

6
6.1

Robustness checks and Threats to Identification
Parallel trends

The principle assumption underlying DD models is that outcomes in the treatment (everMML) states and comparison states would have trended similarly had the treatment group
not been treated (i.e., the ‘parallel trends’ assumption). This assumption, while necessary
for DD models to recover causal effects, is inherently untestable as the treatment group was
in fact treated and therefore the counterfactual is not observed. To verify that states had
similar trends in health and labor supply outcomes prior to law passage, we use pre-period
data to estimate regression models replacing the MML indicator with an interaction between
the treatment group status and a linear time trend:

18

0

0

Yist = β0 + β1 (T reats ∗ T rendsr ) + β2 T rendsr + Xist β3 + τst β4 + δs + γt + µist

(2)

T reats is an indicator variable for ever-MML and T rendsr is a linear time trend centered
around the month and year of law passage (r). We randomly assign an MML passage date for
control states and center the data around this ‘false’ effective date in a comparable manner.
We do not include state-specific linear interview wave trends in Equation 2. Such trends
may absorb differences in trends for MML versus non-MML states which could lead us to
falsely conclude that these two groups of states moved in parallel pre-MML (Wolfers, 2006).
We view a model without state trends as a more conservative test of parallel trends than a
model with trends. However, results are not appreciably different than those reported when
we do include state trends.
Results of the parallel trends tests are reported in Appendix Tables A1 (health) and A2
(labor supply). While we do observe that some of the estimated β1 coefficients are statistically
different from zero, we argue that the parallel trends test results do not invalidate the ability
of our data to recover causal estimates. First, in the majority of regressions (12/16), the
coefficient estimate of β1 is not statistically different from zero. Second, in two of the
four regressions in which the coefficient estimate of β1 is statistically different from zero
(probability of reporting pain and hours worked per week in the qualifying sample), the
sign works against our ability to detect MML effects (Simon, Soni, & Cawley, 2016). For
example, post-MML, the probability of reporting pain within the qualifying sample declines,
but the coefficient estimate for β1 in Equation 2 is positive, suggesting that chronic pain
was increasing in treatment states relative to comparison states in the pre-MML period.
Combining these two estimates suggests that we may understate the effect of MML passage
on chronic pain and conditional hours worked in Equation 1, at least within the qualifying

19

sample. While the estimates for β1 in both of the depressive symptoms regressions are
precisely estimated and positive in sign which may suggest that MML-passing states may
have been experiencing worsening mental health conditions prior to the law passage, but
we recovered no evidence that MML passage influenced this outcome in Equation 1. Thus,
we interpret relationships between MML passage and depression among older adults with
caution and encourage readers to do the same.

6.2

Event study

A concern with analyses of state policies is that they are not randomly assigned. Instead,
state legislatures are prompted to implement policies based on population-level changes. In
our context, MMLs may be passed due to changes in health conditions within the state. In
this scenario, outcomes may induce changes in policies (MMLs) rather than policies inducing
changes in outcomes. Such a phenomena would lead to policy endogeneity or reverse causality
at the state-level. A standard approach to examine the presence of policy endogeneity is to
estimate an event study (Autor, 2003; Lovenheim, 2009).
First, we center the data around the law effective date for each state that passed an
MML during our study period. Next, we construct leads and lags around the effective
date. Specifically, we include a series of two-year leads and lags in the regression from 10 and -9 years to + 7 and +8 years pre- and post-MML. We impose endpoint restrictions
following Kline (2011): we assume that MML effects are not observable more than 10 years
pre-passage and dissipate after 8 years. We code states that do not pass an MML by 2013
as zero for all lead and lag variables (Lovenheim, 2009). We exclude state-specific wave
trends following Wolfers (2006) who argues that including time trends in models that allow
for dynamics (as event studies do) complicates the interpretation of coefficient estimates.
Statistically significant estimates of the leads suggest that policy endogeneity is present in
our data. However, our ability to ‘control’ for such potential endogeneity can allow us to
20

recover causal estimates of policy lags, which are the objects of primary interest in our study.
Moreover, examination of the coefficient estimates on the lags allows study of the dynamics
in MML effects while Equation 1 forces a constant treatment effect in the post-MML period.
Results generated in event studies are reported in Figures 1 and 3 for the full sample and
2 and 4 for the qualifying sample. 95 percent confidence intervals that account for withinstate clustering (Bertrand et al., 2004) are reported with vertical lines. Overall, our event
studies do suggest some policy endogeneity: health limits work was increasing in the full
sample prior to MML adoption and hours worked were declining in the qualifying sample
relative to baseline.

6.3

Endogeneity of the qualifying sample and migration

Passage of an MML may alter the number of HRS respondents reporting qualifying conditions, causing us to our analysis sample on an endogenous variable. This can lead to
conditional-on-positive bias in regression coefficients, a common concern in policy analysis
(Angrist & Pischke, 2009). However, the conditions that we use to construct the eligible
sample are not likely ‘cured’ by the use of medical marijuana, instead use of this medication
may allow better symptom management. Second, because patients must regularly consume
marijuana to manage symptom burden they are not likely to ‘forget’ that they have a condition as they are regularly reminded of the condition through medication use. Nonetheless,
we explore this possibility by regressing the probability of being in the qualifying sample on
the MML variable and other controls in Equation 1. Results are reported in Appendix Table
A3. We find no statistically significant evidence that MMLs affect the probability of being
in the qualifying sample. The coefficient estimate, while imprecise, carries a negative sign
and is small relative to the baseline proportion (-0.01 vs. 0.55).
A related concern is program induced migration (Moffitt, 1992). Older adults moving
to MML states as a result of law passage could lead to bias in our coefficient estimates.
21

We regress the probability that an HRS respondent migrated across state lines between
interviews on the MML indicator and other controls in Equation 1. Results are reported in
Table A3 and suggest that passage of an MML reduces the likelihood that a respondent moves
by 0.7 percentage points (30.4 percent relative to the baseline proportion of 0.0237 ) in the full
sample; we do not observe statistically significant evidence of such migration patterns in the
qualifying sample. Thus, some of our findings, at least within the full sample, may be driven
by residents remaining in a state with an MML, when they might otherwise chose to move.
However, the absolute value of the migration coefficient estimate is considerably smaller than
the absolute value of the health and labor supply coefficient estimates, indicating that our
results cannot be fully explained by MML-induced migration.

6.4

Effect of MMLs on individuals not in the qualifying sample

We next re-estimate Equation 1 using only those respondents who do not qualify for the
access to medical marijuana through the health conditions outlined earlier in the manuscript.
Appendix Tables A4 and A5 show no changes in health or labor supply for this group in
response to MMLs, providing support for the hypothesis that results are largely driven by
older adults utilizing marijuana medically post-MML.

6.5

Effects of specific MML provisions

Health policy scholars have noted that different types of MMLs may have differential impacts
on both medical and recreational marijuana use (Anderson & Rees, 2014; Pacula, Powell,
Heaton, & Sevigny, 2015; Wen et al., 2015). To explore such heterogeneous effects, we
re-estimate Equation 1 for the following law provisions: (i) cultivation permitted (home or
group), (ii) operating dispensaries, (iii) non-specific pain included as a qualifying health
7

We note that the relative effect size is large, but we suspect that this large relative effect is driven by
the fact that few older adults in our sample move across state lines.

22

condition, and (iv) patient registration required (effective dates are reported in Columns 2-5
of Table 1). These first three provisions may improve medical and recreational access with
potential price and quality spillovers to the illegal market, while registration aims to deter
program abuse by recreational users.
Cultivation, operating dispensaries, and chronic pain as a qualifying conditions appear
to drive our health findings (Appendix Table A6). MMLs that require patients to register
with the state to legally access medical marijuana are unrelated to our health outcomes.
Cultivation and chronic pain as a qualifying health condition predict changes in labor supply
(Appendix Table A7). MMLs that requires patients to register with the state reduces the
probability of working, possibly because of workplace policies that preclude use of controlled
substances while working. The manner in which states chose to regulate medical marijuana
is important for older adult health and labor supply outcomes.

6.6

Alternative samples and controls for between-state heterogeneity

Appendix Tables A8 (health) and A9 (labor supply) demonstrate robustness of our results to
alternative samples and regression specifications. First, we exclude adults older than 75, who
are unlikely to change their labor supply. Second, we exclude California to ensure that our
results are not driven by a single large, early-adopting state. In our main analyses we control
for between-state heterogeneity through the use of time-varying state characteristics (e.g.,
wages), state fixed effects, and state-specific linear wave trends. While this is a standard
specification within the MML literature (Anderson et al., 2013; Sabia & Nguyen, 2016) the
state trends may throw away useful variation in MML effects and some of the included
time-varying state-level controls may in fact be outcomes of MMLs (Sabia & Nguyen, 2016)
which could lead to over-controlling bias (Angrist & Pischke, 2009). We estimate regressions

23

models that (i) exclude state-specific linear waves trends and (ii) time-varying state-level
variables. Overall, our results are broadly robust to these alternative samples and approaches
to addressing between-state heterogeneity though some checks lose statistical significance.

6.7

Heterogeneity in MML effects by sex

There are established sex differences in terms of health (e.g., women are more likely to
experience mental health problems than men (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, 2014) and labor supply (i.e., men are more likely to work than women,
particularly in an older sample such as we analyze in the HRS, see for example Banerjee
and Blau (2016). To explore such heterogeneity, we have estimated separate regressions for
men and women.8 Results are reported in Appendix Tables A10 (health) and A11 (labor
supply). We find interesting heterogeneity in health effects across gender. Post-MML, both
reported pain and depressive symptoms decline among men, but not women, in passing
states. However, women, but not men, experience improvements in self-assessed health
post-MML. In terms of labor supply, the sex-stratified regressions suggest that although the
labor supply effects are stronger for men than for women (i.e., larger relative effect sizes and
greater precision), both groups appear to increase labor supply post-MML.

6.8

Additional robustness checks

We conduct several robustness checks that we report in the text for brevity, but that are
available on request. Our identification strategy assumes that the changes in health and
labor supply outcomes observed after states pass MMLs are driven by the laws themselves,
and not an unobserved third factor that follows the same rollout pattern across states as the
laws we study. We test this hypothesis by conducting a Monte Carlo simulation in which
we randomly assign with replacement actual state legislative histories to our 50 states and
8

We chose to rely on the pooled sample in our main analyses to preserve sample size.

24

DC, and estimate the effect of these false laws. Across 100 simulations, our mean point
estimates are small and statistically indistinguishable from zero in all regressions. We have
lagged the MMLs one year to allow for a time delay and outcomes; for example it make take
some time for older adults to learn about medical marijuana, receive a recommendation,
initiate marijuana use, and then experience improvements in symptom burden and increase
participation in the labor market. Results generated in models that include such a lag are
comparable to our main results. We have used alternative coding schemes for MMLs (i.e.,
Pacula et al. (2015) and Wen et al. (2015)). Results are broadly comparable to those that
we report in the manuscript.
Finally, we examined the effect of MML passage on a measure of arguably non-medical
marijuana use among older adults: admissions to substance use disorder treatment (SUD)
with marijuana listed as the primary substance of abuse in the Treatment Episode Data
Set (TEDS). We constructed the rate among adults 55 years and older; age information
provided in the TEDS precluded closer alignment with our HRS analysis sample in terms of
age (i.e., 51 years and older). More specifically, we estimated a version of Equation 1 using
the count of state-level admissions to SUD treatment over the period 1992 to 2012. We
found no evidence that this measure of marijuana use was altered by an MML passage. We
found similar results using any indicator of marijuana use as the dependent variable. While
clearly not definitive, this null finding is suggestive, in combination with information from
marijuana patients reported earlier in the manuscript, that older adults who use marijuana
post-MML are using the product for medical purposes.

7

Discussion

In this study we provide new information to the current policy debate surrounding legalization of marijuana for medical purposes through state regulations. Specifically, we explore

25

the effects of state medical marijuana laws (MMLs) on older adult health and labor supply
outcomes. Thus, we examine an understudied yet important sub-group. First, we document that reported chronic pain declines and overall assessments of one’s health improve
post-MML among older adults. More specifically, post-MML the probability of reporting
pain declines by 0.6 percent (statistically insignificant)and the probability of reporting one’s
health as very good or excellent increases by 3.4 percent. These findings suggest that access
to medical marijuana through MMLs allows, at least some, older adults to better manage
symptoms associated with chronic health conditions. Second, we find that MML passage
allows older adults who are currently working to increase their labor supply, but we do not
find evidence that MMLs allows older adults to re-enter the labor market. In particular, we
find that passage of an MML increases the probability of working full time and the number
of hours worked per week (among working adults) both increase by 3 percent. Finally, health
and labor supply effects are even larger among older adults who are likely to use marijuana
for medical purposes based on their health histories; for example pain declines by a statistically significant 2.2 percentage points among the 55 percent of our sample with one or more
health conditions that would qualify for medical marijuana use.
A key concern with marijuana regulation is that expanded access will promote recreational, and not medical, use of the product. While our study cannot fully address this
important question, our estimates can bring some evidence to bear for the older adult population. The fact that we identify improvements in health outcomes that plausibly capture
symptom burden (i.e., reported pain and overall health assessments) and increases in labor supply concentrated among those with medical marijuana qualifying conditions suggests
that, even if some older adults do use marijuana obtained following passage of an MML
recreationally, on average passage of an MML and the ensuing changes in health and labor
supply confers important benefits to some older adults.
We can compare our findings with a previous study that examines the labor market ef26

fects of MML passage. Sabia and Nguyen (2016) finds no change in employment propensity
following passage of an MML, which is comparable to our null findings for any employment.
However, while we document that older adults increase labor supply along the intensive margin (defined as full time work and conditional hours worked) post-MML, Sabia and Nguyen
(2016) find no statistically significant evidence that conditional hours worked increase. We
hypothesize that our focus on an older sample of workers than Sabia and Nguyen (2016) may
explain this divergence in findings: we examine workers who are 50 years and older while
Sabia and Nguyen (2016) examine workers through age 64. Analysis of the Annual Social
and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey 1992-2012 indicates that 48
percent of adults 50 years and older and 24 percent of adults ages 65 to 75 years report being
in the labor force. Thus, a non-trivial share of older workers are in the labor force and may
increase their labor supply following passage of an MML. Moreover, as noted earlier in the
manuscript, older workers are the types of workers who are most likely to experience many of
the the health conditions whose symptoms may be effectively treated by medical marijuana,
suggesting that these workers are precisely the workers one would expect to observe positive
labor supply effects. Finally, our confidence intervals overlap with Sabia and Nguyen’s confidence intervals; hence we cannot rule out that the two studies produce comparable estimates.
Collectively, these two studies shed important light on the full effects of MML passage on
the labor market; Sabia and Nguyen document effects within working populations while we
examine older adults specifically.
Our findings also contribute to a larger literature highlighting the role of health policies
and access to medical treatments for older workers’ labor supply. Pain medications may be
particularly important for older workers. In addition to our results around medical marijuana
access, Garthwaite (2012) found a 3.9 percentage point (10 percent) decline in labor supply
among adults with joint conditions following the sudden withdrawal of Vioxx, a popular
anti-inflammatory medication previously used to treat joint pain.
27

Our study has limitations. (i) Our sample is potentially vulnerable to survivor bias, that
is we only observe the sample of older adults who are cognitively and physically able to
complete their own interviews. (ii) Our identification strategy only uses variation in MMLs
for those states that implemented such laws during our study period. (iii) As is the case in
all other economics studies examining MML effects of which we are aware, we lack data on
medical marijuana use in the HRS and our results have an ITT interpretation. However,
our effects are comparable, or smaller than, other ITT effects reported in the literature.
For instance, Bradford and Bradford (2016) show a that, post-MML, Medicare prescriptions
decline 5.7 percent for pain medications, 5.0 percent for anxiety medications, 5.4 percent
for nausea medications, and 4.5 percent for psychosis medications, and Bachhuber et al.
(2014) show a 24.8 percent decline in opioid-related overdoses post-MML. Moreover, while
the average treatment effect (ATT) is clearly important clinically, ITT is relevant for policy
purposes due to the complex pathways that MMLs can lead to changes in health and labor
supply. Moreover, as noted earlier in the manuscript, MMLs are the lever available to policy
makers. (iv) We lack data on all health conditions for which medical marijuana may be an
effective treatment for alleviating painful symptoms (e.g., anxiety, nausea).
The policy debate surrounding legalization of marijuana, for medical or recreational purposes, is fierce. In particular, with the Trump Administration’s proposal to renew Federal
enforcement of marijuana possession laws in states with MMLs by allowing the RohrabacherFarr Amendment to expire raises new concerns among medical marijuana advocates and at
the same time offers hope for critics who would like to curtail all marijuana access through
regulation. Policymakers must carefully weigh the costs and the benefits of such legalization. We provide evidence that there may be benefits in terms of the health and labor
supply of older adults, a population that, based on clinical anecdotal evidence, has elevated need for medications that can reduce painful symptoms associated with a range of
health conditions and is plausibly using marijuana medically. Taken in combination with
28

findings that MMLs may reduce body weight (Sabia et al., 2017), improve physical wellbeing (Sabia et al., 2017), reduce suicide rates among some sub-populations (Anderson et
al., 2014), lower opioid-related overdoses (Bachhuber et al., 2014; Powell et al., 2015), and
reduce alcohol-related traffic accidents (Anderson et al., 2013), our findings suggest that
there are potentially important social benefits to MMLs that must be considered in policy
decisions regarding regulation of medical marijuana.

29

Figure 1: Effect of state medical marijuana laws on older adult health outcomes using an
event study: HRS 1992-2012 (full sample)

-.02

0

.02

-.03 -.02 -.01 0

.04

.06

Health Limits Work

.01 .02

Pain

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

+6

+8

-10 -8

+6

+8

+6

+8

Dep. symptoms

0
-.2

-.1

-.04 -.02

0

.1

.02

.2

.04

V good/ex. health

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

+6

+8

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. All models estimated with a
linear probability model (binary outcome) or least squares (continuous outcome), and
control for individual and state characteristics, state fixed effects and interview wave fixed
effects. The omitted period is the year of MML passage. 95 percent confidence intervals
that account for within-state clustering are reported with vertical lines.

30

Figure 2: Effect of state medical marijuana laws on older adult health outcomes using an
event study: HRS 1992-2012 (qualifying sample)
Health Limits Work

-.04

-.02

0

-.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06

.02

Pain

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

+6

+8

-10 -8

+6

+8

+6

+8

Dep. symptoms

-.04 -.02

-.3 -.2 -.1

0

0

.1

.02 .04

.2

V good/ex. health

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

+6

+8

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older who report 1 or more
condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use. All models estimated with a
linear probability model (binary outcome) or least squares (continuous outcome), and
control for individual and state characteristics, state fixed effects and interview wave fixed
effects. The omitted period is the year of MML passage. 95 percent confidence intervals
that account for within-state clustering are reported with vertical lines.

31

Figure 3: Effect of state medical marijuana laws on older adult labor supply outcomes using
an event study: HRS 1992-2012 (full sample)
Work FT

-.02

0

-.04 -.02 0

.02

.04

.02 .04 .06

Work

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

+6

+8

+6

+8

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

+6

+8

-.05

0

.05

Hours worked/wk

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. All models estimated with a
linear probability model (binary outcome) or least squares (continuous outcome), and
control for individual and state characteristics, state fixed effects and interview wave fixed
effects. The omitted period is the year of MML passage. 95 percent confidence intervals
that account for within-state clustering are reported with vertical lines.

32

Figure 4: Effect of state medical marijuana laws on older adult labor supply outcomes using
an event study: HRS 1992-2012 (qualifying sample)

-.02

0

-.04 -.02 0

.02

.04

.02 .04 .06

Work FT

.06

Work

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

+6

+8

+6

+8

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

+6

+8

-.1 -.05

0

.05

.1

Hours worked/wk

-10 -8

-6 -4 -2
+2 +4
Time from Law Passage

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older who report 1 or more
condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use. All models estimated with a
linear probability model (binary outcome) or least squares (continuous outcome), and
control for individual and state characteristics, state fixed effects and interview wave fixed
effects. The omitted period is the year of MML passage. 95 percent confidence intervals
that account for within-state clustering are reported with vertical lines.

33

Table 1: State medical marijuana laws 1996-2013
State
Column
Alaska
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
DC
Delaware
Hawaii
Maine
Massachusetts
Michigan
Montana
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
Oregon
Rhode Island
Vermont
Washington

Any MML
(1)
3/1999
4/2011
11/1996
6/2001
5/2012
7/2010
7/2011
12/2000
12/1999
1/2013
12/2008
11/2004
10/2001
7/2013
10/2010
7/2007
12/1998
1/2006
7/2004
11/1998

Cultivation
(2)
n/a
4/2011
11/1996
6/2001
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
12/2008
11/2004
10/2001
n/a
n/a
n/a
12/1998
1/2006
n/a
7/2011

MML Provisions
Dispensary Non-specific pain
(3)
(4)
n/a
3/1999
12/2012
4/2011
11/1996
11/1996
7/2005
6/2001
8/2014
n/a
7/2013
n/a
n/a
7/2011
n/a
12/2000
4/2011
n/a
n/a
n/a
12/2009
12/2008
4/2009
11/2004
n/a
10/2001
n/a
7/2013
12/2012
10/2010
6/2009
n/a
11/2009
12/1998
4/2013
1/2006
6/2013
7/2007
4/2009
11/1998

Registry
(5)
3/1999
4/2011
n/a
6/2001
5/2012
7/2010
7/2011
12/2000
12/2009
1/2013
n/a
n/a
10/2001
7/2013
10/2010
7/2007
1/2007
1/2006
7/2004
n/a

Notes: Data source is Sabia and Nguyen (2016). We note that the following states
passed MMLs after 2013: Arkansas (2016), Florida (2017), Illinois (2014), Maryland
(2014), Minnesota (2014), New York (2014), North Dakota (2016), Ohio (2016), Pennsylvania (2016), and West Virgina (2017).

34

Table 2: Summary statistics: HRS 1992-2012
Sample:
Health outcomes
Pain
Health limits work
Very good/excellent health
Depressive symptoms
Labor supply outcomes
Work
Work FT
Hours worked/wk (conditional on working)
MML
Any
Individual characteristics
Age
Less than high school
High school
Some college
White
African American
Other race
Hispanic
State characteristics
Marijuana decriminalized
Beer tax ($ per gallon)
Unemployment rate among adults 51+
Hourly wage among adults 51+ ($)
Minimum wage ($)
State EITC as a proportion of the federal EITC
Maximum monthly food stamp benefit, family of 4 ($)
Democrat governor
N

1

2

0.31
0.29
0.41
1.55

0.43
0.39
0.32
1.81

0.39
0.26
36.70

0.31
0.19
34.75

0.13

0.15

66.50
0.29
0.31
0.40
0.80
0.15
0.05
0.09

67.99
0.30
0.32
0.38
0.80
0.16
0.04
0.09

0.32
0.26
0.042
18.10
5.77
0.12
487.96
0.46
183,032

0.32
0.27
0.042
18.08
6.00
0.13
506.20
0.46
101,112

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample
1 = full sample. Sample 2 = qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report 1 or more condition that would qualify for legal medical
marijuana use.

35

Table 3: Effect of MML passage on older adult health outcomes: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Proportion/mean
Any MML
N

Pain
1
0.31
-0.002
(0.01)
182,376

Health lim. work
1
2
0.29
0.39
-0.004
-0.008
(0.01)
(0.01)
157,704 91,688

2
0.43
-0.022**
(0.01)
100,767

V. good/ex. health
1
2
0.41
0.32
0.014** 0.025**
(0.01)
(0.01)
182,406 100,793

Dep. symptoms
1
2
1.55
1.81
-0.006
-0.023
(0.02)
(0.04)
182,412 100,803

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 = full sample. Sample
2 = qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report 1 or more condition that would
qualify for legal medical marijuana use. All models estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS
(continuous outcome), and control for individual characteristics, state characteristics, state fixed
effects, interview wave fixed effects, and state-specific linear time trends. Standard errors clustered
around the state and reported in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent,
*** significant at 1 percent.

Table 4: Effect of MML passage on older adult labor supply outcomes: HRS
1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Proportion/mean
Any MML
N

Work
1
0.39
-0.003
(0.01)
182,078

2
0.31
-0.001
(0.01)
100,673

Work FT
1
2
0.26
0.19
0.008* 0.011**
(0.00)
(0.00)
182,078 100,673

Hours worked/wk
1
2
36.7
34.8
0.033* 0.060***
(0.02)
(0.02)
69,705
30,790

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 =
full sample. Sample 2 = qualifying sample; which includes respondents who
report 1 or more condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use.
Hours worked per week are conditional on any work and are log transformed.
All models estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS (continuous outcome), and control for individual characteristics, state characteristics, state
fixed effects, interview wave fixed effects, and state-specific linear time trends.
Standard errors clustered around the state and reported in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1 percent.

36

Table 5: Effect of MML passage on older adult health outcomes using person fixed effects: HRS
1992-2012
Outcome:
Proportion/mean
Any MML
N

Pain
0.31
0.43
-0.006
-0.02*
(0.01)
(0.01)
182,471 108,808

Health lim. work
0.29
0.39
-0.014
-0.012
(0.01)
(0.01)
157,798 99,204

V. good/ex. health
0.41
0.32
0.016*** 0.022*
(0.01)
(0.01)
182,504 108,834

Dep. symptoms
1.55
1.81
-0.016
0.005
(0.02)
(0.03)
182,510 108,845

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 = full sample. Sample 2 =
qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report 1 or more condition that would qualify
for legal medical marijuana use. All models estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS
(continuous outcome), and control for person fixed effects, interview wave fixed effects, and statespecific linear time trends. Standard errors clustered around the state and reported in parentheses.
* significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1 percent.

Table 6: Effect of MML passage on older adult health outcomes using person
fixed effects: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N

Work
1
0.39
-0.003
(0.01)
182,174

2
0.31
-0.001
(0.01)
108,706

Work FT
1
2
0.26
0.19
0.004
0.005
(0.01)
(0.01)
182,174 108,706

Hours worked/wk
1
2
36.7
34.8
0.024
0.057**
(0.02)
(0.02)
69,747
34,186

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 = full
sample. Sample 2 = qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report
1 or more condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use. Hours
worked per week are conditional on any work and are log transformed. All
models estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS (continuous outcome),
and control for person fixed effects, interview wave fixed effects, and statespecific linear time trends. Standard errors clustered around the state and
reported in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent,
*** significant at 1 percent.

37

References
Abouk, R., & Adams, S. (2018). Examining the Relationship between Medical Marijuana
Laws and Cardiovascular Deaths in the US. International Journal of Drug Policy,
53 (1–7).
Anderson, D. M., Hansen, B., & Rees, D. I. (2013). Medical marijuana laws, traffic fatalities,
and alcohol consumption. Journal of Law and Economics, 56 (2), 333–369.
Anderson, D. M., & Rees, D. I. (2014). The legalization of recreational marijuana: How
likely is the worst-case scenario? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33 (1),
221–232.
Anderson, D. M., Rees, D. I., & Sabia, J. J. (2014). Medical marijuana laws and suicides
by gender and age. American Journal of Public Health, 104 (12), 2369–2376.
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2009). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s
companion. Princeton University Press.
Apouey, B., & Clark, A. E. (2015). Winning big but feeling no better? The effect of lottery
prizes on physical and mental health. Health Economics, 24 (5), 516-538.
Autor, D. H. (2003). Outsourcing at will: The contribution of unjust dismissal doctrine to
the growth of employment outsourcing. Journal of Labor Economics, 21 (1), 1–42.
Azofeifa, A. (2016). National estimates of marijuana use and related indicatorsnational
survey on drug use and health, united states, 2002–2014. MMWR. Surveillance Summaries, 65 .
Bachhuber, M. A., Saloner, B., Cunningham, C. O., & Barry, C. L. (2014). Medical cannabis
laws and opioid analgesic overdose mortality in the united states, 1999-2010. JAMA
Internal Medicine, 174 (10), 1668–1673.
Banerjee, S., & Blau, D. (2016). Employment trends by age in the united states why are
older workers different? Journal of Human Resources, 51 (1), 163–199.

38

Barbour, K. E. (2017). Vital signs: prevalence of doctor-diagnosed arthritis and arthritisattributable activity limitationunited states, 2013–2015. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 66 .
Benjamins, M. R., Hummer, R. A., Eberstein, I. W., & Nam, C. B. (2004). Self-reported
health and adult mortality risk: An analysis of cause-specific mortality. Social Science
& Medicine, 59 (6), 1297-1306.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). How much should we trust differencesin-differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (1).
Bradford, A. C., & Bradford, W. D. (2016). Medical marijuana laws reduce prescription
medication use in medicare part d. Health Affairs, 35 (7), 1230-1236.
Bradford, A. C., & Bradford, W. D. (2017). Medical marijuana laws may be associated with
a decline in the number of prescriptions for medicaid enrollees. Health Affairs.
Case, A., & Deaton, A. S. (2005). Broken down by work and sex: How our health declines.
In Analyses in the economics of aging (pp. 185–212). University of Chicago Press.
Chau, D. L., Walker, V., Pai, L., & Cho, L. M. (2008). Opiates and elderly: Use and side
effects. Clinical Interventions in Aging, 3 (2), 273.
Choi, A. (2014). The impact of medical marijuana laws on marijuana use and other risky
health behaviors. American Society of Health Economists.
Chu, Y.-W. L. (2014). The effects of medical marijuana laws on illegal marijuana use.
Journal of Health Economics, 38 , 43–61.
Chu, Y.-W. L. (2015). Do medical marijuana laws increase hard-drug use? The Journal of
Law and Economics, 58 (2), 481–517.
Currie, J., & Madrian, B. C. (1999). Health, health insurance and the labor market.
Handbook of Labor Economics, 3 , 3309–3416.
Datta Gupta, N., & Larsen, M. (2010). The impact of health on individual retirement plans:
Self-reported versus diagnostic measures. Health Economics, 19 (7), 792–813.
39

Dwyer, D. S., & Mitchell, O. S. (1999). Health problems as determinants of retirement: Are
self-rated measures endogenous? Journal of Health Economics, 18 (2), 173–193.
Fairman, B. J. (2016). Trends in registered medical marijuana participation across 13
usstates and district of columbia. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 159 , 7279.
Garthwaite, C. L. (2012, July). The economic benefits of pharmaceutical innovations: The
case of cox-2 inhibitors. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4 (3), 116137.
Goldenberg, M., Reid, M. W., IsHak, W. W., & Danovitch, I. (2017). The impact of cannabis
and cannabinoids for medical conditions on health-related quality of life: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Drug & Alcohol Dependence, 174 , 80–90.
Hill, K. P. (2015). Medical marijuana for treatment of chronic pain and other medical and
psychiatric problems: a clinical review. Journal of the American Medical Association,
313 (24), 2474–2483.
Horn, B. P., Maclean, J. C., & Strain, M. R. (2017). Do minimum wage increases influence
worker health? Economic Inquiry, In Press.
Ilgen, M. A., Bohnert, K., Kleinberg, F., Jannausch, M., Bohnert, A. S., Walton, M., . . .
Blow, F. C. (2013). Characteristics of adults seeking medical marijuana certification.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 132 , 654659.
Kaila-Kangas, L., Haukka, E., Miranda, H., Kivekäs, T., Ahola, K., Luukkonen, R., . . .
Leino-Arjas, P. (2014). Common mental and musculoskeletal disorders as predictors
of disability retirement among finns. Journal of Affective Disorders, 165 , 38–44.
Kapteyn, A., Smith, J. P., & Van Soest, A. (2008). Dynamics of work disability and pain.
Journal of Health Economics, 27 (2), 496–509.
Kaskie, B., Ayyagari, P., Milavetz, G., Shane, D., & Arora, K. (2017). The increasing use
of cannabis among older americans: A public health crisis or viable policy alternative?
The Gerontologist, gnw166.
40

Kline, P. (2011). The impact of juvenile curfew laws on arrests of youth and adults. American
Law and Economics Review , 14 (1), 44–67.
Longo, L. P., & Johnson, B. (2000). Addiction: Part i. benzodiazepines-side effects, abuse
risk and alternatives. American Family Physician, 61 (7), 2121–2128.
Lovenheim, M. F. (2009). The effect of teachers unions on education production: Evidence from union election certifications in three midwestern states. Journal of Labor
Economics, 27 (4), 525–587.
McCormick, M., et al. (2017). The health effects of cannabis and cannabinoids (Tech. Rep.).
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
McGarry, K. (2004). Health and retirement do changes in health affect retirement expectations? Journal of Human Resources, 39 (3), 624–648.
McInerney, M., Mellor, J. M., & Nicholas, L. H. (2013). Recession depression: Mental health
effects of the 2008 stock market crash. Journal of Health Economics, 32 (6), 1090-1104.
Moffitt, R. (1992). Incentive effects of the us welfare system: A review. Journal of Economic
Literature, 30 (1), 1–61.
Morgan, K. (2003). Daytime activity and risk factors for late-life insomnia. Journal of Sleep
Research, 12 (3), 231–238.
Nahin, R. L. (2015). Estimates of pain prevalence and severity in adults: United states,
2012. The Journal of Pain, 16 (8), 769–780.
National Center for Health Statistics. (2017). Health, united states, 2016: with chartbook on
long-term trends in health (Tech. Rep.). National Center for Health Statistics.
National Institutes of Health. (2011). Chronic pain: Symptoms, diagnosis, & treatment.
NIH Medline Plus: The Magazine, 6 (1), 5-6.
Nielsen, T. H. (2016). The relationship between self-rated health and hospital records. Health
Economics, 25 (4), 497–512.
Nunberg, H., Kilmer, B., Pacula, R. L., & Burgdorf, J. R. (2011). An analysis of applicants
41

presenting to a medical marijuana specialty practice in california. Journal of Drug
Policy Analysis, 4 (1). (Article 1)
Ortman, J. M., Velkoff, V. A., Hogan, H., et al. (2014). An aging nation: The older
population in the united states (Tech. Rep.). United States Census Bureau.
Ozluk, P. (2017). The effects of medical marijuana laws on utilization of prescribed opioids
and other prescription drugs.
Pacula, R. L., Chriqui, J. F., & King, J. (2003). Marijuana decriminalization: What does it
mean in the united states? [NBER Working Paper Series].
Pacula, R. L., Powell, D., Heaton, P., & Sevigny, E. L. (2015). Assessing the effects of
medical marijuana laws on marijuana use: The devil is in the details. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 34 (1), 7–31.
Porter, M. E. (2010). What is value in health care? New England Journal of Medicine,
363 (26), 2477–2481.
Powell, D., Pacula, R. L., & Jacobson, M. (2015). Do medical marijuana laws reduce
addictions and deaths related to pain killers? (National Buruea of Economic Research
Working Paper Series 21345)
Radloff, L. S. (1977). The ces-d scale. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1 (3), 385-401.
Reiman, A., Welty, M., & Solomon, P. (2017). Cannabis as a substitute for opioid-based pain
medication: Patient self-report. Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research, 2 (1), 160–166.
Sabia, J. J., & Nguyen, T. T. (2016). The effect of medical marijuana laws on labor market
outcomes (IZA Discussion Paper No. 9831). IZA.
Sabia, J. J., Swigert, J., & Young, T. (2017). The effect of medical marijuana laws on body
weight. Health Economics, 26 , 6-34.
Sansone, R. A., & Sansone, L. A. (2008). Pain, pain, go away: Antidepressants and pain
management. Psychiatry, 5 (12), 1619.
Simon, K., Soni, A., & Cawley, J. (2016). The impact of health insurance on preventive care
42

and health behaviors: Evidence from the 2014 aca medicaid expansions (Tech. Rep. No.
22265). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Stewart, W. F., Ricci, J. A., Chee, E., Morganstein, D., & Lipton, R. (2003). Lost productive
time and cost due to common pain conditions in the us workforce. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 290 (18), 2443–2454.
Stith, S. S., & Vigil, J. M. (2016). Federal barriers to cannabis research. Science, 352 (6290),
1182.
Stoner, S. (2016). Marijuana use by older adults (Tech. Rep.). Alcohol & Drug Abuse
Institute, University of Washington.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2014). Results from the 2013
national survey on drug use and health: Summary of national findings (NSDUH Series
No. H-48). Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Swegle, J. M., & Logemann, C. (2006). Management of common opioid-induced adverse
effects. American Family Physician, 74 (8), 1347-1354.
Tian, H., Robinson, R. L., & Sturm, R. (2005). Labor market, financial, insurance and
disability outcomes among near elderly americans with depression and pain. Journal
of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 8 (4), 219.
Turvey, C. L., Wallace, R. B., & Herzog, R. (1999). A revised ces-d measure of depressive symptoms and a dsm-based measure of major depressive episodes in the elderly.
International Psychogeriatrics, 11 (2), 139–148.
Ullman, D. (2016). The effect of medical marijuana on sickness absence. Health Economics,
In Press.
Unruh, M. L., Redline, S., An, M.-W., Buysse, D. J., Nieto, F. J., Yeh, J.-L., & Newman,
A. B. (2008). Subjective and objective sleep quality and aging in the sleep heart health
study. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 56 (7), 1218–1227.
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2011). Chronic pain: Symptoms, diagnosis, & treatment
43

(6 No. 1). 5-6: National Library of Medicine.
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2017). Medline plus: Cannabidiol (Tech. Rep.). U.S.
National Library of Medicine.
Van Ours, J. C., & Williams, J. (2011). Cannabis use and mental health problems. Journal
of Applied Econometrics, 26 (7), 1137–1156.
Van Ours, J. C., & Williams, J. (2012). The effects of cannabis use on physical and mental
health. Journal of Health Economics, 31 (4), 564–577.
Vigil, J. M., Stith, S. S., Adams, I. M., & Reeve, A. P. (2017). Associations between medical
cannabis and prescription opioid use in chronic pain patients: A preliminary cohort
study (Vol. 12; Tech. Rep. No. 11).
Volkow, N. D., Swanson, J. M., Evins, A. E., DeLisi, L. E., Meier, M. H., Gonzalez, R.,
. . . Baler, R. (2016). Effects of cannabis use on human behavior, including cognition,
motivation, and psychosis: A review. JAMA Psychiatry, 73 (3), 292–297.
Wen, H., Hockenberry, J. M., & Cummings, J. R. (2015). The effect of medical marijuana
laws on adolescent and adult use of marijuana, alcohol, and other substances. Journal
of Health Economics, 42 , 64–80.
Whiting, P. F., Wolff, R. F., Deshpande, S., Di Nisio, M., Duffy, S., Hernandez, A. V., . . .
others (2015). Cannabinoids for medical use: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 313 (24), 2456–2473.
Williams, A. R., Olfson, M., Kim, J. H., Martins, S. S., & Kleber, H. D. (2016). Older, less
regulated medical marijuana programs have much greater enrollment rates than newer
medicalized programs. Health Affairs, 35 (3), 480-488.
Wolfers, J. (2006). Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates? a reconciliation and new
results. American Economic Review , 96 (5), 1802-1820.
Yi, E. (2015). Medical marijuana use among older adults: A systematic review. Gerontologist, 55 , 672–672.
44

Appendix Materials
Table A1: Parallel trends testing for older adult health outcomes: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Prop./mean:
MML*time
trend
Time
trend
N

Pain
1
2
0.31
0.43
0.0001
0.0002*
(0.0000) (0.0001)
-0.0027** -0.0005
(0.0007) (0.0010)
117,134
59,195

Health lim. work
1
2
0.29
0.39
0.0001
0.0001
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
-0.0047** -0.0042**
(0.0009)
(0.0010)
98,465
54,483

V. good/ex. health
1
2
0.41
0.32
0
0
(0.0000) (0.0001)
-0.0001 -0.0016*
(0.0006) (0.0009)
117,127
59,195

Dep. symptoms
1
2
1.55
1.81
0.0004* 0.0010**
(0.0002) (0.0003)
0.0067* 0.0220**
(0.0028) (0.0025)
117,127
59,197

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 = full sample. Sample 2 =
qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report 1 or more condition that would qualify for
legal medical marijuana use. Only pre-MML data are included in the sample and states that do not pass
an MML by 2010 are randomly assigned a false MML implementation date. The time trend variable
takes a value of -1 one year prior to law implementation, -2 two years prior to law implementation,
and so forth. All models estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS (continuous outcome), and
control for individual characteristics, state characteristics, state fixed effects, and interview wave fixed
effects. Standard errors clustered around the state and reported in parentheses. Only pre-MML data
is included in the analysis. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1
percent.

45

Table A2: Parallel trends testing for older adult labor supply outcomes: HRS
1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Proportion/mean:
MML*time
trend
Time
trend
N

Work
1
0.39
-0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0069**
(0.0006)
116,969

2
0.31
0
(0.0001)
0.0035**
(0.0011)
59,133

Work FT
1
0.26
0
(0.0001)
0.0083**
(0.0006)
116,969

2
0.19
0
(0.0001)
0.0060**
(0.0009)
59,133

Hours worked/wk
1
2
36.7
34.8
0
-0.0003*
(0.0001) (0.0001)
0.0060** 0.0126**
(0.0009) (0.0020)
59,133
18,907

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 = full sample.
Sample 2 = qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report 1 or more
condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use. Only pre-MML data
are included in the sample and states that do not pass an MML by 2010 are randomly
assigned a false MML implementation date. The time trend variable takes a value of 1 one year prior to law implementation, -2 two years prior to law implementation, and
so forth. Hours worked per week are conditional on any work and are log transformed.
All models estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS (continuous outcome),
and control for individual characteristics, state characteristics, state fixed effects, and
interview wave fixed effects. Standard errors clustered around the state and reported
in parentheses. Only pre-MML data is included in the analysis. * significant at 10
percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1 percent.

46

Table A3: Effect of MML passage on the probability of being
in the qualifying sample and across-state migration among
older adults: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Proportion:
Any MML
N

Qualifying sample
1
0.55
-0.006
(0.007)
182,518

Move across
1
0.023
-0.007*
(0.004)
148,764

state lines
2
0.023
-0.007
(0.004)
89,117

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and
older. Sample 1 = full sample. Sample 2 = qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report 1
or more condition that would qualify for legal medical
marijuana use. All models estimated with an LPM and
control for individual characteristics, state characteristics, state fixed effects, interview wave fixed effects, and
state-specific linear time trends. Standard errors clustered around the state and reported in parentheses. *
significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent, ***
significant at 1 percent.

47

Table A4: Effect of MML passage on older adult health outcomes among those not
in the qualifying sample: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N

Pain
0.15
0.003
(0.01)
73,615

Health lim. work
0.13
-0.009
(0.01)
58,545

V. good/ex. health
0.53
-0.001
(0.01)
73,619

Dep. symptoms
1.22
-0.012
(0.03)
73,614

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older who do not report 1
or more condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use. All models
estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS (continuous outcome), and control
for individual characteristics, state characteristics, state fixed effects, interview wave
fixed effects, and state-specific linear time trends. Standard errors clustered around
the state and reported in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5
percent, *** significant at 1 percent.

48

Table A5: Older adult labor supply outcomes among those
not in the qualifying sample: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N

Work
0.49
-0.001
(0.008)
73,418

Work FT
0.36
0.006
(0.01)
73,418

Hours worked/wk
38.5
-0.01
(0.02)
35,533

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and
older who do not report 1 or more condition that would
qualify for legal medical marijuana use. Hours worked per
week are conditional on any work and are log transformed.
All models estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS
(continuous outcome), and control for individual characteristics, state characteristics, state fixed effects, and interview wave fixed effects. Standard errors clustered around
the state and reported in parentheses. * significant at 10
percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1 percent.

49

Table A6: Effect of specific MML law provision passage on older adult health outcomes: HRS
1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Proportion/mean:
Cultivation
Operating
dispensary
Pain as qualifying
condition
Patient
registration
N

Pain
1
0.31
-0.003
(0.01)
-0.011***
(0.00)
0
(0.01)
-0.001
(0.01)
182,376

2
0.43
-0.027***
(0.01)
-0.035***
(0.00)
-0.019*
(0.01)
-0.002
(0.01)
108,761

Health lim. work
1
2
0.29
0.39
-0.008
-0.016
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.012
0.009
(0.01)
(0.02)
-0.003
-0.01
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.008
0.007
(0.02)
(0.02)
157,704 99,159

V. good/ex. health
1
2
0.41
0.32
0.015** 0.026**
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.014
0.026**
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.013*
0.025**
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.007
0.017
(0.01)
(0.02)
182,406 108,787

Dep. symptoms
1
2
1.55
1.81
-0.001
-0.021
(0.02)
(0.03)
0.025
0.03
(0.04)
(0.04)
0.003
-0.019
(0.02)
(0.04)
-0.011
-0.065
(0.05)
(0.08)
182,412 108,798

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 = full sample. Sample 2 =
qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report 1 or more condition that would qualify for
legal medical marijuana use. All models estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS (continuous
outcome), and control for individual characteristics, state characteristics, state fixed effects, interview
wave fixed effects, and state-specific linear time trends. Standard errors clustered around the state and
reported in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1
percent.

50

Table A7: Effect of specific MML law provision passage on older adult labor
supply outcomes: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Proportion/mean:
Cultivation
Operating
dispensary
Pain as qualifying
condition
Patient
registration
N

Work
1
0.39
0.004
(0.00)
-0.002
(0.01)
-0.003
(0.01)
-0.027**
(0.01)
182,078

2
0.31
0.010***
(0.00)
0
(0.01)
-0.001
(0.01)
-0.031**
(0.01)
108,660

Work FT
1
2
0.26
0.19
0.010**
0.01
(0.00)
(0.01)
0.004
0.001
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.007
0.009
(0.00)
(0.01)
-0.01
0.002
(0.01)
(0.01)
182,078 108,660

Hours worked/wk
1
2
36.7
34.8
0.041** 0.072***
(0.02)
(0.02)
0.031
0.042
(0.02)
(0.03)
0.033* 0.070***
(0.02)
(0.02)
0.011
0.062*
(0.02)
(0.04)
69,705
34,172

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 = full
sample. Sample 2 = qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report
1 or more condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use. Hours
worked per week are conditional on any work and are log transformed. All models estimated with an LPM (binary outcome) or LS (continuous outcome), and
control for individual fixed effects, interview wave fixed effects, and state-specific
linear time trends. Standard errors clustered around the state and reported in
parentheses. * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant
at 1 percent.

51

Table A8: Effect of MML passage on older adult health outcomes, various robustness checks:
HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Exclude > 75 yrs
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N
Drop CA
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N
Drop state trends
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N
Drop time-varying X’s
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N

Pain

Health limits work

V good/ex. health

Dep. symptoms

0.31
0.003
(0.01)
143,003

0.45
-0.007
(0.01)
82,577

0.26
-0.009
(0.01)
131,686

0.37
-0.019
(0.01)
78,379

0.44
0.014
(0.01)
143,034

0.33
0.031**
(0.01)
82,598

1.51
-0.02
(0.03)
143,030

1.81
-0.04
(0.04)
82,607

0.31
-0.001
(0.01)
165,197

0.43
-0.009
(0.01)
99,229

0.29
-0.012
(0.01)
142,904

0.39
-0.015
(0.01)
90,599

0.41
0.01
(0.01)
165,219

0.32
0.015
(0.02)
99,249

1.54
-0.032
(0.03)
165,229

1.80
-0.065
(0.05)
99,261

0.31
-0.002
(0.01)
182,376

0.43
-0.007
(0.01)
108,761

0.29
-0.012
(0.01)
157,704

0.39
-0.013
(0.01)
99,159

0.41
0.002
(0.01)
182,406

0.32
0.013
(0.01)
108,787

1.55
0.018
(0.02)
182,412

1.81
0.025
(0.03)
108,798

0.31
-0.001
(0.01)
182,376

0.43
-0.005
(0.01)
108,761

0.29
-0.014**
(0.01)
157,704

0.39
-0.014
(0.01)
99,159

0.41
0.003
(0.01)
182,406

0.32
0.01
(0.01)
108,787

1.55
0.02
(0.02)
182,412

1.81
0.033
(0.03)
108,798

Notes: Sample 1 = full sample. Sample 2 = qualifying sample. All models estimated with an LPM (binary
outcome) or LS (continuous outcome), and control for individual characteristics, state characteristics, state
fixed effects, interview wave fixed effects, and state-specific linear time trends; unless noted otherwise.
Standard errors clustered around the state and reported in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent, **
significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1 percent.

52

Table A9: Effect of MML passage on older adult labor supply outcomes, various
robustness checks: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Drop > 75 yrs
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N
Drop CA
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N
Drop state trends
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N
Drop time-varying X’s
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N

Work

Work FT

Hours worked/wk
1
2

1

2

1

2

0.48
0.004
(0.01)
142,724

0.39
0.003
(0.01)
82,472

0.33
0.016***
(0.01)
142,724

0.25
0.018***
(0.01)
82,472

3.5
0.027
(0.02)
67,105

3.4
0.067***
(0.02)
32,503

0.39
0
(0.01)
164,961

0.31
-0.004
(0.01)
99,140

0.26
0.007
(0.01)
164,961

0.19
0.007
(0.01)
99,140

3.5
0.036
(0.03)
63,035

3.4
0.074**
(0.03)
31,299

0.39
0.012
(0.01)
182,456

0.31
0.012
(0.01)
108,862

0.26
0.022***
(0.01)
182,456

0.19
0.023***
(0.01)
108,862

36.7
0.005
(0.01)
69,871

34.8
0.03
(0.02)
34,229

0.39
0.011
(0.01)
182,456

0.31
0.01
(0.01)
108,862

0.26
0.021***
(0.01)
182,456

0.19
0.022***
(0.01)
108,862

36.7
0.008
(0.01)
69,871

34.8
0.035*
(0.02)
34,229

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 = full sample.
Sample 2 = qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report 1 or more condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use. Hours worked per week
are conditional on any work and are log transformed. All models estimated with
an LPM (binary outcome) or LS (continuous outcome), and control for individual
characteristics, state characteristics, state fixed effects, interview wave fixed effects,
and state-specific linear time trends; unless noted otherwise. Standard errors clustered around the state and reported in parentheses. * significant at 10 percent, **
significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1 percent.

53

Table A10: Effect of MML passage on older adult health outcomes by sex: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Men
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N
Women
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N

Pain

Health lim. work
1
2

V. good/ex. health
1
2

Dep. symptoms
1
2

1

2

0.26
-0.009
(0.01)
75,369

0.40
-0.045**
(0.02)
36,933

0.27
-0.008
(0.01)
66,791

0.34
-0.007
(0.01)
34,103

0.42
0.007
(0.02)
75,388

0.33
0.032
(0.02)
36,947

1.32
-0.083***
(0.03)
75,374

1.55
-0.071
(0.05)
36,938

0.34
0.003
(0.01)
107,007

0.46
-0.008
(0.01)
63,834

0.30
-0.001
(0.01)
90,913

0.40
-0.01
(0.02)
57,585

0.41
0.018**
(0.01)
107,018

0.32
0.021**
(0.01)
63,846

1.70
0.052
(0.03)
107,038

1.96
0.001
(0.06)
63,865

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1 = full sample. Sample 2 =
qualifying sample; which includes respondents who report 1 or more condition that would qualify for
legal medical marijuana use. All models estimated with a linear probability model and control for
individual and state characteristics, state fixed effects, interview wave fixed effects, and state-specific
linear time trends. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1 percent.

54

Table A11: Effect of state medical marijuana laws on older adult labor supply outcomes by
sex: HRS 1992-2012
Outcome:
Sample:
Men
Proportion/mean:
Any MML

Women
Proportion/mean:
Any MML
N

Work

Work FT
1
2

Hours wk/week
1
2

1

2

0.45
-0.009
(0.01)
75,278

0.36
-0.013
(0.02)
36,901

0.32
-0.002
(0.01)
75,278

0.23
0.004
(0.01)
36,901

39.41
0.024
(0.03)
33,323

0.35
0
(0.01)
106,896

0.29
0.006
(0.01)
63,812

0.21
0.008*
(0.00)
106,896

0.17
0.005
(0.01)
63,812

34.22
33.18
0.021 0.066**
(0.02) (0.03)
36,424 17,938

36.94
0.038
(0.05)
12,864

Notes: Sample includes HRS respondents 51 years and older. Sample 1
= full sample. Sample 2 = qualifying sample; which includes respondents
who report 1 or more condition that would qualify for legal medical marijuana use. Hours worked per week are conditional on any work and are
log transformed. All models estimated with a linear probability model
and control for individual and state characteristics, state fixed effects, interview wave fixed effects, and state-specific linear time trends. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1
percent.

55

