                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CHILD POVERTY, THE GREAT RECESSION, AND THE SOCIAL SAFETY NET
                          IN THE UNITED STATES

                                         Marianne Bitler
                                         Hilary Hoynes
                                          Elira Kuka

                                       Working Paper 22682
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22682


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




We thank Patty Anderson, Chloe East, Kosali Simon, and George Saioc for generously sharing
their expertise and data on state safety net policies and state policies regarding foreclosures, and
Chris Wimer for sharing historical supplemental poverty thresholds from Fox et al. (2015a).
Dorian Carloni and Krista Ruffini provided excellent research assistance. This research was
partially funded by a grant from UNICEF. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22682.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marianne Bitler, Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Child Poverty, the Great Recession, and the Social Safety Net in the United States
Marianne Bitler, Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka
NBER Working Paper No. 22682
September 2016
JEL No. I3,J22

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper, we comprehensively examine the effects of the Great Recession on child poverty,
with particular attention to the role of the social safety net in mitigating the adverse effects of
shocks to earnings and income. Using a state panel data model and data for 2000 to 2014, we
estimate the relationship between the business cycle and child poverty, and we examine how and
to what extent the safety net is providing protection to at-risk children. We find compelling
evidence that the safety net provides protection; that is, the cyclicality of after-tax-and-transfer
child poverty is significantly attenuated relative to the cyclicality of private income poverty. We
also find that the protective effect of the safety net is not similar across demographic groups, and
that children from more disadvantaged backgrounds, such as those living with non-Hispanic
black or Hispanic, single, or particularly immigrant household heads-or immigrant spouses,
experience larger poverty cyclicality than non-Hispanic white, married, or native household heads
with native spouses. Our findings hold across a host of choices for how to define poverty. These
include measures based on absolute thresholds or more relative thresholds. They also hold for
measures of resources that include not only cash and near cash transfers net of taxes but also
several measures of medical benefits.

Marianne Bitler                                            Elira Kuka
Department of Economics                                    SMU, Department of Economics
University of California, Davis                            3300 Dyer Street Suite 301
One Shields Avenie                                         Umphrey Lee Center
Davis, CA 95616                                            Dallas, TX 75275-0496
and NBER                                                   United States
bitler@ucdavis.edu                                         ekuka@smu.edu

Hilary Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

        The Great Recession led to massive job loss and historic increases in unemployment

durations. Employment in the United States fell by more than 8 million between January 2008 and

December 2009 and unemployment rose to a peak of 15.6 million persons in October 2009 (both

seasonally adjusted). In the meanwhile, median real household cash income also fell, from $57,357

in 2007 to $52,690 in 2011, and has turned back upward to $53,657 in 2014 (U.S. Census 2015,

figures are in real 2014 dollars).

        These trends in median cash income are useful but are unlikely to tell the whole story. There

is substantial evidence that the effects of economic cycles are larger for less-skilled workers (Hoynes,

Miller and Schaller, 2012; Gundersen and Ziliak, 2004), thus the effect of the Great Recession on

household incomes may be larger in relative terms for households in the lower end of the income

distribution.1 Additionally, the overall trend in household income captures not only the shock to

employment and earnings, but the response of the social safety net including public assistance (e.g.,

Food Stamps), social insurance (e.g., Unemployment Insurance) programs and the stimulus programs

of 2008 and 2009. To what extent did these policies and programs mitigate the earnings and income

losses of the Great Recession?

        In this paper, we empirically investigate these issues. First, we estimate the cyclicality of

being below various multiples of the ratio of household income relative to poverty and how these

vary as we move up the income to needs distribution. Second, we examine how the broader social

safety net mitigates the income loss in economic downturns, capturing effects on a broad post tax and

transfer measure of household resources. We do this in an aggregate fashion, capturing the overall

net effect of the safety net as well as the labor market shock on cyclicality for these measures. Third,

we explore how these findings differ for married compared to single heads, by race and ethnicity, and


1
 Of course the link between the business cycle and income/income to needs need not be monotonic in income.
Parker and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009, 2010) show that the upper end of the income distribution is quite responsive to
business cycles.

                                                         1
for immigrant versus native households. Throughout our analysis, we focus on children and examine

household income relative to poverty. Children are a particularly important group because they

consistently have the highest poverty rates in the U.S.2 A further reason to focus on children is that

poverty has deleterious effects on children (e.g., Brooks-Gunn and Duncan, 1997) and they are the

beneficiaries of much of the safety net.

        In this analysis, we use data on child poverty by state and year for the period 2000 to 2014

and study the effect of the business cycle on children’s economic wellbeing. By using data for 2000

to the present, we focus on the social safety net as currently structured, in the post-welfare reform

world. We estimate state panel data models and measure the economic cycle with the state

unemployment rate. We identify the key parameter – how changes in the business cycle affect child

poverty – using variation in the timing and severity of cycles across states, controlling for state and

year fixed effects. In our models, we do not seek to analyze the causal effects of specific elements of

the social safety net nor household behavioral responses to specific programs, although our reduced

form analysis does also incorporate the net behavioral responses to the current safety net programs

and any changes to these programs in our time period. Instead we are interested in evaluating the

overall effects of the social safety net writ broadly and how it varies as we move up the income

distribution.

        Given our interest in understanding the role that the social safety net plays in mitigating the

adverse effects of shocks to earnings and income, in our main results we use two measures of

resources to construct child poverty. The first, private income poverty, uses a resource measure for

households that includes earned income, private transfers, and asset income. The second, after-tax-

and-transfer poverty, uses a resource measure equal to private income plus cash and near-cash in-

kind government transfers (including social insurance) less net taxes. As we discuss below, our

measure of after-tax-and-transfer poverty shares many (though not all) features of the Supplemental

2
  Our own previous work (Bitler and Hoynes, 2015) has shown that the net of tax and transfer system resources of
the elderly, by contrast to children and prime age adults, are not very responsive to cyclical conditions.

                                                        2
Poverty Measure (SPM), the new poverty statistic released by the Census beginning in 2011. (Note

we discuss alternative ways to measure poverty and the implications of their use below.)

         For these two resource measures, we construct, for each state and year, the share of children

with income below 50 percent, 100 percent, 150 percent and 200 percent of the household’s poverty

threshold. For the poverty threshold, we use the Historical SPM thresholds developed by Fox et al.

(2015a), who employ available historical data to construct poverty thresholds back to 1967 consistent

with the Census Bureau’s current SPM threshold. In sum, our measure of after-tax-and-transfer

poverty differs from the Census official poverty by 1) using a post-tax-and-transfer measure of

income including near-cash in-kind transfers, 2) using the Historical SPM thresholds from Fox et al.

(2015a) and 3) treating the household as the relevant unit for measuring poverty. These choices

address many of the critiques of the official poverty measure made by Citro and Michael (1995) and

Blank (2008).3

         Using these data on income relative to poverty, we establish our main results comparing the

cyclicality of private income poverty and the gradient as we move up the income to poverty

distribution. Second, by comparing the cyclicality of private income poverty to that of our after-tax-

and-transfer poverty, we reveal the aggregate protection that is provided by the safety net. In

particular, our results speak to the mitigating role of public assistance programs and tax credits

(including Food Stamps or SNAP, Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), Supplemental

Security Income (SSI), School Lunch, the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program

(LIHEAP), public housing, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), and the Child Tax Credits) and

social insurance programs (Unemployment Insurance (UI), Social Security Old Age and Disability

Income).

         Ex ante, we would expect the safety net to partially offset the losses to private income in

3
  As we discuss more below, by using the Historical SPM thresholds, we have a quasi-relative poverty measure
rather than an absolute one, comparing resources to a threshold set by families at the top of the bottom third of the
income distribution. Thus, as consumption at that point in the distribution changes across time, so too would our
sense of whether a household was in poverty even if income remained fixed.

                                                           3
downturns. Aggregate program statistics show that the social safety net provided significant support

to households affected by the Great Recession. In 2011, Food Stamp expenditures amounted to $72.8

billion and more than one in seven people in the U.S. received benefits from the SNAP program. The

maximum duration of Unemployment Insurance benefits was extended to up to 99 weeks during the

Great Recession, far beyond the normal maximum of 26 weeks or even the Extended Benefit

maximum of 52 weeks in most states. Further, at the center of the 2009 stimulus, there were

temporary increases in the maximum benefits paid out for Food Stamps, the EITC, and UI as well as

in temporary tax relief (the Making Work Pay tax credit). The total cost of these expansions was over

$200 billion.4

        In addition to these important changes during the Great Recession, the social safety net for

lower-income families has undergone a transformation since the last severe recessions, which took

place during the early 1980s. Welfare reform in the mid-1990s led to a massive reduction in the share

of families (Blank, 2002), and more specifically poor families (Floyd, Pavetti, and Schott, 2015),

receiving cash welfare. At the same time, the EITC expanded substantially in generosity (Hotz and

Scholz, 2003). The end result is that the U.S. safety net for low-income families with children has

changed from one based on out-of-work assistance to one based on in-work assistance (Bitler and

Hoynes, 2010, 2016; Moffitt, 2015). This may have important implications for the protective effects

of the safety net for low-income households.

        Our analysis yields several important findings. Using our after-tax-and-transfer poverty

measure, we find that child poverty rises in recessions and falls in expansions, and the level of

cyclicality is higher at lower levels of the income distribution. Importantly, we find striking evidence

that the safety net provides protection; that is, the cyclicality of after-tax-and-transfer poverty is

significantly attenuated relative to the cyclicality of private income poverty, controlling for fixed

4
 The breakdown of the total costs is as follows: Food Stamps ($48 B), EITC ($5.1 B), UI ($61.0 B) and Making
Work Pay ($104.4 B). The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) also included expansions to TANF.
While Food Stamps and the EITC are targeted at low income families, the stimulus benefits of extended UI and
Making Work Pay will also accrue to higher income families.

                                                      4
state characteristics and national shocks. The net result is that after-tax-and-transfer child poverty

rose modestly in the Great Recession, while child private income poverty increased substantially.

These effects are not equal across groups, as we find that a given change in the unemployment rate

leads to a higher probability that children fall into poverty in households headed by single parents,

Hispanics, and most significantly, for children in households with immigrant-heads or spouses.

           Our findings are robust to how we measure child poverty, including whether instead of our

Historical SPM threshold we use the official poverty threshold (which is absolute), an “anchored”

supplemental poverty threshold (Wimer et al., 2013, also absolute), or even the OECD’s relative

poverty measure (income less than 60 percent of the median yearly household income).5 In our main

estimates, we exclude any value of public (and employer-provided) health insurance coverage from

our measure of resources. Our results are robust to adding the Census Bureau’s fungible value of

public health insurance (and a value for employer-provided insurance) or using the SPM approach of

deducting from resources out of pocket medical expenses (as well as work expenses including child

care). The results are also robust to adding state-level time-varying policies, individual demographic

controls, and state linear trends; as well as to not weighting by population, to using alternate lag

structures for the effects of labor market shocks, and to an alternative definition of the sharing unit.

           Our work adds to a large and rich literature on the measurement and determinants of poverty

spanning many decades (e.g., Blank and Blinder, 1986; Blank, 1989; Cutler and Katz, 1991; Blank

and Card, 1993; Blank, 1993; Freeman, 2001; Gundersen and Ziliak, 2004; Hoynes, Page, and

Stevens, 2006; Moffitt, 2012; Moffitt, 2015; Hardy, Smeeding, and Ziliak, 2015; Organisation for

Economic Cooperation and Development, 2015). We contribute to this literature. First, we focus on

child poverty and focus on the recent Great Recession period. Second, we analyze how the cyclicality

varies as we move up the income to poverty distribution and quantify the role of the social safety net

in mitigating losses. Third, we are the first to show the remarkable stability of the cyclicality across


5
    See Burkhauser (2009) for a discussion of the key distinctions between relative and absolute measures.

                                                           5
quasi-relative measures (our main results, using Historical SPM thresholds), absolute measures

(official poverty thresholds and the anchored SPM thresholds) and relative measures (OECD

thresholds), and all using an after-tax-and-transfer measure of resources. Additionally, as suggested

by Blank (2008) and Citro and Michael (1995) as well as many others (Fox et al., 2015a, 2015b), we

come closer to capturing disposable income shared by children and adults by using a broader unit

rather than the narrow Census family unit and by counting post-tax and transfer income.6,7 We also

complement recent work by Larrimore, Burkhauser, and Armour (2015) who focus on the stabilizing

role of the safety net and the cycle in various recessions.8

        Our next section describes our data and how we measure poverty. Section 3 provides a

summary of the Great Recession and presents the basic time series evidence on child poverty.

Section 4 describes the major social safety net programs and how they changed during the Great

Recession. Section 5 examines the cyclicality of poverty, Section 6 examines the robustness of our

main findings, and Section 7 concludes.

2. MEASURING CHILD POVERTY

        Official poverty in the U.S. is measured using an absolute standard, in contrast to the relative

poverty measure used in many other countries and the OECD (Organisation for Economic

Cooperation and Development, 2015, Burkhauser 2009). The U.S. official poverty measure is

determined by comparing total pre-tax family cash income to poverty thresholds, which vary by

family size, the number of children, and the presence of elderly persons. If the family has pre-tax

6
  A number of recent studies have looked at the Supplemental Poverty Measure (Short, 2011, 2013) to evaluate
poverty and deep poverty over time (Fox et al. 2015a, 2015b; Wimer at al. 2013). As with Fox et al. (2015a, 2015b),
we find that deep ATT poverty is less cyclical than are measures of 100 percent, 150 percent or 200 percent of
poverty. Like Fox et al. (2015a), we find that excluding the safety net from resources leads to poverty being more
cyclical.
7
  There are other approaches to poverty measurement that are beyond the scope of our paper. The development
literature as well as Meyer and Sullivan (2011, 2012) argue that consumption or expenditures are superior to income
for measuring well-being. However, Bavier (2008, 2014) documents that a more comprehensive resource measure
goes a long way towards reconciling differences between income and consumption measures of poverty.
8
  Larrimore, Burkhauser, and Armour (2015) look at detailed trends in market income and after-tax and transfer
income across multiple business cycles, with attention to the top and bottom quintiles. They also use an equivalence
scale adjusted income measure, and point out the relative importance of declines in wage earnings in the severe
1980s recessions relative to employment loss in the Great Recession.

                                                         6
cash income below the relevant threshold, then they are deemed to be poor. The family unit used for

official poverty consists of all related individuals in the household;9 and all persons in the family

have the same poverty status. In 2014, for example, the poverty threshold for a family of four (two

adults plus two children) was $24,008 and 21.1 percent of children were poor.

        The official poverty measure has numerous drawbacks (Citro and Michael, 1995, Blank,

2008). Of particular relevance for our work, the measure of family cash income is not a complete

measure of family resources. It excludes non-cash government transfers (in-kind transfers such as

food stamps and housing subsidies) as well as taxes and tax credits (notably the EITC and Child Tax

Credits as well as other income and payroll taxes). Additionally, there is no geographic variation in

the official poverty thresholds, despite wide variation in costs and wages across regions. 10 These

limitations in the official poverty definition have been noted for decades, and in 2011, the Census

released a new poverty measure – the SPM – designed to improve on the official poverty measure

(Short, 2011). The SPM resource measure expands to include the cash value of various in-kind

transfers and nets out taxes (and deducts from income child support payments, medical out of pocket

expenditures, and work expenses including child care). Additionally, the SPM family unit is

modified to include cohabitors and their children. The Census SPM thresholds are defined to be the

average between the 30th and 36th percentiles of the distribution of consumer expenditures on food,

clothing, shelter, and utilities plus an additional 20 percent to account for additional necessary

expenditures. This makes the SPM a “quasi-relative” poverty measure in that the threshold increases

with consumption levels of families at the top of the bottom third of the consumption distribution.

Additionally, the thresholds are adjusted to reflect geographic variation in costs and spending, owner

versus rental status, and family size (Short, 2013).

9
  Note that this Census measure of family is those who are married or related by blood or adoption and thus excludes
cohabitants or others who may share resources.
10
   Furthermore, the thresholds fail to adjust for many categories of expenses (e.g., shelter, clothing, work-related
expenses, medical expenses, and utilities), and thus do not necessarily capture the relevant measures of needs. The
thresholds are also updated annually by the CPI-U, which may not well capture changes in needs across all
locations.

                                                         7
        In our analysis, we develop a poverty measure is highly aligned with—though not identical

to—the Census SPM. We use data from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) to the

Current Population Survey (CPS), administered to most households in March every year. The ASEC

is an annual survey that collects labor market, income, and program participation information for

individuals for the previous calendar year, as well as demographic information from the time of the

survey. Our sample uses the 2001 through 2015 CPS surveys, corresponding to the 2000 to 2014

calendar years. The CPS is used to report official poverty and, since 2011, the SPM each year.

        We use the CPS to construct private income (PI) poverty and after-tax-and-transfer (ATT)

poverty. Appendix Table 1 provides details on the sources of income in our two measures of

resources and compares them to the income sources included in both official poverty and the Census

SPM. Private income includes earned income, asset income, and private transfers (child support,

alimony, private disability and retirement). Our after-tax-and-transfer resource measure, developed in

Bitler and Hoynes (2010, 2016), includes private income plus cash transfers (AFDC/TANF, Social

Security, SSI, UI, veterans payments and workers’ compensation), the cash value (as reported by the

household or imputed by the Census Bureau) of non-cash in-kind programs (food stamps, school

lunch, housing subsidies, and energy subsidies), tax credits (the EITC, child tax credits, and stimulus

payments) and then subtracts payroll, federal, and state income taxes. We use the NBER TAXSIM

model for all tax variables (though the results are virtually identical if we use the Census imputations

of taxes provided in the CPS).

        As is clear from Appendix Table 1, one way our ATT poverty measure differs from the

Census SPM is that we do not incorporate medical out-of-pocket expenditures (MOOP) or work-

related expenses (including child care and other expenses), which are subtracted from resources by

the Census SPM as are child support payments made. While there is significant agreement about the

importance of adding the value of in-kind benefits to expand the resource measure, there are a variety

of approaches that are used to take into account the value of public (and private) health insurance.


                                                   8
The Congressional Budget Office, in its analyses of the concentration of and trends in income, uses

the government’s average cost of providing Medicaid and Medicare as well as employers’

contributions to health insurance to value health insurance (Congressional Budget Office, 2014).

Until the SPM, the Census Bureau has used the fungible value of public health insurance, essentially

counting the average cost of Medicaid and Medicare only if household income is above the amount

needed for basic food and housing needs.11 Finally, the Census SPM deducts out-of-pocket medical

expenses from income (rather than the CBO/Census approach of adding the value of the insurance

coverage provided). In our view, none of these approaches satisfy the ideal of including the

“insurance value” of this benefit as well as what families spend in practice. As such, in our main

estimates we make no adjustment for MOOP or the value of public health insurance (or private

health insurance). It turns out, as we show below, whether and how we handle this has no impact on

the main results in the paper; results that either exclude MOOP (and other fixed costs of work) from

resources or add the fungible value of Medicare and Medicaid and employer provided insurance to

resources are nearly identical to our main findings.

         For each of our poverty measures, we calculate resources and poverty at the household

level.12 This is another difference from the SPM—their sharing unit is composed of related

individuals plus foster children and cohabitors and their children. However, the CPS only began

identifying cohabitors for all of the adults in the household in 2007, and thus this measure is not

available for our full sample period. Our household sharing unit also differs from one used by the

Census to calculate official poverty, which consists of only persons married or related through birth

or adoption. One advantage of our household measure is the inclusion of cohabitants and others who

share resources. Additionally, the CPS only measures use of food stamps at the household level, so a


11
   The fungible value represents the benefit of being covered by Medicare and Medicaid “to the extent that they free
up resources that could have been spent on medical care.” The estimated fungible value depends on family income,
the cost of food and housing needs, and the market value of the medical benefits (Census Bureau, Current
Population Reports, P60-186RD).
12
   We drop the small number of unrelated children, as does the Census Bureau when constructing official poverty.

                                                         9
household sharing unit is appealing for this reason.13 Therefore, private and ATT incomes are

summed across household members and total household income is compared to the appropriate

poverty threshold using the appropriate household structure and size; an indicator for this value being

below the threshold is then attached to all household members. Since here we study child poverty, we

limit the sample to those aged below 18 at the survey month. When we analyze subgroups, we use

the demographic characteristics of the head of household (or in the case of immigration status, the

spouse of the head as well).

         Finally, we use the Historical SPM thresholds developed by Fox et al. (2015a) for our

poverty thresholds. The new Census SPM thresholds are only available beginning in 2009 so it is not

adequate for our 2000 through 2014 analysis. Fox et al. (2015a) implement nearly all of the SPM

methods and construct thresholds back to 1967 with available Consumer Expenditure Data. Due to

data limitations, the Fox et al. (2015a) Historical SPM does not adjust the thresholds for geographic

variation in costs and spending. Below, we explore the sensitivity of our main results to the poverty

threshold, in particular also using the official US poverty threshold, the “anchored” SPM (Wimer et

al., 2013), as well as an OECD relative poverty threshold. Wimer et al. (2013) take the 2012 SPM

threshold and backcast it by adjusting for changes in prices using the CPI-U-RS. For our measure of

ATT poverty using the anchored SPM threshold, we take the same approach, starting with 2014

thresholds by household size and number of children, then collapsing to state (so the geographic

variation matches our CPS data), and finally adjusting for changes in prices back to 2000.14 The

OECD threshold is defined as 60 percent of the median of household-equivalized income. We

implement this using our sample and resource measure and construct thresholds using the OECD’s




13
  Receipt of LIHEAP is also only reported at the household level as is use of school lunch.
14
  Note that our measures will capture geographic variation in 2 ways. First, to the extent that thresholds in the
official SPM on average vary by state, it will be incorporated in our anchored SPM thresholds. Second, to the extent
that across or within state expenditures in the thresholds vary across state or within state by household size/number
of children, we will capture that.

                                                         10
standard equivalence scale applied to the household structure and number of persons.15 This gives us

one quasi-relative measure (ATT poverty with Historical SPM thresholds), two absolute measures

(ATT poverty with official poverty thresholds or anchored SPM thresholds) and one relative measure

(ATT poverty with OECD thresholds). As we show below, our main results are robust to using any

of these four alternative thresholds to define poverty.

3. CYCLES, THE GREAT RECESSION, AND POVERTY

        We begin with a historical view of child poverty and economic cycles, examining the

changes in child poverty that have occurred in the U.S. between 2000 and 2014. Figure 1 presents

(on the right axis) our primary measure of the economic cycle – the unemployment rate – annually

over this period. Using the NBER dating, the Great Recession officially began in December 2007 and

the unemployment rate rose from 5 percent in December 2007 to a peak of 10.0 percent in October

2009 (seasonally adjusted). While the recession officially ended in July 2009, it took another 6 years

for the unemployment rate to return to its pre-Great Recession level reaching 5.0 (seasonally

adjusted) in October 2015 (not shown). Figure 1 also presents (on the left axis) our two measures of

child poverty annually for the same period. The solid line plots annual child private income poverty

and the dashed line plots child ATT poverty, both measured using the Historical SPM threshold.

Notably, private income poverty varies significantly with the business cycle. Using this pre-tax-and-

transfer measure of resources, during the Great Recession child private income poverty rose by 6.0

percentage points, from 19.7 in 2007 to 25.7 in 2010. Similarly, we see an increase in private income

child poverty during the recession of the 2000s. Turning to the poverty measure calculated using the

more comprehensive measure of resources, child ATT poverty rose (only) by 2.1 percentage points

during the Great Recession (this change is from 2007 (11.3) to 2010 (13.4)). This is our first

evidence of the extent to which the social safety net provided protection against shocks to household

earnings and income in the Great Recession.

15
  The OECD equivalized scale equals 1 for the head plus 0.5 for each additional adult [age 14+] plus 0.3 for each
child [age < 14].

                                                        11
         In our main results, shown below, we explore these issues further by estimating the

relationship between the business cycle and child poverty. In that analysis, we take advantage of the

dramatic variation in the timing and magnitude of business cycles across U.S. states, controlling for

fixed differences across states and aggregate secular trends. Here, we begin that analysis by

presenting some descriptive findings on child poverty across states in the Great Recession. Figure 2

presents percent changes in real private income, government transfers, and government taxes (net),

by state, over the Great Recession. In particular, we compare the pre-recession peak (captured by

averages over 2006 to 2008) to the trough (captured by averages over 2009 to 2011), following the

Census practice of pooling multiple years to construct state averages. 16 The figure shows that during

the Great Recession private income dropped for most states, but that transfers and taxes offset this

drop. These changes represent average effects across all children of all income levels in the state.

Figure 3 builds on this and shows the change in the child poverty rate, by state, where the changes

are again over 2006 to 2008 to 2009 to 2011. For comparison, we present both poverty measures,

with the blue bars representing ATT poverty and the open circles (with a bar) representing private

income poverty. During the Great Recession, almost all states experienced increases in private

income child poverty, with North Dakota and its oil and gas boom representing a notable exception.

The role of the safety net in providing protection against these private income losses is also evident

in the figure. The net effect is a dramatic variation in the changes in child poverty across states in the

wake of the Great Recession. Some states, such as many New England states (Connecticut,

Massachusetts) and others (Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Texas), experienced reductions in ATT

poverty. However, other states such as Nevada, DC, and Arizona experienced increases in ATT

poverty on the order of 5 percentage points. The figure is a useful starting point, but the usual caveats

apply given its “single difference” statistic. Importantly, these differences may, to some degree, be


16
  The Census uses two-year averages for all person poverty levels. Because we are analyzing a smaller sample
(children rather than all persons) we have adopted a three-year average. We pool the three years of data (in real 2012
dollars) and take the population-weighted average over that.

                                                         12
capturing short-run or longer-run trends as well as the cycle. We address these limitations by

estimating a state panel model, described below.

4. THE SOCIAL SAFETY NET AND THE POLICY LANDSCAPE

         In this section, we give a brief summary of the cash and non-cash social safety net for

families with children and summarize the important policy changes leading up to and during the

Great Recession. We consider a broad definition of the social safety net including traditional means-

tested cash programs (TANF, SSI), near cash in-kind means tested transfers (SNAP (formerly known

as food stamps), housing subsidies, LIHEAP, child nutrition programs), tax credits (the EITC, the

Child Tax Credits), and, in some specifications, means-tested public health insurance (Medicaid,

Children’s Health Insurance Program).17 Additionally, we consider unemployment insurance given

its prominent place as income replacement after job loss (even though, unlike all of the above, it is

not a program targeted to lower-income groups). We also consider elements of the temporary

stimulus programs (implemented in 2008 and 2009). We choose these tax and transfer programs to

comprise our working definition of the social safety net because of our ability to measure them in our

household data (the CPS) along with their importance for low-income households with children

(Short 2015, Moffitt 2015).18

         These programs are summarized in Table 1, which presents the total cost (in billions) of each

program in 2010, the trough of the recession. In 2010, UI spending topped the list at $150 billion,

although as a social insurance program it serves workers throughout the income distribution. The

combined amount spent on tax credits, the EITC and the refundable portion of the CTC, amounted to

$87.3 billion, followed by SNAP at $64.8 billion. Housing assistance (Section 8 and public housing)

was $27.3 billion. Much smaller is cash welfare, $12.4 billion for TANF and $9.4 billion for SSI

17
   Specifications which account for Medicaid’s value also include the fungible value of Medicare and the value of
employer provided health insurance in resources.
18
   As discussed earlier, Appendix Table 1 provides a complete list of all tax and transfer programs that we include in
our ATT income measure. Transfer programs that we include in ATT income but that we do not describe here
include Social Security retirement and disability benefits, veterans payments and workers’ compensation. Taxes that
we do not discuss here include federal and state income taxes and payroll taxes.

                                                         13
(limiting to costs for covering children), and the other child food and nutrition programs.19 Medicaid

expenditures (limiting to costs for covering children) were $67.2 billion.

        Before proceeding, we lay out what we do and do not seek to causally identify in our

analysis. First, we use variation in the timing and severity of economic cycles across states to

estimate the effects of the unemployment rate on various multiples of the child poverty threshold. By

exploring the probability that children are in households under 50 percent, 100 percent, 150 percent

and 200 percent of poverty, we identify how the cyclicality of income to poverty varies along the

income to poverty distribution. Second, we evaluate the role of the social safety net by comparing the

cyclicality of private income poverty to that of after-tax-and-transfer income poverty. The aim of the

paper is not to estimate the effects of the policies and programs per se but instead the effects of the

cycle and how the programs mitigate the shocks associated with the cycle. Our reduced form analysis

does incorporate behavioral responses to the labor market shock, such as changes in employment and

earnings of a spouse and changes in living arrangements.

A. The Social Safety Net

        Cash Welfare (AFDC/TANF): Since 1935, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)

provided cash welfare for single-parent families with children. The program is means-tested,

requiring families to satisfy income and asset tests. The benefits were structured in a manner typical

for income-support programs: If a family had no income, they received the maximum benefit

(guarantee) and as earnings increased the benefit was reduced by the benefit reduction rate. The

benefit reduction rate was high for AFDC, 67 percent or 100 percent, providing strong disincentives

for work (Moffitt, 1983). Concerns about work disincentives and disincentives to form two-parent

families led to federal welfare reform, with enactment of the Personal Responsibility and Work


19
  Other food and nutrition programs relevant for children include WIC, School Breakfast Program and Child and
Adult Care Food Program. SNAP is by far the largest, accounting for more than 70 percent of USDA spending on
food and nutrition programs (Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2015). SNAP combined with National School Lunch
Program (the second largest food and nutrition program), account for more than 80 percent of total food and
nutrition spending.

                                                      14
Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWRORA) in 1996. TANF, the program that replaced AFDC,

includes work requirements (with financial sanctions for non-compliance), a maximum of five years

of lifetime use of federally funded welfare, and in many states, enhanced earnings disregards.

Importantly, welfare reform removed the entitlement to AFDC and federal funding was replaced with

a (nominally fixed) block grant and states were given more flexibility to spend this funding on things

besides cash assistance. Under both AFDC and TANF, benefits are relatively low; for example, in

1996, on the eve of welfare reform, the median state’s benefit level was about 36 percent of the

poverty guideline (U.S. House of Representatives, 1996). Since welfare reform, caseloads have fallen

to historic lows; for example, the number of families receiving cash welfare (TANF/AFDC) per 100

families with children in poverty fell from 68 in 1996 to 23 in 2014 (Floyd, Pavetti, and Schott,

2015).

         Food Stamps (SNAP): Like AFDC/TANF, Food Stamps is a means-tested program and

benefits are based on maximum benefit level that is reduced with additional earnings using a benefit

reduction rate. The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), as the program was

renamed in 2008, provides a voucher that can be spent on most food items in the grocery store.20 In

contrast to AFDC/TANF, SNAP is a federal program with little involvement and few rules set by the

states until quite recently, with a national income eligibility threshold and benefits being adjusted for

changes in prices each year. SNAP is close to a universal program with eligibility extending to

almost all those with that meet the income and asset rules. The benefit reduction rate for SNAP is

relatively low (30 percent), the gross income eligibility threshold is higher (at 130 percent of

poverty) than other U.S. cash welfare programs, and the program serves the working and non-

working poor. Welfare reform left Food Stamp rules relatively unaffected.21 However, beginning


20
   Despite its voucher form, the behavioral response to food stamps has been found to be similar to the response to
cash (Fraker et al., 1992; Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2009; Ohls et al., 1992).
21
   Welfare reform limited benefits for legal immigrants, who were deemed ineligible (though this was reinstated in
2002) and for able-bodied adults without dependents 18-49 (who were limited to 3 months of benefits in a 3 year
period); the latter restriction was waived at state application when economic times were sufficiently bad.

                                                         15
with regulatory changes in 1999 and continuing with the 2002 Farm Bill, the USDA has allowed

states to make changes in how they implement the program’s rules to facilitate obtaining access to

benefits. This has led to a relaxation of asset requirements and expanded gross income eligibility in

what has been called broad-based categorical eligibility (U.S. Government Accountability Office,

2007). Overall, SNAP spending increased substantially in the Great Recession (Bitler and Hoynes,

2016) and provides an automatic stabilizer for families and the broader economy. In 2014, SNAP

provided benefits to 47 million persons in 22.7 million households.

        Supplemental Security Income (SSI): SSI is a means-tested program providing cash benefits

for low-income aged and disabled individuals. A 1990 Supreme Court decision relaxed the medical

eligibility criteria for children and the SSI-child caseload has steadily grown since that time. Benefits

for child SSI recipients average $561 per month in April 2016 and about 1.3 million children

currently receive the benefits (Social Security Administration, 2016).

        Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC): The EITC is a tax credit available to lower-income

families with positive earned income. It is refundable, so when a family’s income is too low to

generate tax obligations, the EITC liabilities are negative and the family receives a refund check

from the Internal Revenue Service. The EITC schedule has three segments: the phase-in, flat, and

phase-out ranges. At low earnings (in the phase-in range), the EITC functions as an earnings subsidy

with subsidy rates of 34/40/45 percent for families with 1/2/3 or more children. At higher levels of

earnings, beyond a narrow flat region, the credit is phased out at around a 21 percent phase-out rate.

Expansions of the EITC, facilitated through tax acts in 1986, 1990, and 1993, have featured

prominently in the movement toward more “in-work” assistance in the U.S. safety net (and with

welfare reform, a decline in out-of-work assistance). In 2015 for a single mother with two children,

the maximum EITC credit was $5,548 (annual payment) and the phase-out range extended to those

with earned income of up to $44,454. In 2013 about 22 million families with children received the

EITC with an average payment of $3064 (Internal Revenue Service, 2016).


                                                   16
        Child Tax Credit (CTC): The CTC was introduced in 1997. It is structurally similar to the

EITC (with a phase-in, flat and phase-out range), but more universal in design and less targeted

towards lower-income families. Since 2003, the maximum credit is $1,000 per child (it is set

nominally and unlike the EITC does not change with prices each year). The CTC’s wide flat region

(where the credit is maximized at $1,000) and a low phase-out rate (5 percent) combine to generate

high income eligibility limits: In 2015, the CTC is available to families with incomes up to $150,000

(if married with two children) or $115,000 (if single with two children). The CTC is a nonrefundable

credit, which limits the value of the credit for low-income families (who are less likely to have

positive tax liabilities). However, a refundable CTC (called the Additional Child Tax Credit) was

introduced in 2001 and expanded significantly in 2009 as part of the stimulus (and recently became

permanent). Currently, the Additional CTC provides a refundable credit equal to 15 percent of

earnings above $3,000. This has significantly enhanced the benefits of the CTC for lower-income

families (Hoynes and Rothstein, 2016).

        Unemployment Insurance (UI): Unemployment insurance provides temporary and partial

earnings replacement for involuntarily unemployed individuals with recent employment. As a social

insurance program, UI is not means tested (limited to those with low incomes) and eligibility is a

function of earnings history. UI benefits consist of three separate programs. Recipients receive

benefits for a fixed duration, typically up to 26 weeks, through regular state benefits, funded by

employer contributions. Under the Extended Benefits program, jointly funded by states and the

Federal government, UI benefits can be extended for 13 or 20 additional weeks in states experiencing

high unemployment rates. Lastly, in most major downturns, Congress has enacted emergency

extensions to unemployment; these programs tend to be relatively short lived and are explicitly

counter-cyclical and fully federally funded.

        The CPS data also allow for measurement of housing subsidies and the National School

Lunch Program, both means-tested transfer programs for income-eligible families, as well as


                                                  17
subsidies for spending on energy (LIHEAP). In some specifications, we include the Census measure

of the “fungible value” of public health insurance for children and parents, Medicaid and the

Children’s Health Insurance Plan (CHIP).22 Originally, Medicaid was limited to families (and

individuals) who received cash welfare (now TANF or SSI). However, with policy expansions in the

mid-1980s through the 1990s, Medicaid (and subsequently, post-1997, CHIP) expanded to children

(and pregnant women) beyond those participating in cash welfare (Gruber, 1997). The number of

children enrolled in Medicaid now totals 32.7 million (in fiscal year 2011) almost a tripling from the

11.2 million in 1990 (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2013).

        This discussion makes clear that heading into the Great Recession, the social safety net has

moved away from cash welfare and towards tax credits and in-kind transfers. This represents a major

change in support for low income Americans.

B. The Stimulus and Changes to the Social Safety Net in the Great Recession

        The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) was passed in February

2009 and contained many elements that expanded the social safety net. The Food Stamp maximum

monthly benefit was increased by 13.6 percent (this provision expired in October 2013) and the

three-month time limit on Food Stamp receipt for able-bodied childless adults (ABAWDs) was

suspended temporarily (states can also seek waivers if the local unemployment rate exceeds a

threshold or if there are insufficient jobs). The 2009 ARRA also included a $5 billion TANF

emergency fund (temporarily expanding the block grant), expanded the EITC to include a more

generous schedule for families with three or more children, expanded the refundable portion of the

CTC, and reduced taxes through the introduction of the Making Work Pay Tax Credit (providing up




22
  While Medicare spending for children is small in magnitude, when we include the fungible value of Medicaid, we
are also including the fungible value of Medicare as well as the employer contribution to health insurance premiums.
In 2010, CMS reported that total Medicare spending on children 0-18 was $91 million out of a total $489 billion. By
contrast total spending on children in Medicaid in 2010 was $96 billion out of a total of $366 billion (CMS, 2010).

                                                        18
to $400 per worker).23 There was also a 2008 Economic Stimulus that included a “recovery rebate”

with maximum payments of $600 ($1,200 for joint filers).

        In the Great Recession, both extended and emergency programs provided extensions to the

duration of UI (Rothstein, 2011). In June 2008, Congress enacted the Emergency Unemployment

Compensation (EUC) program, which (eventually) raised maximum UI benefit durations to as long

as 99 weeks given sufficiently high unemployment rates in the states. With passage of the 2009

ARRA, the full cost of extended benefits was shifted to the federal government; the ARRA also

raised the weekly UI benefit by $25.24 These UI extensions expire when the unemployment rate

within states declines below certain predetermined thresholds. Some states have responded to the

slow recovery by cutting the maximum duration of their state benefits (e.g., North Carolina now has

a maximum state duration of 19 weeks), while sequestration also led to some reductions in EUC

benefits.

C. Implications for Low-Income Households

        To gain some insight into the quantitative importance of these elements of the safety net for

households with children, Figure 4 presents a summary of income components by source for our

sample of children from the CPS. In particular, we calculate the share of total ATT income by source

for children living in deep poverty (resources less than 50 percent of poverty, panel A), below 100

percent of poverty (panel B), below 150 percent of poverty (panel C), and below 200 percent of

poverty (panel D). In each panel, we plot the percentage of total ATT income from the following

sources: earned income, TANF,25 SSI, EITC and both CTCs, Food Stamps, other in-kind benefits




23
   The ARRA also included a one-time payment of $250 per person for Social Security, SSI, and Veterans Disability
Benefits.
24
   As is noted above, Extended Benefit UI program costs are shared by the states and federal government. Initially
some states chose not to participate but eventually did so after the ARRA shifted the costs to the federal
government.
25
   Note that this variable in the CPS also includes other state and local general assistance.

                                                       19
(school lunch, housing subsidy, LIHEAP), UI, and other.26 We plot this for 2010, the trough of the

Great Recession in terms of the U.S. annual unemployment rate. Several facts emerge from these

graphs. First, TANF is providing minimal income; even for those in deep poverty, cash assistance

(TANF plus general assistance) is only 4.2 percent of total income. SNAP, on the other hand, makes

a significant contribution to incomes for those under 50 percent, 100 percent and 150 percent of

poverty, ranging from 23.3 percent of income for those under 50 percent of poverty, to 19.6 percent

for those under 100 percent of poverty, to 13.0 percent for those under 150 percent of poverty. The

share of income from SSI ranged from 2.7 percent for those under 50 percent of poverty to 4.6

percent for those under 100 percent of poverty. Second, the tax-based safety net is important: the

importance of the EITC (and both CTCs) is particularly evident at 100 percent poverty and beyond,

supplying 9.3 percent of ATT income for those under 100 percent of poverty, 13.2 percent of ATT

income for those under 150 percent of poverty, and 12.6 percent of ATT income for those under 200

percent of poverty. UI, on the other hand, is small in magnitude at all of these income to poverty

levels and is never more than 4.5 percent of income at 100 percent poverty and above, and is only 2.8

percent of income for those in deep poverty.27

        These findings are consistent with those in the Census report on the Supplemental Poverty

Measure (Short, 2015). The report shows that the combined tax credits (EITC and CTC) are the

biggest anti-poverty program for children, keeping 5 million children out of poverty. The second

biggest anti-poverty program for children is SNAP, which keeps 2.2 million children out of poverty.

These reductions are followed in magnitude by a decrease in children in poverty of 1.5 million for

Social Security (retirement and disability), 1.0 million for public housing, 0.7 million for School



26
   The percentages sum to one hundred. “Other” sources include Social Security (Old Age and Disability benefits),
veterans payments, workers’ compensation, unearned private income (asset income, child support, alimony, private
retirement and private disability) and federal and state taxes other than the EITC and CTCs.
27
   Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2009) document that there is extensive underreporting of these programs. Sherman and
Trisi (2015) adjusts for underreporting using the Urban Institute’s TRIM microsimulation model and finds that
government benefits play a large role in reducing poverty, and while the numbers are different from Short (2015),
they still find that post welfare reform, SNAP plays a large role in lifting children out of deep poverty.

                                                       20
Lunch, 0.7 million for SSI, 0.6 million for UI and 0.4 million for TANF.28

         Putting this all together, there are several important observations about the social safety net

for low-income households going into the Great Recession. First, with welfare reform and the

expansion of the EITC, the safety net for low-income households with children has been transformed

from one providing out-of-work assistance into one supporting in-work assistance. Second, a large

and growing share of the cost of the social safety net is accounted for by public health insurance

(Congressional Budget Office, 2013). Third, the stimulus expanded significantly the core programs

aimed at protecting income from earnings losses.

5. THE CYCLICALITY OF POVERTY

         Here we present results on the relationship between economic cycles and child poverty. We

explore how the cyclicality varies as we move up the income to poverty distribution and we explore

the role of the social safety net in mitigating against labor market fluctuations. Our empirical strategy

exploits variation in the timing and severity of cycles across states to estimate the effect of labor

market conditions on child poverty, controlling for fixed state characteristics and common shocks.

We measure the business cycle using the state unemployment rate and estimate a basic state panel

fixed effects model using annual data covering 2000 through 2014:

     (1) 𝑦𝑠𝑡 = 𝛽𝑈𝑅𝑠𝑡 + 𝛼𝑠 + 𝛿𝑡 + 𝜀𝑠𝑡

where yst is child poverty (either the private income poverty or ATT poverty) measured for children

in state s and year t. 𝑈𝑅𝑠𝑡 is the state unemployment rate in state s and year t; and equation (1) also

controls for state and year fixed effects, 𝛼𝑠 and 𝛿𝑡 respectively. We cluster the standard errors at the

state level, and the regressions are weighted using the relevant denominator (the CPS total weighted

population of children in the state-year cell). Below, we consider the robustness to alternative

measures of the economic cycle, to adding time-varying state policies (Zst) as well as to adding lags


28
  Given the focus on child poverty, the results for Social Security may be surprising. But recall that poverty is a
“family,” or as measured by us, a household measure and evidently many households with children also contain
elderly (or to disabled) individuals receiving income from Social Security old age or disability programs.

                                                          21
of the unemployment rate and state linear trends and individual controls.

A. Main Findings

        Our main results are presented in Table 2. The first four columns present results for the child

private income poverty and the second four columns present results for child ATT poverty. To

explore the impacts of the cycle at different points of the income to poverty distribution, we present

models for the share of children with (private or ATT) income below 50 percent, 100 percent, 150

percent and 200 percent of the poverty level. We use the Historical SPM as the poverty threshold

(Fox et al 2015a). Reported in Table 2 is the estimate of the coefficient β which captures the extent to

which within-state over-time changes in poverty respond to within-state over-time changes in the

state unemployment rate.

        The first thing to note is that all of the coefficients in Table 2, for both private income

poverty and ATT poverty, are positive and statistically significant, showing a high degree of

cyclicality of child poverty consistent with the existing literature (Bitler and Hoynes 2010, 2016;

Blank, 1989, 1993; Blank and Blinder, 1986; Blank and Card, 1993; Cutler and Katz, 1991; Freeman,

2001; Gunderson and Ziliak, 2004; Hoynes, Page, and Stevens, 2006; Meyer and Sullivan, 2011).

Our estimates here update that previous work using data through the Great Recession, focus on child

poverty, and contrast before-tax-and-transfer and after-tax-and-transfer poverty.

        Looking at the first four columns (for child PI poverty), the results show that a one

percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 0.9 percentage point increase in the

probability that private income is below 100 percent of poverty for a 4.1 percent effect (relative to

mean child PI poverty of 21.2 percent). The sensitivity of child private income poverty to changes in

unemployment is the largest at the bottom of the distribution and decreases as we move up to higher

poverty levels. The percent impacts of a one percentage point increase in unemployment rate are 4.8

percent for less than 50 percent of poverty, and 4.1, 3.0 and 2.3 for less than 100 percent, 150




                                                    22
percent, and 200 percent of poverty, respectively.29

         Columns 5 through 8 present similar models for child ATT poverty. Before comparing the

results, the difference in the mean poverty rates illustrates the importance of the social safety net for

low income households. For example, 10.7 percent of children have private income below 50 percent

of poverty while a much lower 3.1 percent of children have ATT income below 50 percent of

poverty. For 100 percent of poverty, 21.2 percent of children have private income below this level

compared to 11.4 based on ATT income. The differences narrow as we move higher in the income-

to-poverty distribution (32.6 percent versus 25.5 percent for 150 percent of PI and ATT poverty, and

43.2 percent versus 41.7 percent for 200 percent of PI and ATT poverty). This “tilting” of the

income-to-poverty gradient reflects the high levels of various safety-net program benefits and tax

credits at the lowest income levels and the potentially offsetting effects of taxes and non-cash

benefits for the higher income levels.30

         Comparing the results on the cyclicality of PI poverty (columns 1-4) and ATT poverty

(columns 5-8), we see a strong evidence for the safety net in protecting income, particularly at the

lowest income levels. For deep poverty (income below 50 percent of the poverty threshold), the

results show that a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 0.2 percentage

point increase in the level of ATT poverty, compared to the 0.5 percentage point increase in PI

poverty. For 100 percent of poverty, the results show that a one percentage point increase in the

unemployment rate leads to a 0.5 percentage point increase in ATT poverty, compared to a 0.9

percentage point increase in PI poverty. This reduction in the cyclicality of poverty is an illustration

of the magnitude by which the social safety net provides protection against shocks to earnings and



29
   The point estimates increase as we move up the income distribution (across columns 1-4), but given that the
baseline rates vary across the multiples of poverty, it is more appropriate to use the percent impacts (which are
defined as the estimated coefficients divided by the mean of the dependent variables) to compare estimates as we
move up the income-to-poverty distribution.
30
   To be clear, the poverty thresholds are identical between the PI and ATT measures. However, the relevant
adjustments to private income will be positive for some (reflecting the value of cash and non-cash benefits as well as
the value of tax credits such as the EITC) and negative for others (reflecting the effect of taxes).

                                                         23
income. These results illustrate our main findings: the social safety net mitigates the income loss due

to the Great Recession (and the much less severe 2001 recession), and reduces in particular the

exposure for those at the lowest income-to-poverty levels.31

         Figure 5 illustrates some of the variation underlying these regression estimates. The figure

provides a scatterplot where the x-axis shows the change in the state unemployment rate (UR, as a

share) and the y-axis shows the change in child PI (100 percent) poverty (black filled circle) and

child ATT (100 percent) poverty (blue open circle). Each point is a state’s pair of values, and we plot

the changes in UR and poverty over the Great Recession (peak over 2006 to 2008 to trough over

2009 to 2011).32 We also provide a best-fit line (using the child population in each state as weights)

of these points.33 There are several things to point out with the figure. First, there is substantial

variation in the severity of the labor market shock in the Great Recession across states – for example

North Dakota, Alaska, and Nebraska experienced an increase in the UR of less than 1.5 percentage

points, while Alabama, California, Florida and Nevada had increases of more than 5.5 percentage

points. It is this variation in the unemployment rates (as well as the year-to-year timing of the

changes) that provides the identification in our model. Second, and importantly, the figure

compellingly helps to visualize the effect that the social safety net plays in mitigating the increases in

poverty from the Great Recession. The slope of the line for private income poverty is much steeper

(dashed line) than the slope for ATT poverty (solid line). Thus, the relationship between the size of

the shock and the resulting change in child poverty is significantly lessened by incorporating the

stabilizing effects of the social safety net. In both cases the relationship between changes in the



31
   When comparing PI to ATT poverty for the same poverty cutoff (e.g., 100 percent of poverty), we find it most
useful to compare the percentage point effects (i.e., estimates of β). This allows for the direct comparison of how
many children would be moved into poverty (or 50 percent of poverty, etc.) and how that compares with and without
the tax-and-transfer safety net.
32
   Because of small sample sizes in some states, we combine three years of data for the peak and trough – in
particular the change is from the weighted average for 2006-2008 to the weighted average for 2009-2011. This is the
same combination of years as we used above in Figures 3 and 4.
33
   The slope of this best fit line essentially captures the coefficient estimate presented in panel B of Table 2. It is not
identical because here we have a single “long difference” and the table uses data from 2000 through 2014.

                                                            24
unemployment rates and changes in poverty is positive, but the correlation is larger for PI poverty

compared to ATT poverty.

        To explore the role of the social safety net further, Table 3 separates out the public assistance

safety net and the social insurance safety net. Columns 1–4 repeat the results for private income

poverty and columns 5-8 add social insurance (or, more accurately, all non-means-tested taxes and

transfers, which excludes the EITC and the CTC and refundable additional CTC). Columns 9-12 then

add means-tested tax and transfer programs, arriving at ATT poverty.34 Table 3 shows the expected

pattern in terms of the point estimates. As social insurance payments are added, the cyclicality of

income to poverty decreases at all levels, though modestly. Adding public assistance and tax credits,

in contrast, leads to a substantial decrease in cyclicality at 50 percent and 100 percent poverty (with

smaller changes at the higher income-to-poverty levels).

        To explore how these results vary across different groups, Table 4 presents ATT 100 percent

poverty for demographic subgroups. We define subgroups based on characteristics of the household

head (in most cases the parent) including marital status, race/ethnicity, and immigrant status (here, of

the household head or their spouse). Prior work shows that racial and ethnic minorities are more

likely to suffer labor market shocks (e.g., Hoynes, Miller, and Schaller, 2012). Additionally, single-

headed households and racial and ethnic minorities have higher baseline poverty rates. Importantly,

for immigrants, another issue is that a large share of the safety net is either unavailable to them

(unauthorized immigrants) or access is more limited (authorized immigrants).35 Given all of this, we

would expect ATT poverty to be more responsive for households headed by non-Hispanic blacks and

Hispanics than for non-Hispanic white headed households, and for households with single versus

married heads. But we would also expect the safety net to be less responsive and less effective at


34
   Social insurance includes Social Security, UI, worker’s compensation, and veterans payments. Public assistance
for this purpose includes SNAP, the National School Lunch Program, SSI, TANF and GA, housing subsidies, and
LIHEAP as well as the tax credits EITC, CTC, Additional CTC, and other credits.
35
   This is particularly the case for those who entered the country after August 1996, due to the provisions of
PWRORA and the IRCA act.

                                                        25
mitigating shocks for households headed by immigrants or with an immigrant spouse (compared to

households with native heads/spouses), due to their more limited access to the safety net.

        The findings in Table 4 are consistent with these predictions. A one percentage point increase

in the unemployment rate leads to larger increases in poverty for children whose head of household is

single (compared to married), and for children of black and Hispanic household heads (compared to

children of white heads).36 Most dramatic, however, is the comparison of children of native and

children of immigrant household heads/spouses. The cyclical responsiveness of poverty for children

of immigrant heads/spouses is larger in absolute and percentage terms than that for children of

natives, for both the PI and ATT measures. Even more striking, adding in the income from the social

safety net has no mitigating effect – in fact a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate

leads to a similar 1.2 percentage point increase in both PI and ATT poverty. Appendix Table 2 shows

the results for PI poverty and ATT poverty for the subgroups in columns 1-5 of Table 4, and the only

other group where the cyclicality of poverty does not significantly decrease when we include taxes

and transfers in the measure of income is Hispanics. Although not shown here, this same pattern for

children of immigrant heads/spouses is evident for extreme poverty as well.

6. ROBUSTNESS

        Here we explore the sensitivity of our main findings to two changes to our poverty definition

as well as examine the sensitivity of our results to the basic model specification.

Sensitivity to Alternative Poverty Measures

        . Our baseline results are based on our after-tax-and-transfer poverty using the Historical

SPM thresholds (Fox et al., 2015a). We compare these results to those using two different absolute

poverty thresholds, our version of the anchored SPM thresholds (Wimer et al., 2013) and the official

poverty thresholds. We also explore the cyclicality of a relative poverty measure. To do so, we adopt

the poverty definition used by the OECD: a person is poor if their income is below 60 percent of the

36
  The percentage effects however are smaller for the more disadvantaged groups, given their much higher average
poverty rates.

                                                       26
median of household-equivalized income. This threshold is recalculated each year and thus reflects

relative income inequality rather than an absolute measure. The results for PI and ATT 100 percent

poverty across these 4 measures for the thresholds are presented in Table 5. Looking across the

columns, we find a remarkable consistency in the cyclicality of poverty across the different

measures, in absolute and percent terms. Additionally, across the measures we find very similar

effects of the social safety net (comparing private income to ATT poverty). Figure 6 illustrates this

robustness more fully, by presenting these alternative measures for the four different income to

poverty cutoffs (the estimates and standard errors are reported in Appendix Table 3). Across these

four panels, our main findings stand out. The social safety net mitigates the effects of cyclical

downturns, particularly at the lower end of the income distribution (50 percent and 100 percent of

poverty). This holds regardless of whether we use the Historical SPM thresholds, the anchored SPM

thresholds, or official poverty thresholds. It also holds for a quite different construct, the OECD

relative poverty thresholds.

        Table 6 explores the sensitivity of our results to the treatment of costs and benefits of medical

care and insurance. Our baseline measure of resources used to construct ATT poverty (see the

definitions of the poverty measure resource definitions in Appendix Table 1) does not include the

benefits of health insurance (public or employer-provided) nor does it include the out of pocket

medical costs (or other fixed costs of work). Table 6 presents two alternatives prominent in the

literature. First, we adopt the Census approach used for most of the period prior to the introduction of

the Census SPM (experimental poverty measure as suggested by the National Academy of Sciences).

This adds to ATT income the fungible value of Medicaid (and Medicare and includes the value of the

employer contribution to HI premiums). Second, we use the approach in the Census SPM and deduct

from ATT income out of pocket medical costs (here we also deduct work-related expenses including

child care costs as is implemented in the SPM). The results, for 100 percent poverty using both the

historical and anchored SPM thresholds, are shown in Table 6. By looking at the means of the


                                                   27
dependent variable across the columns in the table, it is clear that how one treats the costs and

benefits of medical care and insurance makes a difference in the level of the measured child poverty

rates. However, the table shows clearly that our core finding concerning the cyclicality of poverty,

quantitatively and qualitatively, is little changed by how we treat medical care. Figure 7 expands this

analysis to illustrate how these results vary across income-to-poverty thresholds (the full set of

coefficients and standard errors, including those for the ATT poverty with anchored SPM thresholds

are presented in Appendix Table 4). The figure confirms our main finding that the percent effects of

an increase in unemployment decline as we move up the income-to-poverty distribution.

Sensitivity to Alternative Model Specifications

        First, we explore the sensitivity to adding controls for demographic characteristics, state-level

time varying policies, and state linear trends to our relatively parsimonious estimation model. The

results are shown in Appendix Table 5. Our first set of robustness (panel B) turns to individual

regressions and adds controls for the head’s characteristics including dummies for single years of

age; dummies for race/ethnicity (Hispanic, white non-Hispanic, black non-Hispanic, other non-

Hispanic); a dummy for marital status (head is married); a dummy for the head being male; and

dummies for the head’s education being high school graduate, some college, and college graduate.

While these need not look identical to our aggregate regressions, these individual controls make little

difference to our findings. We also explore how state policy choices in Medicaid (eligibility limits

for pregnant women and children), state-level EITCs, the average UI replacement rate (Kuka, 2016),

TANF (the guarantee), and the real level of the binding minimum wage affect our estimates.

Controlling for these important poverty determinants has little substantive effect on our estimates of

cyclicality of any of our poverty measures (panel C). Similarly, including state linear trends does not

significantly affect our estimates (panel D).

        Next we explore the sensitivity to our choice of the unemployment rate as the measure of the

cycle. Appendix Table 6 presents our baseline results, followed by panel B with the employment to


                                                   28
population ratio (EPOP) as the measure of the state-year cycle, and panel C with real chained GDP

per capita as the measure of the cycle. We present results for PI and ATT poverty and for the four

cuts of income to poverty. Broadly speaking, the qualitative findings are similar regardless of

whether we use the unemployment rate or EPOP as our measure of the cycle. All coefficients for the

effect of the business cycle on poverty are countercyclical and highly statistically significant (the

coefficients on the EPOP and GDP per capita are negative, indicating a strengthening of the labor

market leads to a reduction in poverty), and the magnitudes of the percent impacts are strikingly

similar for the unemployment rate and EPOP (in absolute value).37 The results show that GDP per

capita is not a statistically significant determinant although all but one of the signs are consistent with

those for the unemployment rate and EPOP; when the coefficient for the unemployment rate is

positive, that for the GDP is negative 7 of 8 times and that for EPOP is always negative. We also

explored including the Census’s imputed tax measures instead of assigning the TAXSIM values, not

weighting by the population of children, and using an alternate sharing unit, the smallest related

family unit in Census terms, the subfamily. None of these additional changes (not shown) matter

substantively.

         Our final robustness check looks at effects of adding lags (one or two years) of the

unemployment rate to our main specification (Appendix Table 7). Here, the cumulative effect is

relatively unchanged, and the bulk of the effects are on the contemporaneous level of the

unemployment rate.

         In sum, our main results are robust to alternative definitions for resources, poverty thresholds,

the measure of the economic cycle, and the regression specification.

7. CONCLUSION



37
  A percent impact of “x” implies that a one percentage point increase in UR (or EPOP) leads to an x percent
increase in the poverty rate. One might be worried that these two marginal effects (a one percentage point change in
UR versus a one percentage point change in EPOP) might represent very different changes, however the change in
the EPOP is quite similar (although oppositely signed) from the change in the UR during the Great Recession.

                                                         29
        Beginning in 2007, the Great Recession led to unemployment rates unseen since the deep

recessions of the early 1980s. At the same time, significant changes in the safety net occurred both

before and during this most recent downturn. These two events make it important to explore the role

of the safety net in providing protection during the Great Recession, both through the normal

countercyclical response and through ARRA. We focus on child poverty, as children experience

some of the highest poverty rates of any group in the United States.

        We consider two child poverty measures, which differ in the way they count resources – one

focuses on PI poverty and the other on ATT poverty. By comparing the response of these two

poverty measures across the business cycle, we gain insight into the role played by the social safety

net in protecting children’s well-being against economic shocks. We use CPS data covering the

period 2000 through 2014 and estimate state-year panel data models where we measure state

business cycles using unemployment rates. Our results are identified using the significant and

sizeable variation in the timing and severity of the business cycle across states.

        We find that child poverty is cyclical and the cyclicality is larger in magnitude (in percent

terms) at lower points in the income-to-poverty ratio distribution. This finding has been shown in

other work to be true historically and continues to be evident in the Great Recession. We also find

that the safety net as a whole provides significant protection, as the cyclicality of after-tax-and-

transfer poverty is significantly lower than the cyclicality of private income poverty. While our main

specifications rely on quasi-relative poverty thresholds as in the Historical SPM (Fox et al., 2015a),

we find that the findings are quite robust across absolute measures such as the official poverty

thresholds and anchored SPM thresholds (Wimer et al., 2013), and even when using the OECD’s

relative poverty threshold. Moreover, our results are robust to how we treat the value of health

insurance and medical expenses when we calculate household resources, and to a variety of

alternative model specifications. Lastly, while we find that on average the safety net is effective at

mitigating the cyclicality of child poverty, our results also show that these effects are differential


                                                    30
across groups and that cyclicality of poverty is larger for children in households headed by single

parents, Hispanics, and, most significantly, immigrants or those with an immigrant spouse.




                                                  31
REFERENCES

Bavier, R. (2008). Reconciliation of Income and Consumption Data in Poverty Measurement. Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, 27, 40–62.

Bavier, R. (2014). Recent Trends in U.S. Income and Expenditure Poverty. Journal of Poverty
Analysis and Management, 33, 700–718.

Bitler, M., and Hoynes, H.W. (2010). The State of the Safety Net in the Post-Welfare Reform Era.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 71–127.

Bitler, M., and Hoynes, H.W. (2015). Heterogeneity in the Impact of Economic Cycles and the Great
Recession: Effects Within and Across the Income Distribution, American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings, 105, 154–160.

Bitler, M., and Hoynes, H.W. (2016). The More Things Change the More They Stay the Same? The
Safety Net and Poverty in the Great Recession. Journal of Labor Economics, 34, S403–S444.

Blank, R. (1989). Disaggregating the Effect of the Business Cycle on the Distribution of Income.
Economica, 56, 141–163.

Blank, R. (1993). Why Were Poverty Rates so High in the 1980s?. In D.B. Papadimitriou and E.N.
Wolff, (Eds.), Poverty and Prosperity in the Late Twentieth Century. St Martin’s Press. London:
Macmillan Press.

Blank, R. (2002). Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States. Journal of Economic Literature,
40, 1105–1166.

Blank, R. (2008). Presidential Address: How to Improve Poverty Measurement in the United States.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27, 233–254.

Blank, R., and Blinder, A. (1986). Macroeconomics, Income Distribution, and Poverty. In S.
Danziger and D. Weinberg, (Eds.), Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn’t. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Blank, R., and Card, D. (1993). Poverty, Income Distribution and Growth: Are They Still Related?
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 285–339.

Brooks-Gunn, J. and Duncan, G. (1997). The Effects of Poverty on Children. The Future of Children
7, 55–71.

Burkhauser, R. (2009). Deconstructing European Poverty Measures: What Relative and Absolute
Scales Measure. Professional Practice, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 28, 715–725.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2010). Unpublished Age and Gender Tables, Retrieved
July 7, 2016 from https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/Age-and-Gender.html.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2013). Medicare and Medicaid Statistical Supplement,
2013 Edition. Retrieved September 5, 2016 from https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-
systems/statistics-trends-and-reports/medicaremedicaidstatsupp/2013.html.




                                                 32
Citro, C. and Michael, R. (Eds.) (1995). Measuring Poverty: A New Approach. Washington D.C.:
National Academy Press.

Congressional Budget Office (2013). Growth in Means-Tested Programs and Tax Credits for Low-
Income Households. (CBO Report 43934). Washington, DC.

Congressional Budget Office (2014). The Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes,
2011. (CBO Report 49440). Washington, DC.

Congressional Research Service (2012). Low Income Assistance Programs: Trends in Federal
Spending. (CBO Report R41823), Washington, DC.

Cutler, D., and Katz, L. (1991). “Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvantaged”, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1–74.

Floyd, I., Pavetti, L., and Schott, L. (2015). TANF Continues to Weaken as a Safety Net. Center for
Budget and Policy Priorities.

Fox, L., Wimer, C., Garfinkel, I., Kaushal, N., and Waldfogel, J. (2015a). Waging War on Poverty:
Poverty Trends Using a Historical Supplemental Poverty Measure. Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 34, 567-592.

Fox, L., Wimer, C., Garfinkel, I., Kaushal, N., Nam, J., and Waldfogel, J. (2015b). Trends in Deep
Poverty from 1968 to 2011: The Influence of Family Structure, Employment Patterns, and the Safety
Net. Rusell Sage Journal, 1, 14–34.

Fraker, T.M., Martini, A.P., Ohls, J.C., Ponza, M., and Quinn, E.A. (1992). The Evaluation of the
Alabama Food Stamp Cash-Out Demonstration: Volume 1 Recipient Impacts. Mathematica Policy
Research, Inc.

Freeman, R. (2001). The Rising Tide Lifts…? In Sheldon Danziger and Robert Haveman (Eds.),
Understanding Poverty (pp. 97–126). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Gruber, J. (1997). Health Insurance for Poor Women and Children in the U.S.: Lessons from the Past
Decade. In James Poterba (Ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 11. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gundersen, Craig and James Ziliak. (2004). “Poverty and Macroeconomic Performance across
Space, Race, and Family Structure,” Demography, 41:1, 61–86.

Hardy, B., Smeeding, T., and Ziliak, J. (2015). The Changing Safety Net for Low-Income Parents
and Their Children: Structural or Cyclical Changes in Income Support Policy. Mimeo.

Hotz, J. and Scholz, J.K. (2003). The Earned Income Tax Credit. In Robert Moffitt, (Ed.) Means-
Tested Transfer Programs in the United States (pp. 141–197). The University of Chicago Press and
NBER.

Hoynes, H.W., Miller, D., and Schaller, J. (2012). Who Suffers in Recessions and Jobless
Recoveries? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26, 27-48.

Hoynes, H.W., Page, M.E. and Stevens, A.H. (2006). Poverty in America: Trends and Explanations.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, 47-68.



                                                 33
Hoynes, H.W., and Rothstein, J. (2016). Tax Policy Toward Low Income Families. Working Paper
22080. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hoynes, H.W., and Schanzenbach, D.W. (2009). Consumption Reponses to In-Kind Transfers:
Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 1, 109–139.

Hoynes, H.W., and Schanzenbach, D.W. (2016). U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs. In R. Moffitt
(Ed.) Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the U.S, University of Chicago Press.

Internal Revenue Service (2016). Statistics of Income—1990-2013 Individual Income Tax Returns.
(Publication 1304). Retrieved July 7, 2016 from http://www.irs.gov/uac/soi-tax-stats-individual-
income-tax-returns-publication-1304-complete-report#_tbla.

Kuka, E. (2016). Quantifying the Benefits of Social Insurance: Unemployment Insurance and Health,
Working Paper.

Larrimore, J., Burkhauser, R., and Armour, P. (2015). Accounting for Income Changes over the
Great Recession Relative to Previous Recessions: The Impact of Taxes and Transfers. National Tax
Journal, 68, 281-318.

Meyer, B., and Sullivan, J. (2011). Consumption and Income Poverty over the Business Cycle.
Research in Labor Economics 32, 51–82.

Meyer, B., and Sullivan, J. (2012). Identifying the Disadvantaged: Official Poverty, Consumption
Poverty, and the New Supplemental Poverty Measure, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26, 111–
36.

Meyer, B., Mok, W., and Sullivan, J. (2009). The Under-Reporting of Transfers in Household
Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences. Working Paper 15181. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Moffitt, R. (1983). “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma,” American Economic Review 73(5),
1023–35.

Moffitt, R. (2012). The Reversal of the Employment-Population Ratio in the 2000s: Facts and
Explanations. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 201–251.

Moffitt, R. (2015). The Deserving Poor, the Family, and the U.S. Welfare System. Demography, 52,
729-749.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (2015) In It Together: Why Less
Inequality Benefits All. Paris: OECD Publishing.

Ohls, J.C., Fraker, T.M., Martini, A.P., and Ponza, M. (1992). The Effects of Cash-Out on Food Use
by Food Stamp Program Participants in San Diego. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and
Nutrition Service, Office of Analysis and Evaluation: Washington, DC.

Oliviera, V. (2016). The Food Assistance Landscape FY 2015 Annual Report. (Economic Research
Service Economic Information Bulletin 150). U.S. Department of Agriculture: Washington, DC.




                                                34
Parker, J., and Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2009). Who Bears Aggregate Fluctuations? Estimates and
Implications for Consumption Inequality. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 99,
399–405.

Parker, J., and Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2010). The Increase in Income Cyclicality of High-Income
Households and Its Relation to the Rise in Top Income Shares. Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 41, 1–55

Rothstein, J. (2011). Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 43, 132–210.

Sherman, A., and Trisi, D. (2015). Safety Net for Poorest Weakened after Welfare Law but Regained
Strength in Great Recession, at Least Temporarily, A Decade after Welfare Overhaul, More Children
in Deep Poverty. Center for Budget and Policy Priorities.

Short, K. (2011). The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2010. (Current Population Reports
P60-241). Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.

Short, K. (2013). The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2012. (Current Population Reports
P60-247). Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.

Short, K. (2015). The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2014. (Current Population Reports
P60-254). Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.

Social Security Administration (2016). Monthly Statistical Snapshot May 2016, Table 2. Retrieved
September 5, 2016 from https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/quickfacts/stat_snapshot/.

U.S. Census Bureau. (2015). Income Poverty and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States:
2014. (Current Population Reports P60-252). Washington, DC.

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service. (2016a). Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program Participation and Costs. Retrieved July 7, 2016 from
www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/SNAPsummary.pdf.

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service. (2016b). “Federal Cost of School Food
Programs.” Retrieved July 7, 2016 from www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/pd/cncost.pdf.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Family Assistance (2016). TANF
Financial Data – FY 2010. Retrieved July 7, 2016 from
www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/ofa/2010_tanf_data_with_states.pdf.

U.S. Department of Labor, Employment & Training Administration. (2016). Benefits Paid All
Programs, Most Frequently Requested Statistics. Retrieved July 7, 2016 from
oui.doleta.gov/unemploy/frs.asp.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2007). Food Stamp Program. (GAO Report GAO-07-465).
Washington, DC.

U.S. House of Representatives. (1996). Green Book: Background Material and Data on Programs
Within the Jurisdiction of the House Committee on Ways and Means. Committee on Ways and
Means. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.




                                                35
Wimer, C., Fox, L., Garfinkel, I., Kaushal, N., and Waldfogel, J. (2013). Trends in Poverty with an
Anchored Supplemental Poverty Measure. mimeo.




                                                 36
Figure 1: Annual Unemployment Rate and Private Income Poverty and After-Tax-and-Transfer
                                 Poverty for Children




    Notes: Data are from the 2000 through 2014 calendar year ASEC (poverty measures) and the
    Bureau of Labor Statistics (unemployment). Poverty refers to percent of children living in
    households with income below the Historical SPM poverty line in each calendar year, using
    various concepts for resources. Private income includes only wages and salaries, self-employment
    income, and private transfers. ATT income includes the value of public in-kind and cash transfers
    and nets out taxes and tax credits.




                                                   37
Figure 2: Change in Average Child Household Income by Source and State in the Great Recession




     Notes: Data are from the 2006 to 2008 and 2009 to 2011 ASEC calendar years. Percent changes in
     sources of income for children are computed as the percent difference between the 2006 to 2008
     weighted average of state household income from that source for children and the 2009 to 2011
     weighted average of state household income for that source for children.




                                                  38
Figure 3: Change in Private Income Poverty and After-Tax-and-Transfer Poverty during
                         the Great Recession for Children




      Notes: Data are from the 2006 to 2008 and 2009 to 2011 ASEC calendar years. Change in
      poverty refers to the change in the share of children in each state living in households
      with PI and ATT income below the Historical SPM poverty line. Changes in the share of
      children in poverty are computed as the difference between the 2006 to 2008 weighted
      average state poverty rate and the 2009 to 2011 weighted average state poverty rate.




                                                39
       Figure 4: Composition of After-Tax-and-Transfer Income by Source for Children, 2010

           (a) Below 50% Poverty                                     (b) Below 100% Poverty




              (c) Below 150% Poverty                                 (d) Below 200% Poverty




Notes: Data are from the 2010 ASEC (income from calendar year 2010). Poverty multiples refer to the sample of
children living in households with income below multiples of the Historical SPM poverty line, using ATT income.
The percentages sum to one hundred. Other in-kind sources are School Lunch and LIHEAP. “Other” sources of
income include Social Security (Old Age and Disability benefits), veterans payments, workers’ compensation,
unearned private income (asset income, child support, alimony, private retirement and private disability) and
federal and state taxes other than the EITC and Child Tax Credits.




                                                       40
Figure 5: Change in Unemployment Rate and Child ATT Poverty in the Great Recession, by State




     Notes: Data are from the 2006 to 2008 and 2009 to 2011 ASEC (calendar year income) and the
     Bureau of Labor Statistics. Poverty refers to percent of children living in households with PI or
     ATT income below the Historical SPM poverty line. Changes in poverty rates and unemployment
     rates are computed as the differences between the weighted state average child poverty and
     unemployment rate (as a share) for 2006 to 2008 and the weighted state average child poverty and
     unemployment rate (as a share) for 2009 to 2011.




                                                    41
      Figure 6: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income Child Poverty and After-Tax-and-
                 Transfer Child Poverty – Sensitivity to the Choice of Poverty Threshold

               (a) Below 50% Poverty                                       (b) Below 100% Poverty




                (c) Below 150% Poverty                                   (d) Below 200% Poverty




Notes: Figure shows the relationship between the unemployment rate and children having household private income or
after-tax-and-transfer income below various multiples of the Historical SPM threshold, the anchored SPM threshold,
the official poverty threshold and the OECD poverty threshold. Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000-2014
and are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted).




                                                        42
 Figure 7: Sensitivity of ATT Poverty Cyclicality to Treatment of Medical Benefits,
                             Historical SPM Thresholds




Notes: Figure shows the relationship between having household after-tax-and-transfer income
below various multiples of the Historical SPM poverty threshold and the state unemployment rate,
using various measures of resources to construct the poverty measures. First set of bars are percent
effects using an ATT measure of resources, second set of bars are percent effects using a resource
measure that adds the fungible value of Medicaid/CHIP and Medicare and the employer
contribution to HI premiums to ATT resources, and the third set of bars subtracts MOOP, child
care expenses, and other work expenses from ATT resources. Data are from the CPS ASEC
calendar years 2000 through 2014 and are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted). All
effects from regressions that include controls for state and year fixed effects, and percent effects
derived by dividing the estimated coefficient on the unemployment rate by the average of the
dependent variable. The regression results are weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell.




                                                43
Table 1: Total Cost of Safety-Net Programs Captured in
       Our After-Tax-and-Transfer Income-2010

                                                 Billions of dollars
 Public assistance, cash
 TANF, cash assistance                                           $12.4
 SSI, recipients<18                                                9.4

 Pubic assistance, food and nutrition programs
 SNAP                                                              64.8
 School Lunch                                                       9.8

 Tax credits
 EITC                                                              59.6
 CTC (primarily higher income filers)                              28.5
 Additional CTC (refundable)                                       27.7

 Public assistance, other inkind
 Housing (Section 8, Public Housing)                               27.3
 Medicaid, recipients <18                                          67.2
 LIHEAP                                                             5.1

 Social insurance
 UI (Regular, Extended, Emergency, & STC)                        150.0


 Notes: Table shows total spending in billions of 2010 dollars
 on various transfer programs and tax credits. Source for
 TANF cash assistance spending for FY 2010: OFA (2016);
 for SSI spending for children, 2010: SSA (2016); for SNAP
 for FY 2010: FNS (2016a); for School Lunch for FY 2010:
 FNS (2016b); for EITC and CTC for 2010: IRS (2016); for
 Housing for FY 2011 in 2011 dollars (CRS 2012); for
 Medicaid for 2010: CMS (2016); and for UI for 2010, ETA
 (2016).




                                  44
     Table 2: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
                                             Poverty
                                  Private Income Poverty                     After Tax and Transfer Poverty
                         <50%       <100% <150% <200%                     <50%     <100% <150% <200%


     UR                  0.509       0.871          0.988     0.978       0.198             0.538      0.928      0.959
                        (0.097)     (0.134)        (0.152)   (0.165)     (0.057)           (0.096)    (0.157)    (0.151)

     % Impact             4.8            4.1        3.0        2.3         6.3              4.7        3.6         2.3
     Mean y              0.107          0.212      0.326      0.432       0.031            0.114      0.255       0.417
     Mean UR             0.064          0.064      0.064      0.064       0.064            0.064      0.064       0.064

     N                    765            765        765        765           765            765        765         765
     Notes: Table shows the relationship between children having household private income (columns 1-4) or
     after-tax-and-transfer income (columns 5-8) below various multiples of the Historical SPM poverty
     threshold and the state unemployment rate. Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000 to 2014
     and are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted). All regressions include controls for state and year
     fixed effects. The results are weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell. Standard errors are
     clustered by state and shown in parentheses.


     Table 3: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
                           Poverty – Social Insurance vs. Public Assistance
                                                     Resource measure: Priv. Income +
              Resource measure: Private Income               Social Insurance                  Resource Measure: ATT income

             <50%     <100% <150% <200%             <50%     <100% <150% <200%                <50%    <100% <150% <200%

UR            0.509   0.871   0.988   0.978   0.351   0.806   0.803   0.910   0.198   0.538   0.928   0.959
             (0.097) (0.134) (0.152) (0.165) (0.114) (0.138) (0.163) (0.156) (0.057) (0.096) (0.157) (0.151)

% Impact      4.8      4.1        3.0       2.3       4.1     4.1       2.5         2.0        6.3     4.7       3.6       2.3
Mean y       0.107    0.212      0.326     0.432     0.086   0.195     0.325       0.454      0.031   0.114     0.255     0.417
Mean UR      0.064    0.064      0.064     0.064     0.064   0.064     0.064       0.064      0.064   0.064     0.064     0.064

N             765      765        765       765      765      765      765         765         765     765      765        765
Notes: Table shows the relationship between children having household private income (columns 1-4), household
income and social insurance (columns 5-8), or after-tax-and-transfer income (columns 9-12) below various multiples
of the Historical SPM poverty threshold and the state unemployment rate. “Social Insurance” includes all tax and
transfer programs not explicitly means tested, this includes federal income taxes (except EITC and refundable CTC).
Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000 to 2014 and are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted).
All regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects. The results are weighted by the sum of the CPS
weights in the cell. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses.




                                                             45
 Table 4: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
                   Poverty – Heterogeneity Across Demographic Subgroups
                         Child ATT 100% Poverty                                 Child 100% Poverty
                                                                               Immigrant Native      Native
                                                                     Immigrant   ATT      PI          ATT
             Married    Single    White      Black     Hispanic      PI Poverty Poverty Poverty      Poverty

UR            0.490     0.645      0.363     0.492          1.119      1.197     1.171     0.724      0.358
             (0.099)   (0.191)    (0.092)   (0.357)        (0.218)    (0.467)   (0.250)   (0.119)    (0.109)

% Impact       8.5       2.6       5.6        2.2           6.1        4.5        8.3       3.7       3.4
Mean y        0.057     0.250     0.065      0.226         0.183      0.265      0.141     0.197     0.107
Mean UR       0.064     0.065     0.063      0.064         0.067      0.067      0.067     0.063     0.063

N              5791       5024       2827       2459       2854        4956      4956     5859     5859
Notes: Table shows the relationship between child private income poverty or after-tax-and-transfer poverty
and the state unemployment rate across demographic groups. The poverty threshold is the Historical SPM.
Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000 to 2014 and are collapsed to the state by year by
demographic group level (weighted). All regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects.
Demographic groups are determined according to the demographics of the household head, or in the case of
immigration, whether the head or their spouse are immigrants. The results are weighted by the sum of the
CPS weights in the cell. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses.




                                                      46
 Table 5: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
                      100% Poverty – Sensitivity to the Poverty Threshold
                       SPM Historical        SPM Anchored          Official Poverty     OECD Measure
                        PI      ATT           PI     ATT           PI         ATT        PI    ATT


UR                    0.871      0.538      0.892      0.461       0.859     0.478      1.075     0.975
                     (0.134)    (0.096)    (0.124)    (0.109)     (0.137)   (0.114)    (0.193)   (0.150)

% Impact               4.1        4.7        4.2           3.9     4.3        4.5       3.1        3.4
Mean y                0.212      0.114      0.212         0.117   0.201      0.105     0.348      0.290
Mean UR               0.064      0.064      0.064         0.064   0.064      0.064     0.064      0.064

N                       765       765        765        765        765         765       765        765
Notes: Table shows the relationship between the unemployment rate and children having household private
income after-tax-and-transfer income below the Historical SPM threshold (columns 1 and 2), the anchored
SPM threshold (columns 3 and 4), the official poverty threshold (columns 5 and 6) and the OECD poverty
threshold (columns 7 and 8). Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000-2014 and are collapsed to
the state by year level (weighted). All regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects. The
results are weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell. Standard errors are clustered by state and
shown in parentheses.




                                                     47
Table 6: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
          Poverty – Sensitivity to the Treatment of Medical Expenses and Benefits
                                       SPM Historical                   SPM Anchored ATT
                                       ATT +       ATT minus               ATT +     minus
                              ATT      Medical      MOOP            ATT   Medical MOOP


     UR                       0.512      0.490          0.662       0.441     0.500      0.517
                             (0.095)    (0.094)        (0.102)     (0.105)   (0.107)    (0.111)

     % Impact                  4.5        4.6            4.7        3.8        4.7        3.6
     Mean y                   0.114      0.106          0.142      0.117      0.106      0.145
     Mean UR                  0.064      0.064          0.064      0.064      0.064      0.064

     N                         714        714           714         714        714        714
     Notes: Table shows the relationship between the unemployment rate and children having
     household private income or after-tax-and-transfer income below the Historical SPM
     thresholds (columns 1-3) and anchored SPM thresholds (columns 4-6). Data are from the CPS
     ASEC calendar years 2000-2013 and are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted).
     Column 1 and 4 specifications are for the determinants of poverty using our baseline ATT
     measure of resources, column 2 and 5 specifications are for the determinants of poverty using
     a resource measure that adds the fungible value of Medicaid/CHIP and Medicare and the
     employer contribution to HI premiums to ATT resources, and column 3 and 6 specifications
     are for the determinants of poverty after subtracting MOOP, child care expenses, and other
     work expenses from ATT resources. All regressions include controls for state and year fixed
     effects. The results are weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell. Standard errors
     are clustered by state and shown in parentheses.




                                                  48
                 Table A.1: Resource Measures used in Alternative Poverty Measures
                                                     Resource measures
                                          Official          Private Income    ATT      Public     Social
                                                     SPM
                                          Poverty               Poverty      Poverty Assistance Insurance
Private Income
   Wages and salaries                        X        X           X            X
   Self-employment income                    X        X           X            X
   Farm income                               X        X           X            X
   Returns from assets                       X        X           X            X
   Child support and alimony                 X        X           X            X
   Private disability and retirement         X        X           X            X
   Value of employer contribution to HI
Transfers
   AFDC/TANF                                 X        X                        X         X
   Social Security Ret. / SSDI               X        X                        X                    X
   SSI                                       X        X                        X         X
   Unemployment Insurance                    X        X                        X                    X
   Food Stamps                                        X                        X         X
   Free/Reduced lunch                                 X                        X         X
   Housing subsidies                                  X                        X         X
   LIHEAP                                             X                        X         X
   Veterans payments, workers' comp          X        X                        X                    X
   Fungible value of Medicaid
   Fungible value of Medicare
Taxes
   EITC                                               X                        X         X
   Child Tax Credit                                   X                        X                    X
   Additional Child Tax Credit                        X                        X         X
   Stimulus Tax Credits / Rebates                     X                        X                    X
   Federal taxes, other                               X                        X                    X
   State taxes                                        X                        X                    X
   FICA contrbutions                                  X                        X                    X
Deductions
   Child Support                                      X
   Medical out of pocket expenditures                 X
   Other work expenses                                X
   Child care                                         X




                                                      49
   Table A.2: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
                  100% Poverty – Heterogeneity Across Demographic Subgroups
                     All           Married          Single           White            Black           Hispanic
                PI         ATT    PI    ATT       PI     ATT       PI    ATT        PI    ATT        PI    ATT

UR             0.891 0.550 0.791 0.490 1.074 0.645 0.655 0.363 0.887 0.492 1.432 1.119
              (0.105) (0.099) (0.125) (0.099) (0.313) (0.191) (0.136) (0.092) (0.361) (0.357) (0.329) (0.218)

% Impact       4.2   4.8          6.4   8.5      2.6   2.6        5.1   5.6        2.3   2.2        4.2   6.1
Mean y        0.212 0.114        0.124 0.057    0.421 0.250      0.128 0.065      0.387 0.226      0.337 0.183
Mean UR       0.064 0.064        0.064 0.064    0.065 0.065      0.063 0.063      0.064 0.064      0.067 0.067

 N             10815 10815 5791 5791              5024 5024         2827 2827      2459 2459        2854 2854
Notes: Table shows the relationship between child private income poverty or after-tax-and-transfer poverty and the
state unemployment rate across demographic groups. The poverty threshold is the Historical SPM. Data are from the
CPS ASEC calendar years 2000-2014 and are collapsed to the state by year by demographic group level (weighted).
All regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects. Demographic groups are determined according to
the demographics of the household head, or in the case of immigration, whether the head or their spouse are
immigrants. The results are weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell. Standard errors are clustered by
state and shown in parentheses.




                                                       50
    Table A.3: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
                            Poverty – Sensitivity to the Poverty Threshold
                     SPM Historical            SPM Anchored              Official Poverty         OECD Measure
                     PI       ATT              PI      ATT               PI          ATT          PI      ATT

                                                            A. 50% Poverty
UR                  0.509        0.198        0.553        0.183      0.457         0.162        0.807        0.308
                   (0.097)      (0.057)      (0.088)      (0.060)    (0.095)       (0.055)      (0.121)      (0.095)
% Impact             4.8          6.3          5.0          5.6        4.4           5.5          4.9          4.2
Mean y              0.107        0.031        0.108        0.033      0.103         0.029        0.166        0.073

                                                           B. 100% Poverty
UR                  0.871        0.538        0.892        0.461     0.859          0.478        1.075        0.975
                   (0.134)      (0.096)      (0.124)      (0.109)   (0.137)        (0.114)      (0.193)      (0.150)
% Impact             4.1          4.7          4.2          3.9       4.3            4.5          3.1          3.4
Mean y              0.212        0.114        0.212        0.117     0.201          0.105        0.348        0.290

                                                           C. 150'% Poverty
UR                  0.988        0.928        0.958        0.944      0.982         0.895        0.972        0.944
                   (0.152)      (0.157)      (0.172)      (0.127)    (0.171)       (0.141)      (0.171)      (0.167)
% Impact             3.0          3.6          2.9          3.7        3.2           3.9          1.9          1.8
Mean y              0.326        0.255        0.326        0.257      0.308         0.231        0.512        0.526

                                                           D. 200% Poverty
UR                  0.978        0.959        0.812        1.001     1.014          1.001        0.734        0.580
                   (0.165)      (0.151)      (0.231)      (0.166)   (0.174)        (0.162)      (0.182)      (0.174)
% Impact             2.3          2.3          1.9          2.4       2.5            2.6          1.1          0.8
Mean y              0.432        0.417        0.431        0.412     0.409          0.382        0.645        0.693

N                    765          765          765         765          765          765          765          765
Notes: Table shows the relationship between the unemployment rate and having household private income or
after-tax-and-transfer income below various multiples of the Historical SPM threshold (columns 1 and 2), the
anchored SPM threshold (columns 3 and 4), the official poverty threshold (columns 5 and 6) and the OECD
poverty threshold (columns 7 and 8). Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000-2014 and are collapsed to
the state by year level (weighted). All regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects. The results are
weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in
parentheses.




                                                          51
Table A.4: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
           Poverty – Sensitivity to the Treatment of Medical Expenses and Benefits

                                   SPM Historical                         SPM Anchored
                                     ATT +      ATT minus                   ATT +     ATT minus
                           ATT       Medical     MOOP            ATT        Medical    MOOP

                                                       A. 50% Poverty
         UR               0.187       0.182          0.186       0.177       0.179        0.181
                         (0.054)     (0.051)        (0.074)     (0.058)     (0.055)      (0.064)
         % Impact          6.0         6.0            4.7         5.4         5.6          4.5
         Mean y           0.031       0.031          0.039       0.033       0.032        0.040
                                                      B. 100% Poverty
         UR               0.512       0.490          0.662       0.441       0.500        0.517
                         (0.095)     (0.094)        (0.102)     (0.105)     (0.107)      (0.111)
         % Impact          4.5         4.6            4.7         3.8         4.7          3.6
         Mean y           0.114       0.106          0.142       0.117       0.106        0.145
                                                      C. 150% Poverty
         UR               0.929       0.938          0.940       0.939       0.906        0.993
                         (0.161)     (0.111)        (0.167)     (0.124)     (0.109)      (0.120)
         % Impact          3.6         4.6            3.0         3.7         4.3          3.2
         Mean y           0.255       0.204          0.315       0.256       0.209        0.313
                                                      D. 200% Poverty
         UR               0.948       1.061          0.860       1.005       1.078        0.871
                         (0.153)     (0.115)        (0.165)     (0.169)     (0.116)      (0.180)
         % Impact          2.3         3.1            1.8         2.4         3.2          1.8
         Mean y           0.416       0.341          0.477       0.411       0.339        0.472

          N                 714          714        714          714         714        714
         Notes: Table shows the relationship between the unemployment rate and children
         having household private income or after tax and transfer income below various
         multiples of the Historical SPM thresholds (columns 1-3) and anchored SPM
         thresholds (columns 4-6). Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000-2013 and
         are collapsed to the state by year level (weighted). Column 1 and 4 specifications are
         for the determinants of poverty using our baseline ATT measure of resources, column
         2 and 4 specifications are for the determinants of poverty using a resource measure that
         adds the fungible value of Medicaid/CHIP and Medicare and the employer contribution
         to health insurance to ATT resources, and column 3 and 6 specifications are for the
         determinants of poverty after subtracting MOOP, child care expenses, and other work
         expenses from ATT resources. All regressions include controls for state and year fixed
         effects. The results are weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell. Standard
         errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses.




                                                     52
Table A.5: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
                         Poverty – Sensitivity to Model Specification
                           Private Income Poverty                           ATT Poverty
                  <50%      <100%      <150%        <200%      <50%      <100%      <150%     <200%

                                                    A. Main specification
     UR           0.509      0.871      0.988         0.978     0.198     0.538      0.928     0.959
                 (0.097)    (0.134)    (0.152)       (0.165) (0.057) (0.096)        (0.157)   (0.151)

                              B. Adding individual demographic controls (micro regression)
     UR           0.592      1.004     1.146        1.142     0.219      0.621       1.068     1.121
                 (0.085)    (0.124) (0.161) (0.192) (0.055) (0.095) (0.171)                   (0.183)
     N           874866     874866 874866 874866 874866 874866 874866                         874866

                                           C. Add state time varying policies
     UR           0.475      0.865      0.979     0.975       0.193       0.509      0.901     0.938
                 (0.104)    (0.129)    (0.142) (0.143) (0.061) (0.103)              (0.149)   (0.141)

                                                 D. Add state linear trends
     UR           0.372      0.822      0.974        1.029       0.105      0.372    0.726     0.881
                 (0.139)    (0.156)    (0.153)      (0.157) (0.077) (0.141)         (0.142)   (0.139)

    Notes: Table shows the relationship between the unemployment rate and children having
    household private income or after-tax-and-transfer income below various multiples of the
    Historical SPM threshold. Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000-2014 and are
    collapsed to the state by year level (weighted) for Panels A, C, and D. All regressions include
    controls for state and year fixed effects. Panel A repeats our main specifications. panel B uses
    individual controls and individual data, including age dummies for the household head’s age in
    years; dummies for the head being of Hispanic ethnicity, a non-Hispanic white, a non-Hispanic
    black, or non-Hispanic other race (excludes Asian heads); dummies for household head education
    being a high school graduate, having some college, or being a college graduate; dummies or the
    number of persons in the household; a dummy for the head being male; and a dummy the head
    being married. panel C adds state-level time varying controls for the Medicaid eligibility threshold
    for pregnant women and young children, state-level EITCs, the binding minimum wage, the
    average UI replacement rate (Kuka, 2016), and the TANF guarantee. The results are weighted by
    the sum of the CPS weights in the cell. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in
    parentheses.




                                                      53
Table A.6: Effects of Cycles on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child Poverty –
                            Sensitivity to the Measure of Cycles
                          Private Income Poverty                       ATT Income Poverty
                 <50%       <100%      <150%       <200%      <50%       <100%      <150%      <200%

                                       A. Main specification (unemployment rate)
   UR            0.509       0.871      0.988     0.978        0.198    0.538        0.928      0.959
                (0.097)     (0.134)    (0.152) (0.165) (0.057) (0.096)              (0.157)    (0.151)
   % Impact       4.8         4.1        3.0       2.3          6.3      4.7          3.6        2.3

                              B. Labor market measure = employment-to-population ratio
   EPOP         -0.565      -0.728    -0.890    -0.814     -0.155    -0.530     -0.750         -0.837
                (0.080)     (0.099) (0.130) (0.140) (0.049) (0.091) (0.111)                    (0.134)

                                   C. Labor market measure = state GDP per capita
   GDP PC        0.006      -0.021     -0.262   -0.391     -0.058     -0.074      -0.151       -0.143
                (0.273)     (0.436) (0.637) (0.777) (0.157) (0.332) (0.533)                    (0.731)

   Notes: Table shows the relationship between economic cycles and children having household
   private income or after-tax-and-transfer income below various multiples of the Historical SPM
   threshold. Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000 through 2014 and are collapsed to
   the state by year level (weighted). All regressions include controls for state and year fixed effects.
   Panel A repeats our main specification, panel B uses the EPOP as the labor market measure, and
   panel C uses chained real state GDP per capita. The results are weighted by the sum of the CPS
   weights in the cell. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. Notably, none
   of the panel C regressions are statistically significant at the 5 percent level.




                                                    54
Table A.7: Effects of Unemployment Rate on Private Income and After-Tax-and-Transfer Child
               Poverty – Sensitivity to Adding Lags of the Unemployment Rate
                           Private Income Poverty                           ATT Poverty
                  <50%      <100%      <150%        <200%      <50%       <100%     <150%      <200%

                                                    A. Main specification
     UR           0.509      0.871      0.988         0.978     0.198     0.538      0.928      0.959
                 (0.097)    (0.134)    (0.152)       (0.165) (0.057) (0.096)        (0.157)    (0.151)

                                                 B. Adding one year lag
     UR(t)        0.343      0.575      0.782       0.674     0.258        0.322     0.599      0.563
                 (0.187)    (0.198)    (0.234)    (0.203) (0.071)         (0.189)   (0.222)    (0.215)
     UR(t-1)      0.205      0.366      0.255       0.376    -0.075        0.267     0.407      0.490
                 (0.166)    (0.187)    (0.260)    (0.251) (0.079)         (0.176)   (0.214)    (0.270)

                                           C. Adding one and two year lags
     UR(t)        0.468      0.604      0.829     0.811      0.289      0.427        0.742      0.688
                 (0.210)    (0.200)    (0.231) (0.214) (0.078) (0.214)              (0.234)    (0.231)
     UR(t-1)     -0.206      0.268      0.101    -0.077     -0.176     -0.081       -0.066      0.076
                 (0.276)    (0.256)    (0.310) (0.326) (0.125) (0.270)              (0.300)    (0.333)
     UR(t-2)      0.387      0.093      0.146     0.426      0.095      0.327        0.444      0.390
                 (0.181)    (0.210)    (0.260) (0.237) (0.110) (0.169)              (0.224)    (0.224)


    Notes: Table shows the relationship between the unemployment rate and children having
    household private income or after-tax-and-transfer income below various multiples of the
    Historical SPM threshold. Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 2000 through 2014 and are
    collapsed to the state by year level (weighted). All regressions include controls for state and year
    fixed effects. Panel A repeats the baseline specifications. Panel B specifications add a one-year lag
    of the unemployment rate, and panel C specifications add the one- and two-year lags of the
    unemployment rate. The results are weighted by the sum of the CPS weights in the cell. Standard
    errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. A number of the estimated coefficients on
    the lags of the poverty rate are insignificant at the 5 percent level.




                                                      55
