                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      MEASURING EFFECTS OF SNAP ON OBESITY AT THE INTENSIVE MARGIN

                                       Lorenzo N. Almada
                                         Rusty Tchernis

                                      Working Paper 22681
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22681


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Rachana Bhatt, Charles Courtemanche,
David Frisvold, Barry Hirsch, Dan Kreisman, Nikolas Mittag, Tom Mroz, Michelle Ver Ploeg, as
well as seminar participants from Abt Associates, California State University – Chico, Columbia
University Social Policy Seminar Series, Duke University, Food and Drug Administration,
Georgia State University, IMPAQ International, Western Economic Association Conference,
Southern Economic Association Conference, United States Department of Agriculture –
Economic Research Service, and the University of Maryland Baltimore County. This work was
made possible by the generous funding from the Jean Childs Fellowship as well as the American
Society of Hispanic Economists dissertation fellowship. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Lorenzo N. Almada and Rusty Tchernis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Effects of SNAP on Obesity at the Intensive Margin
Lorenzo N. Almada and Rusty Tchernis
NBER Working Paper No. 22681
September 2016
JEL No. H51,H53,I1,I38

                                          ABSTRACT

The effects of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) on obesity have been the
focus of much debate. However, causal interpretation of estimates from previous studies,
comparing participants to non-participants, is complicated by endogeneity and possible
misreporting of participation in SNAP. In this paper, we take a novel approach to examine quasi-
experimental variation in SNAP benefit amount on adult obesity. Children of SNAP households
qualify for free in-school meals, thus freeing some additional benefits for the household. A
greater proportion of school-age children eligible for free in-school meals proxies for an
exogenous increase in the amount of SNAP benefits available per adult. Using data from the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-1979 we show that school meals represent a non-trivial
part of the food budget for SNAP households. We find that increases in SNAP benefits have no
effect on obesity levels for the full sample of those who report SNAP participation. To better
isolate the effects of additional benefits from other potential changes we restrict our analysis to
adults living in households with at least one child under 5 years of age. In this setting, we find
that additional SNAP benefits reduce BMI and the probability of being obese for SNAP adults.


Lorenzo N. Almada
School of Social Work, Columbia University
1255 Amsterdam Avenue, Room 730
New York, NY 10027
lorenzo.almada@columbia.edu

Rusty Tchernis
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
rtchernis@gsu.edu
    1. INTRODUCTION
        Obesity rates among the U.S. adult population have reached staggering numbers. Flegal

et al. (2010) reports that as of 2008, over one third of U.S. adults were considered obese and that

72.3% of men and 64.1% of women were considered overweight or obese. 1 The prevalence of

obese adults hovered around 13-15% during the 1960’s and 1970’s, but striking increases in the

1980’s and 1990’s have elevated obesity rates to 31% by the year 2000 and 35.7% by 2010

(Flegal et al., 2002; Ogden et al., 2012). The increase in obesity prevalence is of major concern

to public health officials and researchers. Overweight and obese adults have a much higher risk

of developing coronary heart disease, type 2 diabetes, cancer, high blood pressure, and other

adverse health conditions (Dixon, 2010). Furthermore, obesity has surpassed cigarette smoking

as the leading cause of preventable morbidity in the United States (Jia and Lubetkin, 2010).


        The higher prevalence of obesity found in low-income households has reinforced the

focus of examining food assistance programs that are targeted to the poor. 2 The Food Stamp Act

of 1964 led to the creation of the federally funded Food Stamp Program (Supplemental Nutrition

Assistance Program or SNAP as of October 2008) in charge of reducing food insecurity and

providing adequate levels of nutrition to families with financial constraints. 3 Fewer than 10

million low-income Americans were participating in the program in the early 1970’s, but by

2014 over 46 million received some amount of SNAP benefits (USDA, 2015). The introduction

and growth of the largest food assistance program in the nation coinciding with the dramatic

increase in obesity rates has prompted the question of whether the social program that was



1
  Obesity in adults is defined as having a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 30 or higher while overweight adults fall under
a BMI range of 25-29.9. Adult BMI is calculated as weight divided by height squared (kg/m2). For more information
see http://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/assessing/bmi/.
2
  See Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Prevent and Decrease Overweight and Obesity (2001).
3
  More information about SNAP is available at http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/Legislation/Default.htm

                                                        2
implemented to reduce hunger among the poorest families in the U.S. has in fact been

contributing to the rise in obesity rates.


        Previous studies have focused on estimating the effects of SNAP on weight outcomes at

the extensive margin by comparing participants and income-eligible non participants (Baum,

2011; Fan, 2010; Gibson, 2003; Meyerhoefer and Pylypchuk, 2008; Kaushal, 2007). Overall, the

findings suggest SNAP participation may have a small positive effect on weight gain for women

and no significant effect on men. However, causal interpretation of estimates from previous

research is complicated by endogenous participation and misreporting of SNAP. Much of the

effort has centered on addressing endogenous participation into SNAP, but far less has been

spent dealing with misreporting of SNAP participation. Previous studies have shown that

misreporting of SNAP in surveys, in some instances over 30% of participants, is a serious issue

that has significant consequences when overlooked (Bitler et al., 2003; Brachet, 2008; Meyer et

al., 2009). A recent paper by Almada, McCarthy, and Tchernis analyzes the effects of

participation in SNAP on obesity and show that the estimates of the effects are exceptionally

sensitive to misreporting (Almada et al., 2016).


        This paper adds to the existing literature on SNAP and adult obesity by being the first to

estimate the causal effects of changes in SNAP benefit amount. To examine the intensive margin

effects of SNAP we focus only on households who report SNAP participation. We identify

exogenous variations in SNAP amount through changes in the proportion of school-age children

(share of family members who are between the ages of 6 and 14) in SNAP households who

qualify for in-school nutrition assistance programs (i.e. the National School Lunch Program and

School Breakfast Program). A greater proportion of school-age children eligible for free in-



                                                   3
school meals proxies for an exogenous increase in the amount of SNAP benefits available per

adult.


         Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-1979, we show that school

meals represent a non-trivial part of the food budget for the family. We find that increases in

SNAP benefits have no effect on obesity levels for the full sample of those who report SNAP

participation. To isolate the effect of SNAP from other potential changes when a child enters

school our preferred specification examines adults living in SNAP households with at least one

school-age child and at least one child under 5 years of age who is not yet school-age eligible.

For this subsample we find that increases in SNAP benefits, due to increases in the share of

children eligible for in-school meals, reduce BMI and the probability of being obese.

Specifically, when one child in a household of four becomes school-aged, adult BMI is expected

to decrease by 0.23 units (approximately 1.4 pounds assuming height of 5’5’’) and the

probability of being obese decreases by 2.58 percentage points or by about 10%.


         Intensive margin effects of SNAP are relevant to recent policy debates discussing

changes to the amount of benefits households receive through changes in allowable income

deductions as well as benefit indexing adjustments (CBO Report, 2012). Our identification

strategy allows us to estimate unbiased effects of changes in effective benefit amount for a

selective subsample of low-income households while minimizing concerns with selection and

misreporting of true SNAP participation. However, because our approach is based on a unique

subset of low-income households, we must caution against generalizing our findings to all low-

income households. Additionally, because our data do not contain direct information on child’s

in-school meal participation we use school-age eligibility as proxy for additional benefits. As



                                                 4
such, our results should be interpreted as lower bound estimates of the true effect given the

potential of attenuation bias from relying on this proxy treatment measure.


    2. BACKGROUND

2.1 SNAP Eligibility Rules and Benefits


         Basic rules of eligibility are set and administered by federal legislation and the United

States Department of Agriculture – Food and Nutrition Service. 4 Although certain eligibility

rules have been amended over time, generally household SNAP eligibility is based on income

and household size. A “Gross Income Test 5” establishes that household income must be at or

below 130% of the federal poverty line (FPL) to qualify for SNAP. The gross income limits vary

according to household size such that larger households have higher income limits. A lower

monthly income limit (100% FPL) is also considered once certain allowable deductions are

applied to household income. 6 Some states also consider a “Resources Test 7” where households

may have no more than a set amount in countable resources in order to qualify for SNAP.


         If the criteria for eligibility is met, the household is provided with an Electronic Benefit

Transfer (EBT) card, similar to a debit or credit card, which is credited with funds (SNAP

benefits) on a monthly basis that can be used to purchase food items at SNAP participating
4
  http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/Legislation/about.htm
5
  According to the state of New York “Income can include: Regular job (wages), income before strike, on-the-job-
training, military reserves, national guard, work study, alimony, child support, educational assistance (grants,
scholarships, etc.), friends or relatives (other than loans), public assistance, pensions or retirement, Supplemental
Security Income (SSI), Social Security benefits, veterans benefits, unemployment benefits, worker’s compensation,
babysitting, taxi driving, cleaning homes or other buildings, farming/ranching, income from a roomer, income from
a boarder or arts and crafts.”
6
  The “Net Income Test” allows certain amounts of standard deductions based on household size and earned income.
Deductions are also allowed for dependent care costs (when needed for work, training, or education), medical
expenses for elderly or disabled, legally owed child support payments, and certain shelter costs. After any
deductions are made, the household must not exceed a net income limit in order to pass the net income test.
7
  According to the USDA-FNS, the exact procedure for handling certain resources is determined by individual
states. Furthermore, resource test are only considered in a handful of states. (http://frac.org/federal-foodnutrition-
programs/snapfood-stamps/eligibility/)

                                                          5
stores. 8 Prior to the introduction of EBT cards in the late 1990s, SNAP benefits were issued via

mail or through local agencies in the form of monthly paper coupons or stamps. The amount of

benefits received varies according to the size, expenses, and income of each household. For

example, in 2015, a two-member household receives at most $357 per month in SNAP benefits,

and a four-member household could receive at most $649 per month. SNAP eligible households

with other income sources are allotted less than the maximum benefit amount as these

households are expected to spend a portion of their earned income on food. 9


2.2 Literature on SNAP and Obesity


        The intended purpose of SNAP is to provide adequate levels of nutrition to families in

need. However, economic theory cannot definitively predict the effect of SNAP participation on

obesity outcomes. Weight gain and SNAP participation can be modeled through an intra-

household utility maximization framework. SNAP benefits increase disposable income.

Depending on preferences, recipients may choose to maximize their utility by either using SNAP

benefits to increase food expenditure or using benefits to offset spending and increase non-food

expenditure. Fraker et al. (1995), discuss findings from cash-out experiments which provide

some evidence that the in-kind nature of SNAP benefits increase spending on food items more so

than an equivalent cash transfer. Potential reasons for the observed differences in the marginal

propensity of food consumption by SNAP participation status are considered in detail by Wilde

et al. (2009). Nevertheless, the effects of greater food expenditure on body weight are contingent

not only on the quantity, but also the nutritional quality of the diets afforded.

8
  Several restrictions are placed on SNAP benefits including the purchase of alcohol, tobacco, and pet food products
and other non-food items. The EBT system has been implemented in all States since June of 2004 (source:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/ebt/general-electronic-benefit-transfer-ebt-information)
9
  According to the USDA-FNS “The net monthly income of the household is multiplied by 0.3, and the result is
subtracted from the maximum allotment for the household size to find the household's allotment.” (source:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/eligibility)

                                                         6
       Overall, studies have found mixed evidence on the effects of SNAP participation on diet

quality and nutrient intake. Earlier research that generally ignore program selection find

deleterious effects from SNAP. For example, Wilde et al. (2000) examine food choices of a

sample of SNAP recipients and find that, on average, SNAP recipients consume greater amounts

of meats, sugars, and fats compared to non-recipients. Similarly, Whitmore (2002) finds that

recipients who are constrained by the in-kind nature of the benefits spend more on soft drinks

and juices than if they had received the equivalent amount of benefits in cash. Cole and Fox

(2008) find that SNAP participants obtain a significantly larger percentage of their total energy

intake from solid fats, alcoholic beverages, and added sugars compared to low-income

nonparticipants. In addition they find that, relative to higher-income nonparticipants, SNAP

participants are far less likely to consume sufficient quantities of vitamins and minerals.

However, more recent studies that account for selection into SNAP find more favorable effects

of participation on nutritional intake. Using variation in state-level SNAP policy, Gregory et al.

(2013) find that SNAP participants consume more whole fruits while decreasing their intake of

saturated fats and sodium compared to similar nonparticipants. Applying a similar methodology

to control for selection into SNAP, Todd and Ver Ploeg (2014) find that caloric intake from

sugar sweetened beverages is lower among current SNAP participants compared to similar

nonparticipants.


       Another potential mechanism linking SNAP to changes in body weight depends on the

timing of benefit distribution in conjunction with the harmful consequences of chronic dieting,

often referred to as the “Food Stamp Cycle”. Blackburn et al. (1989) found that a persistent

pattern of over- and under-consumption of calories (binge eating followed by periods of

restricting food intake) can lead to “permanent metabolic and physiologic alterations which


                                                 7
promote weight gain and make subsequent loss of weight more difficult” (Blackburn et al.,

1989). Chronic dieting may be an issue for SNAP participants because benefits are received on a

monthly basis. Monthly distribution of SNAP benefits may induce recipients to over-consume

foods at the beginning of the month and then unintentionally under-consume at the end of the

month when benefits are running low or completely used up. This can be particularly

problematic for the poorest participants who do not have other sources of income to help smooth

their caloric intake throughout the month. A recent report from New York City’s Human

Resources Administration (Fellner, 2012) finds that half of all SNAP recipients had redeemed

80% of their benefit allotment by the second week of receipt. Wilde and Ranney (2000) find that

SNAP recipients who shop once a month for groceries have a significantly lower caloric intake

during the week immediately prior to receiving next month’s benefits. For those who do not shop

once a month, they find that food expenditures for SNAP recipients are highest immediately after

receiving the benefits. Further evidence of chronic dieting by SNAP recipients and its adverse

effects are reported by Hastings and Washington (2008), Seligman et al. (2014), and Shapiro

(2005). If difficulties smoothing one’s food consumption can lead to weight gain then greater

amounts of benefits has the potential to reduce obesity for those receiving SNAP. Ultimately, the

effects of additional SNAP benefits on adult weight must be sought out empirically.


        In order to determine the causal effects of SNAP on obesity researchers usually must deal

with two main sources of bias. First, estimates can be biased if one does not account for non-

random selection into SNAP. 10 Second, the effects of SNAP can suffer from misreporting bias if

true participation is misclassified. Most of the literature focuses on comparing participants to

10
  Selection bias occurs if those who choose to participate in SNAP are systemically different (preferences and/or
behaviors) than those who do not, and this distinction affects weight. For example, suppose only individuals who
have a stronger preference for food, and are eligible, choose to participate in SNAP. This group would show a
positive correlation between SNAP participation and higher weight level.

                                                         8
income eligible non-participants while attempting to address issues of selection. Far less has

been done to address participation misclassification or to examine intensive margin effects of

SNAP participation on obesity.


        Ver Ploeg and Ralston (2008) and Gundersen (2015) conduct thorough reviews of the

existing literature on SNAP and adult obesity. Their analyses of the more rigorous studies in

which attempts were made to control for selection bias and time-invariant characteristics

suggests that, in general, SNAP participation appears to be positively related to BMI measures

and obesity in adult women, but has no significant impact on adult men. 11 For example, to

control for selection bias, both Baum (2011) and Gibson (2003) estimate fixed-effect models

using longitudinal survey data and find positive effects of SNAP participation on BMI and the

probability of being obese for adult women. In an attempt to control for participation

endogeneity, Meyerhoefer and Pylypchuk (2008) use variation in state-level SNAP outreach

expenditures, electronic fingerprint requirement, and recertification periods to instrument for

SNAP participation. Their estimates suggest that SNAP participation increases the probability of

being obese by 6.7% in adult women but has no significant impact on adult men. Kaushal

(2007) exploits the variation in state responses to the federal ban of SNAP benefits for

immigrants in accordance to the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity

Reconciliation Act. Estimating a difference-in-difference model, she finds that SNAP

participation is not associated with any significant increases in BMI in both adult immigrant men

and women. A more recent study by Fan (2010) applies a difference-in-difference strategy with

propensity score matching and finds no statistically significant effects of SNAP participation on

BMI or probability of being overweight or obese for low-income women.

11
  A review of the literature generally finds reductions in obesity among children of SNAP participating households
(Gundersen, 2015).

                                                         9
       A recent look at the extent of misclassification of SNAP participation in survey data

suggests the issue is quite problematic. Meyer et al. (2009) find that under-reporting of program

participation in five nationally representative surveys is highly prevalent and increases over time.

Their estimates suggest that one third of SNAP beneficiaries do not report participation in the

program which can significantly bias estimates of the effects of participation. Bitler et al. (2003)

find under-reporting of SNAP recipients by about 15 percent in both the CPS Food Security

Supplements and Survey of Income and Program Participation. Bollinger and David (1997) also

examine cases of under and over-reporting of SNAP participation in the SIPP. Although they

find that cases of over-reporting (false positives) are rare and minimal (approximately 0.3

percent), under-reporting is nontrivial and accounts for approximately 12 percent of all

responses.


       To our knowledge, only two published studies have considered participation misreporting

while estimating treatment effects of SNAP on obesity. Kreider et al. (2012) examine the effects

of SNAP participation on child obesity and other health outcomes also utilizing data from

National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). The authors simultaneously

address selection and misreporting bias using partial identification (layering process) and

bounding methods. Their analyses consider the effects of misreporting bias by testing various

restrictions on the size of the classification errors. The findings of their study suggest that SNAP

participation reduces the likelihood that a child is obese only when misreporting rates are less

than 4%. Utilizing similar methods, Almada et al. (2016) find considerable rates of SNAP

participation underreporting in the NLSY79 and that failing to account for misreporting

overstates program effects by nearly 100 percent. Taken together, these findings warrant research

that accounts for potential misreporting bias to obtain more accurate effects of SNAP on obesity.


                                                 10
        Our review of the literature points to only two studies that consider associations between

SNAP benefit amount and adult weight outcomes. Jilcott et al. (2011a) examine weight

outcomes of low income adults from the 2005-2006 NHANES. Stratifying by gender and

controlling for race, education, and age they find that receiving a greater amount of SNAP

benefits in the prior month is associated with lower BMI and waist circumference among

females. In Jilcott et al. (2011b), researchers recruited approximately 200 female SNAP

participants from eastern North Carolina to examine the associations between SNAP benefits and

multiple measures of health and wellbeing. Their study finds that adult females who receive less

than $150 in monthly SNAP benefits per child have significantly higher BMIs than females

receiving more than $150 in benefits per child. Although failing to account for selection or

misreporting, both studies show a negative relationship between benefit amount and weight

outcomes.


     3. METHODS AND DATA

        Our paper adds to the existing literature on SNAP and adult obesity by proposing a

unique identification strategy that estimates the causal effects of changes in SNAP benefit

amount. To examine intensive margin effects, we rely on a strategy that focuses only on

households who report SNAP participation. This approach minimizes our concerns with

selection and misreporting of true SNAP participation. 12 However, our approach will ultimately

only yield unbiased estimates for this selective subsample of low-income households and, as

such, we must caution against generalizing our findings to all low-income households.



12
  Our approach will inevitably include a very small percentage of non-participants who falsely report receiving
SNAP benefit while excluding individuals who under-report participation. See Almada et al. (2016) for discussions
of SNAP misreporting in the NLSY79 and its consequences for analyses in the context of obesity.

                                                       11
3.1 Identification


        Our identification strategy relies on the direct certification program enacted by The

Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act of 1986. The implementation of the program

requires States and local educational agencies to certify children from SNAP households for in-

school food assistance programs forgoing a formal application process from parents/guardians

(USDA: Moore et al., 2013; USDA: Jackson et al., 2000). By 1992, forty-five states had

implemented direct certification in school districts within their state. At the start of the 1996

school year, 48 states and Washington D.C. had used direct certification to verify the eligibility

of over 10 million students for free in-school meals, representing 72% of all students certified for

free meals that academic year (USDA: Jackson et al., 2000). Specifically, school-age children

from SNAP households are eligible to receive up to two free meals per day as part of the

National School Lunch Program (NSLP) and School Breakfast Program (SBP). 13 Furthermore,

there is no reduction in SNAP benefits once children from these households become eligible for

these in-school programs. Therefore, we can identify exogenous variations in effective benefits

from variations in the proportion of school-age children in SNAP households. As the share of

school-age children increases, the same amount of SNAP benefits are available, but are needed

for fewer in-home meals.


        We can get a sense of the income effect from the additional SNAP resources available

when children participate in the in-school meals programs by means of an example for a typical


13
  According to the USDA-FNS (http://www.fns.usda.gov/cnd/lunch/AboutLunch/NSLPFactSheet.pdf) “Children
from families with incomes at or below 130 percent of the poverty level are eligible for free meals.” The NSLP and
SBP are federally assisted meal programs for low income children attending public and nonprofit private schools.
Households who receive SNAP benefits automatically qualify NSLP and SBP. Legislation mandates states and local
education agencies to use direct certification to automatically enroll children of SNAP recipients into NSLP. The
NLSP (SBP) are administered in over 100,000 (89,000) schools nationwide and currently serves over 31 million (12
million) children each day.

                                                       12
SNAP household. In 2015 a family of four received on average $459 in SNAP benefits while

reimbursement rates for the NSLP and SBP in the contiguous states were $3.30 and $1.99,

respectively. 14,15 When a child in the household becomes school-age eligible, she automatically

qualifies for a free breakfast and lunch at school. Using these reimbursement rates, we calculate

that in a typical month with 20 school days in-school meals average to just over $100 in

additional food assistance, or approximately 23% of the average amount of SNAP benefits

allotted to this household. We consider this amount to be a conservative estimate given that meal

production at schools benefit from greater economies of scale. In addition, households that

receive less than the maximum amount of SNAP benefits (due to some earned income) would

experience an even greater percentage increase in benefit amount. To put this into perspective,

the temporary SNAP benefit increases from the 2009 American Reinvestment and Recovery Act

(ARRA) amounted to $80 a month for a family of four. 16


3.2 Econometric Model


         To estimate the effects of additional SNAP benefits on obesity we are interested in

changes in the proportion of school-age children within SNAP households. The effects can be

estimated from the following fixed-effect model:


                                Yit = c + δPSACit + βXit + αi + πt + uit                                        (1)


In equation (1) our outcome of interest, Yit, takes the form of a continuous measure of BMI and

the linear probability of being obese (BMI of 30 or more) for respondent, i, in year, t. The

14
   See CBPP report for additional information on household-level benefit receipt (http://www.cbpp.org/research/a-
quick-guide-to-snap-eligibility-and-benefits)
15
   For more information on school meal reimbursement rates see http://www.fns.usda.gov/school-meals/rates-
reimbursement
16
   Additional information on SNAP and the ARRA is available at: http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-
assistance/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-%28snap%29/arra.aspx

                                                        13
parameter of interest, δ, captures the effects of changes in the amount of available SNAP benefits

for respondent, i, on the outcomes described above. We estimate this effect for respondent, i, at

time, t, from changes in the proportion of school-age children, PSACit while controlling for a

vector of time-varying demographic controls, Xit, and unobserved individual and time fixed-

effects αi, πt. Specifically, we control for the respondents’ age, household size, education level,

income (logged and squared), as well as indicators for poverty status, marital status, employment

status, living in an urban area, and year dummies. In this setting, adult weight and the treatment

variable are reported contemporaneously. Given that SNAP receipt is reported since the prior

survey wave (1 or 2 years) as is the child aging into school eligibility, there is sufficient time for

the treatment to affect weight outcomes that we do not use time lags for our treatment measure.


       Computationally, equation (1) estimates the impact of exogenous variation in SNAP

benefit amounts on the BMI and likelihood of being obese over time within each adult

respondent. A fixed-effect approach minimizes bias stemming from the inability to control for

unobservable time-invariant characteristics that differ between respondents that may influence

weight outcomes. However, fixed-effects models are still susceptible to bias if some unobserved

characteristics that impact obesity are changing over time. We further discuss and address these

concerns in section 4.2.


       In our empirical analysis, a positive coefficient for δ would indicate that additional

benefits are contributing to weight gain for adults in SNAP households. Conversely, a negative

coefficient on δ would point to decreases in adult weight from additional SNAP benefits. More

precisely, the sign and magnitude of δ indicates how changes in SNAP benefit availability from

changes in the share of school-age children in a respondent’s household affect BMI and

likelihood of being obese.

                                                  14
3.3 Data: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth - 1979 Cohort


         The NLSY79 contains data on a nationally representative sample of 12,686 men and

women who were between the ages of 14 and 22 when they were first surveyed in 1979. The

dataset is comprised of three subsamples: 1) a cross-sectional sample of 6,111 youths designed to

be representative of non-institutionalized civilian youths, 2) A supplemental sample of 5,295

youths designed to oversample civilian Hispanic, black, and economically disadvantaged

nonblack/non-Hispanic youths 17, and 3) a military sample of 1,280 youths. The cohort was

interviewed annually through 1994 and then every two years until present time. Retention rates

for NLSY79 respondents who were still considered eligible for interviews were close to 90

percent during the first 16 waves and since then have only decreased slightly (BLS, 2012).


         The NLSY79 contains several key variables that are useful for our analysis. Measures of

weight were self-reported in pounds for the following survey years: 1981, 1982, 1985, 1986,

1988, 1989, 1990, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2008. Height

measures were self-reported in 1981, 1982 and 1985. We use the 1985 height measure to

calculate each respondent’s BMI for all the corresponding years with weight information. 18 19We

exclude from the analysis any observations without a BMI measure and females in years they

indicated being pregnant. This produces a subsample of 132,349 respondent-year observations.


         We also utilize a number of respondent demographic variables including household size,

ages of household members, indicators for race/ethnicity, gender, marital status, employment
17
   The oversampling of economically disadvantaged non-black and non-Hispanic individuals were no longer
interviewed after the 1990 survey wave.
18
   We use 1982 measures of height if height was not reported in 1985 (N=1515).
19
   Although self-reported weight and height measures could suffer from systematic reporting error that may bias
coefficient estimates, several studies have indicated that the extent of weight and height misreporting in the NLSY79
has trivial impact on coefficient estimates (Baum 2011; Cawley 2000; Lakdawalla and Philipson 2009) and that
correction methods may not be appropriate for NLSY cohorts (Courtemanche et al. 2015). Results are qualitatively
similar when adjusting for height and weight according to Cawley (2004) – available upon request.

                                                         15
status, number of hours worked per calendar year, as well as some limited measures of physical

activity. In addition, the survey collects information on the total net income of each respondent’s

household, the respondent’s (and respondents’ mother’s) highest level of education, and total

dollar amount of SNAP benefits received during the past year for each surveyed wave. The

intention of this study is to model only adults who report receiving SNAP benefits. Therefore,

we begin observing individuals in the 1985 survey wave once all respondents have reached adult

age. 20 Furthermore, we are interested only in observations for years when respondents report

receiving SNAP benefits. The final sample consists of 2,078 individual adults with BMI

measures who report receiving SNAP in at least 2 survey waves. The 2,078 adults are observed

across 15 different survey waves (unbalanced) resulting in 10,634 respondent-year observations.


        Because we are unable to determine a child’s actual in-school food assistance program

participation status in the NLSY79, we use child school-age eligibility to proxy for

participation. 21 Both direct certification efforts and identical income requirements as SNAP

make it highly probable that school-age eligible children from SNAP households are also

receiving free in-school meals (Bartfeld, 2015). Studies using different surveys reveal that a vast

majority of school-age children from SNAP households are also participating in both the NSLP

and SBP. Tchernis et al. (2012) find that 97% of children from SNAP households in the Early

Child Longitudinal Study – Kindergarten 1998 cohort participate in the NSLP, while 70% also

participate in the SBP. An examination of the 2001-2004 Survey of Income and Program

Participation finds that approximately 78% of female SNAP households have children who

receive free and/or reduced school meals (Reese, 2006). Finally, Bartfeld (2015) thoroughly


20
  Average age in the 1985 wave is 23.7 ranging from 20 – 28 years of age.
21
  NLSY79 Child and Young Adult supplement survey reveals that over 95% of surveyed children of NLSY79
respondents attend public schools where NSLP and SBP are primarily administered.

                                                    16
examines SNAP and in-school meal program participation during and after the great recession

also finding that the vast majority of SNAP participating households with children in the 2008

SIPP panels are also participating in the NSLP (90%) and SBP (72%). In this setting, we argue

that the proportion of school-age eligible children in a SNAP household is a reliable proxy for

additional benefit per household member, and any attenuation bias from using a proxy variable is

relatively minor. Consequently, our results should be interpreted as a lower bound estimate of the

true effect.


         For our analysis we use information on the age of all household members who live with

the respondent to calculate the number of school-age children living with the respondent. 22 We

consider a child to be of school-age if she is between the ages of 6 and 14 as determined on the

date of interview. We start the cutoff at six years old given that the average age when a child first

enters kindergarten is just over five and a half, and because only a small fraction (9%) of

children are older than six years old when they first enter kindergarten (U.S. Dept. of Education,

2012). Although the majority of U.S. children are enrolled in school through age 17, because of

lower NLSP and SBP participation rates among high school students due to stigma concerns and

higher average household incomes, we limit our school-age eligibility cutoff to 14 years of age

(Ralston et al., 2008). We test the sensitivity of our age restrictions in section 4.3.


3.4 Summary Statistics


         A summary of descriptive statistics for the sample of NLSY79 respondents who report

receiving SNAP benefits throughout the 15 waves are presented in Table 1. 23 The respondents


22
   Child’s date of birth, date of death, and date of interview/survey was also used to cross check the age of the
various children in the household and to address missing information in the data.
23
   We use the NLSY79 sampling weights for longitudinal analysis to calculate all descriptive statistics (variable
name: SAMPWEIGHT)

                                                         17
are grouped into three pooled survey wave categories to provide average measures over time.

Waves 1985, 1986, 1988, and 1989 are pooled in column 1, waves 1990, 1992, 1993, and 1994

in column 2, and waves 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2008 in column 3. SNAP

benefits are reported in 2008 dollars adjusted by the CPI Food and Beverage index. The

weighted sample means show that the average amount of SNAP benefits per household per year

decreases from $3,347 to $2,989 from the 1985-1989 waves to the 1990-1994 waves and down

to $1,881 for the most recent pooled waves. We see similar reductions over time of SNAP

benefits per person and per adult in households. Interestingly, average household incomes also

decrease over time. A share of the reductions in household benefits and incomes can be

attributed to the reductions in household size over time. Average number of children increases

and later decreases as household compositions change over time. We find that the percent of

respondents who hold a high school degree or higher increases over the time period indicating

the possibility of continued educational training in later years. Not surprising, the education level

of the respondent’s mother stays fairly constant. The percent of respondents who report working

20 or more hours per week in the past year increases slightly after the first pooled waves. We

find that approximately 27% of respondents were employed at least part-time during the 1985-

1989 waves, while in the later pooled waves the employment rate is closer to 31%.


       Race, ethnicity, gender, regional locations are all relatively constant over the different

time periods. In regards to various obesity measures the data do show significant increases over

time. Average BMI increases from 25.38 in the early periods to 27.38 in the middle periods and

up to 29.55 in the later periods. Obesity rates increase from 18.8% to 28% and up to 39.8% in the

later periods. The percent of respondents who are overweight or obese increases by almost 30

percentage points throughout our time period. The data show that in the latest survey waves


                                                 18
almost 70% of all respondents are considered overweight. The increases in obesity rates

observed in the NLSY79 sample of SNAP adults are slightly larger than the national average

obesity rates documented by the CDC. 24


     4. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

4.1 Individual Fixed-Effects

         Before estimating the model described in section 3.2, we first present some supporting

evidence that our proxy variable for changes in effective SNAP benefit amount (proportion of

school-age children in the household) is not endogenous to SNAP participation. We might be

concerned that parents are more likely to apply for SNAP benefits in order to make their school-

age children eligible to receive free in-school meals. 25 Such households may be more concerned

about food intake and understand the importance of nutrients which might also be related to their

own food consumption. On the other hand, parents from these households may prefer school

meals to avoid the hassle of preparing food at home which can also be related to their own food

consumption and a myriad of other unobservable factors. More generally, we might worry that

there could be selection into our treatment measure that could bias our estimates of the intensive

margin effects of SNAP benefits on adult weight.


         In column 1 of Table 2 we present the coefficient from an individual fixed-effect

regression estimating the effect of changes in the proportion of school-age children on the

probability of reporting SNAP participation among households at or below 130% of the federal

poverty line. The estimated effect is very small and statistically insignificant providing some


24
  For more information on national adult obesity rates and trends see http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html
25
  Intuitively, we suspect households are not signing up for SNAP in order for their children to receive free in-school
meals given the greater difficulties (documentation needed and recertification requirements) of applying for SNAP
relative the NSLP and SBP.

                                                         19
evidence that parents are not applying for SNAP benefits as their children become school-age

eligible, on average. The second column of Table 2 indicates that, among households who report

SNAP receipt, changes in the proportion of school-age children does not significantly impact the

amount of benefits received per household member. However, if we assume children do not

“consume” household SNAP benefits when they reach school-age, then our treatment variable

predicts a significant increase in the amount of benefits available per adult among SNAP

households (column 3, Table 2). Specifically, if one child in a household of four becomes

school-age eligible, effective SNAP benefits per adult per year would increase by about $100.

This predicted effect is surprisingly low given our assumption that children do not “consume”

any SNAP benefits once they become school-age, and we suspect it is largely due to the high

degree of underreporting of SNAP benefit amount in the survey data. Nevertheless, our treatment

variable appears to be exogenous to participation in SNAP and a reliable (and perhaps even

better) proxy for changes in effective benefits among SNAP households.


        In row 1 of Table 3 we present the estimates of changes in effective SNAP benefit

amount on adult weight outcomes using the individual fixed-effects specification described in

section 3.2. Our results are estimated using robust standard errors clustered at the individual

level. In this longitudinal framework the fixed-effects specification uses within respondent

variation to estimate treatment effects. Specifically, we are interested in the variation of effective

SNAP benefits from changes in the proportion of school-age children within each respondent’s

household, net of household demographic factors and yearly indicators. 26




26
  In our dataset 85% of the observations experience changes in the share of school-age children over time while
only 15% experienced no variation.

                                                        20
        Our coefficient estimates have signs consistent with a positive, albeit minute,

relationship between SNAP benefits and obesity. The estimated point estimate for BMI suggests

that additional SNAP benefits available to adults when one child in a household of four becomes

school-age eligible (PSAC from 0 to 0.25), increases adult BMI by 0.036 units. This effect

amounts to an increase of approximately 0.2 pounds for a typical 5’5’’ (65 inches) tall

individual. We find an even smaller and statistically insignificant percentage point increase for

the probability of being obese. Overall, we find that additional SNAP benefits have no effect on

adult weight outcomes. Thus far, our intensive margin results are in line with previous work that

finds no effect of SNAP participation on obesity (Fan, 2010; Kaushal, 2007).


4.2 Subsample Analysis


        In this section we examine a subsample of our SNAP respondents in an attempt to isolate

the effect of increased benefits versus other potential mechanism affecting obesity. When

children enter school there are many changes at the household level that are not accounted for in

a fixed-effect framework. For example, when a child enters school time spent on childcare can

be replaced with other activities that influence obesity such as devoting more time to

employment, preparing home cooked meals, exercising, sleeping, etc. Courtemanche (2009) and

Ruhm (2005) separately show that additional hours dedicated to labor force participation lead to

increases in BMI and the probability of being obese in adults. To eliminate some of these

channels we concentrate on a subsample of individuals living with at least one child under the

age of five for every year of participation. Focusing on households with at least one child who is

not yet school-age eligible allows us to isolate the exogenous increase in SNAP availability from




                                                21
other behavioral changes. 27 Morrill (2011) applies a similar strategy in which a child’s youngest

sibling’s eligibility for kindergarten is used to instrument for maternal labor force participation.


        To examine how the age of the youngest child affects employment decisions among our

low-income sample of NLSY79 households we estimate the model from section 3.2 on labor

force participation outcomes. In Table 4 we present the regression coefficients for changes in the

proportion of school-age children on an indicator for working 20 or more hours per week in the

last year and two measures of the number of hours worked in the past year. The first panel of

Table 4 presents the results for the full sample of SNAP adults (row 1) and the subsample of

SNAP adults living with at least one child under the age of five (row 2). The results suggest that

adults in SNAP households living with children who are not yet school-age eligible are

significantly less likely to be employed at least part-time and, if employed, less likely to work

more hours when the proportion of school-age children increases. We examine the same

relationship for SNAP income-eligible adults who do not report receiving benefits in the second

panel (rows 3 and 4) and third panel (row 5 and 6) of Table 4. We find similar differences, yet

less pronounced, for adults who do not report receiving SNAP with incomes at or below 130% of

the federal poverty line (rows 3 and 4). The differences for the full and subsample of adults

between 130% and 200% of the federal poverty line who do not report receiving SNAP (rows 5

and 6) are less evident. More generally, these findings provide some evidence that we can better

isolate the effects of SNAP from unobserved potential changes in behavior by focusing on adults

living in households with at least one child who is not yet school-age eligible.



27
  The American Time Use Survey reports average hours per day spent on various activities by presence and age of
youngest child in the household. According to the 2012 ATUS, adults living in households with the youngest child
under the age of 6 spend, on average, 30 minutes less (60 minutes less if not employed) on leisure and sport
activities (exercise, socializing, watching TV, relaxing, playing games and computer use, etc.) per day compared to
adults in households with the youngest child between 6-17 years of age.

                                                        22
        The effect of additional SNAP benefits on obesity outcomes for both the full sample and

the subsample of SNAP adults with at least one child under the age of five are presented in panel

1 of Table 3. As described earlier, row 1 of Table 3 presents the results for the fixed-effects

specification that controls for time-varying demographic characteristics and year dummies on the

full sample of SNAP adults. The results for the subsample of SNAP adults are presented in row 2

of Table 3 with a separate obesity outcome under each column. For the sample of SNAP adults

living in households with at least one child under five years of age we find that greater amounts

of SNAP benefits significantly reduce adult BMI. The effect on BMI has the opposite sign

compared to the point estimate for the full sample of SNAP adults (-0.924 versus 0.143) and is

statistically significant at the 5% level. Our results indicate that, for adults living with a child

under the age of five, additional SNAP benefits from one child entering school in a household of

four reduces adult BMI by 0.23 units (-0.924 x 0.25). Once again, if we consider an individual

with a height of 5’5’’ (65 inches), the estimated reduction in body weight is approximately 1.4

pounds. We find that the effect on the probability of being obese is also reversed and

substantially larger in magnitude compared to the estimate for the full sample of SNAP adults (-

0.101 versus 0.005). 28 The coefficient estimate suggests that one child entering school (from a

household of four) decreases the probability an adult is obese by 2.53 (-0.101 x 0.25) percentage

points, statistically significant at the 5% level. This is equivalent to approximately a 10%

reduction in obesity. 29 The subsample of SNAP recipients with at least one non-school-aged

child consist of fewer observations (4,929 compared to 10,634 from the full sample), but we are



28
   The reductions in BMI fall primarily on respondents who are obese. We do not find increases in the underweight
category suggesting the reductions in BMI are towards healthier levels of weight. Previous versions of this paper
examined underweight, overweight, and severely obese categories and found no meaningful effects. The results are
available upon request.
29
   Baseline obesity rate for subsample of SNAP adults living with at least one child less than 5 years of age is
25.4%.

                                                       23
better able to isolate the direct effects of SNAP on this smaller sample. The sign reversal of our

effects suggests that the full sample estimates may be affected by other potential channels

affecting weight when all children enter school.


4.3 Sensitivity Analyses and Robustness Checks


         In this section we discuss sensitivity analyses that further propose the effects on obesity

outcomes are driven primarily by additional SNAP benefit receipt from children entering school.

First, we estimate the effect of changes in the proportion of school-age children on obesity for

income eligible non-SNAP participating households. If we find changes in obesity levels in these

adults it would not be due to SNAP benefits, but rather other mechanisms. 30 Next, we perform

sensitivity tests on the school-eligible age cutoffs. If we find effects of SNAP on obesity when

children are not old enough to participate in the SBP and NSLP then it is possible that changes in

weight are driven by other mechanisms.


         To examine how changes in the proportion of school-age children affect weight outcomes

of non-SNAP adults we use the sample of NLSY79 respondents who do not report receiving

SNAP and who have household incomes at or below 130% of the federal poverty level. The

results for the full sample of income-eligible non-participants and the subsample of these non-

participants with at least one child not yet school-age eligible are presented in panel 2 of Table 3.

The results from row 3 suggest that changes in the proportion of school-age children increase

both BMI (0.358) and the probability of being obese (0.0297) for income eligible non-SNAP

adults. In row 4 we restrict the sample to those income-eligible adults who do not report


30
   We suspect that many of the income eligible non-participants are indeed receiving SNAP but incorrectly reporting
their status and potentially bias the comparisons. Meyer et al. (2009) find that false negative rates of SNAP reporting
in survey data can be over 30%. For further discussion on SNAP misreporting rates and its implications particular to
the NLSY79 see Almada et al. (2016).

                                                          24
participating in SNAP living in households with at least one child who is not yet school-age

eligible. Although still positive in magnitude, we no longer find a statistically significant effect

on BMI or the probability of being obese. We perform similar analysis for non-SNAP reporting

adults with incomes between 130% and 200% of the federal poverty lines (panel 3) in rows 5 and

6 of Table 3. For this group, the point estimates more closely resemble those of the SNAP

sample, but are measured with less precision. Eligibility for reduced priced lunches and

breakfasts for this less disadvantaged group may help explain the resemblance to our SNAP

sample point estimates. 31


           To further test whether our findings are in fact driven by additional SNAP benefits rather

than other potential mechanisms when children enter school we examine the interaction of SNAP

participation and the proportion of school-age children on weight outcomes. This approach is

analogous to a difference-in-difference design that estimates the effect of SNAP on adult obesity

before and after children are school-age eligible (with varying degrees of intensity). Each panel

in Table 5 presents the point estimates for the interaction term between proportion of school-age

children and a SNAP dummy variable for the adults in the two different income groups. In the

first panel of Table 5 we combine the sample of adults who report receiving SNAP benefits with

the sample of adults living in households at or below 130% of the federal poverty level who did

not report participating in SNAP. Our analysis for the sample of adults living in households with

at least one child less than 5 years of age (row 2) shows that a greater availability of SNAP

benefits from increases in the proportion of school-age children significantly reduces adult BMI

and the probability of being obese for adults who report participating in SNAP relative to adults

who report no participation. The intensive margin effects of SNAP on obesity are seen primarily


31
     Children qualify for reduced price meals if family income is between 130% - 185% of the FPL (USDA-FNS).

                                                        25
for the poorer income group (at or below 130% FPL). We find smaller and less precise effects

for the sample of adults between 130% and 200% of the federal poverty level whose children are

only eligible for reduced price lunches and breakfasts. Altogether, these results are suggestive

that the reductions in obesity found in section 4.2 are driven primarily by increases in SNAP

benefits.


        We next test whether our results are sensitive to age of school eligibility. We repeat the

analyses performed above but now assume school-age eligibility to be between the ages of 4 and

14 rather than ages 6 to 14. This analysis allows us to test whether other sources of benefits may

increase the availability of SNAP resources for adults with children who are slightly younger

than the average age of entering kindergarten. For example, mothers with children up to the age

of 5 are eligible to receive WIC benefits for additional food purchases. 32 Similarly, some

children may be receiving other in-school meals available through Head Start or other preschool

programs. Panel 1 of Table 6 presents the results for the new school-age eligibility cutoff of 4-

14. Additional SNAP benefits have no significant effect on adult obesity levels for the full

sample of adults using the younger school-age eligibility cutoff (row 1 of Table 6). The results

from row 2 (households with a younger child present) appear closer in magnitude but are not

statistically significant relative to the results from our preferred age eligibility cutoff (ages 6 –

14). We do not find strong evidence that suggests WIC or preschool programs, in conjunction

with SNAP, affect adult obesity levels. Rows 3 and 4 of Table 6 present the estimated effects

when we expand the age cutoff to also include children in high school (ages 6 – 18). For this

range, the point estimates are similar but less precise compared to those using our preferred age

cutoff range. We posit the difference could be attributed to lower NSLP and SBP participation

32
  Our results are robust to the inclusion of a WIC dummy control variable which is not available prior to 1990.
Results are not shown but available upon request.

                                                        26
rates among high school-aged children (Ralston et al., 2008). The likelihood that older children

consume larger amounts of food, and thus use more household SNAP benefits, could also

explain our findings.


       We further explore whether our findings differ by gender. In Tables 7 and 8 we re-

estimate our main results from Table 3, limiting our analysis to only women and only men,

respectively. In general, stratifying across gender reveals that the reductions in BMI and obesity

found in the full sample of adults are driven primarily by women SNAP participants. The effects

of additional SNAP benefits on women with at least one child less than 5 (Row 2, Table 7) are

very similar, and in fact slightly larger, to the estimates from the full sample with younger

children (Row 2, Table 3). The decrease in the probability of being obese for women is

significant at the 1% level. For men we find smaller effects, albeit in the same direction, which

are not statistically significant at conventional levels (Row 2, Table 8). The results for income-

eligible women and men who report not receiving SNAP benefits are largely mixed, with some

evidence suggesting that increases in the proportion of school-age children increase BMI in

women (Row 3, Table 7) and increase the probability of being obese for men (Rows 3 and 4,

Table 8).


       As a final check, we test whether our findings are sensitive to fluctuations in SNAP

participation status. In the first panel of Table 9 we present results from specifications that limit

the analysis to respondents who reported receiving SNAP benefits in 4 or more consecutive

waves. The results presented in panels 2 and 3 of Table 9 are from income-eligible and near

income-eligible respondents who reported never receiving SNAP benefits in any of the survey

waves. For our preferred group, adults with a child less than 5 (Row 2, Table 9), we find that the

results are robust to the continuous participation specification, but the effects are not estimated

                                                  27
with more precision. For all SNAP reporting adults (Row 1, Table 9), there appears to be some

evidence that an increase in SNAP benefits has a small positive effect on BMI but not significant

effect on the likelihood of becoming obese.


  5. DISCUSSION

       In this paper we present the first causal effects of additional SNAP benefits on adult

obesity. Our focus is only on individuals who report SNAP participation and we use variation in

household composition to examine differences in the effective amount of SNAP benefits

available to adults in the NLSY79. We find no effect of increased SNAP benefits on weight

outcomes for the full sample. In our preferred specification we find that additional SNAP

benefits per adult, proxied by a greater proportion of school-age children in the household,

decreases weight among adult recipients. Specifically, when one child in a household of four

enters school, adult BMI is expected to decrease by 0.23 units (roughly 1.4 pounds) while the

probability of being obese decreases by about 10% or 2.58 percentage points. Our causal

estimates are in line with the negative relationship between SNAP amount and BMI levels found

in Jilcott et al. (2011a) and Jilcott et al. (2011b). More broadly, our findings fit with the body of

literature exploring the causal effects of earned and unearned income transfers on weight

(Cawley et al., 2010; Lakdawalla et al., 2005; Schmeiser, 2009).


       There are a number of possible mechanisms discussed in the literature that can explain

reductions in BMI and the likelihood of being obese from exogenous increases in SNAP

benefits. Decreases in BMI levels from increases in SNAP benefits may be the result of a

transition from lower quality (cheap) to higher quality (more expensive) foods that help maintain

or even reduce weight (Drewnowki and Specter, 2004; Meyerhoefer and Yang, 2011). Another


                                                  28
potential mechanism may be that additional SNAP benefits are alleviating the negative

consequences of chronic dieting stemming from the “Food Stamp Cycle” hypothesis (Ver Ploeg

and Ralston, 2008; Meyerhoefer and Yang, 2011). An increase of SNAP benefits to households

with little to no additional sources of income may be providing enough income to purchase food

for the entire month greatly reducing the need to restrict consumption and calories towards the

end of the cycle. Finally, we cannot rule out the possibility of a pure income effect from

additional SNAP benefits that frees up non-SNAP income for the consumption of goods that

promote weight loss. However, our analysis on non-SNAP reporting adults suggests that the pure

income effect may not be the primary driver of our findings.


       Our findings have several implications relevant to current deliberations regarding SNAP

policy. On April of 2012, the Congressional Budget Office discussed the possibilities of

changing benefit amounts by adjusting how SNAP is indexed with the Thrifty Food Plan or by

changing the number and/or amount of deductions from individuals’ gross income. Likewise, the

American Reinvestment and Recovery Act (ARRA) of 2009 included provisions that increased

the amount of SNAP benefits available to participants by approximately 15 percent. Recent

legislation repealed the ARRA benefit increases in late 2013 resulting in approximately a 10

percent drop in overall benefits per household amounting to a little over one dollar in benefits per

day for a family of four. Based on our results, intensive margin changes could have significant

impacts on the prevalence of obesity among SNAP recipients. Presumably, decreasing the

amount of SNAP benefits to each household could amount to significant cuts in government

spending but may have adverse health consequences to the millions of households who rely on

these benefits. However, again, we caution against generalizing our findings to the entire

population of low-income households. The effects we find are only valid among a subset of


                                                29
SNAP households. Furthermore, government policies that change the generosity of SNAP have

the potential to increase or decrease overall participation further complicating the external

validity of our findings.


       Future research is needed to help uncover the exact mechanisms through which a greater

amount of SNAP benefits leads to healthier weight outcomes. Using consumer expenditure or

administrative data to examine purchasing behavior and redemption patterns amongst SNAP

households with and without school-age children could shed light on such mechanisms involving

food choice. Changes in food choices amongst adults with school-age children could stem from

healthier eating habits learned in school and then brought home. Healthier eating habits learned

at school in conjunction with an exogenous increase in SNAP may help explain the weight loss

we find among adult SNAP recipients in the NLSY79. Future work should also examine food

consumption choices of SNAP recipients pre and post-ARRA policy changes to provide

additional insights on purchasing behavior and redemption patterns given changes in SNAP

benefit amounts.




                                                 30
                                            References

Almada, L., McCarthy, I., and Tchernis, R. (2016). What can we learn about Food Stamps in the
        Presence of Misreporting? American Journal of Agricultural Economics. 98 (4): 997-
        1017.
Bartfeld, J. (2015). SNAP and the School Meal Programs. In Bartfeld J., C. Gundersen, T.
        Smeeding, J Ziliak. Editors. SNAP Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Well
        Being. Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press.
Baum, C. (2011). The Effects of Food Stamps on Obesity. Southern Economic Journal, Southern
        Economic Association, vol. 77(3), pages 623-651, January.
Bitler, M., J. Currie and J. K. Scholz. (2003). WIC Eligibility and Participation. Journal of
        Human Resources, 38:S, 1139-1179.
Blackburn, G., L., Wilson, G., T., Kanders, B., S., Stein, L., J., Lavin, P., T., Adler, J., Brownell,
        K., D. (1989)Weight Cycling: the Experience of Human Dieters. American Journal of
        Clinical Nutrition, 49, 1105-1109.
Bollinger, Christopher R., & Martin David. (1997). Modeling discrete choice with response
        error: food stamp participation. Journal of the American Statistical Association 92: 827-
        835.
Brachet, T., (2008). Maternal smoking, misclassification, and infant health. In: University of
        Pennsylvania Working Paper.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. (2012) National Longitudinal Survey of
        Youth 1979 cohort, 1979-2010 (rounds 1-24). Produced and distributed by the Center for
        Human Resource Research, The Ohio State University. Columbus, OH.
Cawley, J. (2000). Body Weight and Women's Labor Market Outcomes. Working Paper No.
        7841, National Bureau of Economic Research. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Cawley, J. (2004).The Impact of Obesity on Wages. Journal of Human Resources. 39 (2): 451-
        474.
Cawley, J., Moran, J., Simon, K. (2010) The impact of income on the weight of elderly
        Americans. Health Economics, 19(8): 979-993
Congresstional Budget Office. (2012). The Supplemental Nutrition Assitance Program.
        http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/04-19-SNAP.pdf (April
        2012).
Courtemanche, C. (2009). Longer Hours and Larger Waistlines? The Relationship between Work
        Hours and Obesity. Forum for Health Economimcs and Policy, 12(2), 1-31.
Courtemanche, C., Pinkston, J., and Stewart, J. (2015). Adjusting Body Mass for Measurement
        Error with Invalid Validation Data. Economics and Human Biology. (forthcoming).
Dixon, J.B. (2010). The effect of obesity on health outcomes. Molecular and Cellular
        Endocrinology 316, 104–108.
Drewnowski, A. and Specter, S. (2004). Poverty and obesity: the role of energy density and
        energy costs. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 79:6–16.


                                                 31
Fan, M. (2010) Do Food Stamps Contribute to Obesity in Low-Income Women? American
         Journal of Agricultural Economics, 92 (4), 1165-1180.
Fellner, K. (2012). Analysis of Food Stamp Benefit Redemption Patters in New York City. New
         York City Human Resources Adminsitration Office of Evaluation and Research.
Flegal, K., M., Margaret D. Carroll, Cynthia L. Ogden, & Clifford L. Johnson. (2002).
         Prevalence and trends in obesity among U.S. adults, 1999-2000. Journal of the American
         Medical Association. 288: 1723-1727.
Flegal, K., M., Carroll, M., D., Ogden, C., L., Curtin, L., R. (2010). Prevalence and Trends in
         Obesity Among US Adults, 1999-2008. Journal of the American Medical Association,
         303 (3), 235-241.
Fraker, T., M., Martini, A., P., Ohls, J., C. (1995). The Effect of Food Stamp Cashout on Food
         Expenditures: An Assessment of the Findings from Four Demonstrations. Journal of
         Human Resources, 30 (4), 633-649.
Gibson, D. (2003). Food Stamp Program Participation Is Positively Related to Obesity in Low
         Income Women. Journal of Nutrition. 133:2225-31.
Gregory, Christian, Michelle Ver Ploeg, Margaret Andrews, Alisha Coleman-Jensen.
         Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Participation Leads to Modest
         Changes in Diet Quality, ERR-147, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
         Service, April 2013.
Gundersen, C. (2015). SNAP and Obesity. In J. Bartfield, C. Gundersen, T. Smeeting and J.
         Ziliak (eds.), SNAP Matters: How Food Stamps Affect Health and Well Being. Redwood
         City, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hastings J. & Washington E., (2010). The First of the Month Effect: Consumer Behavior and
         Store Responses. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, American Economic
         Association, vol. 2(2), pages 142-62, May.
Hofferth, S. L., & Curtin, S. (2005). Poverty, food programs, and childhood obesity. Journal of
         Policy Analysis and Management, 24(4), 703-726.
Jia, H., & Lubetkin, E. I. (2010). Trends in quality-adjusted life-years lost contributed by
         smoking and obesity. American journal of preventive medicine. 38(2), 138-144.
Jilcott, S.B., Liu H., DuBose, K.D., Chen, S.E., and Kranz, S. (2011). Food stamp participation is
         associated with fewer meals away from home, yet higher body mass index and waist
         circumference in a nationally representative sample. Journal of Nutrition Education and
         Behavior.43:110-15.
Jilcott, S.B., Wall-Bassett, E.D., Burke, S.C., and Moore, J.B. (2011). Associations between
         Food Insecurity, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Benefits, and Body
         Mass Index among Adult Females. Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 1741-
         45.
Kaushal, N. (2007). Do Food Stamps Cause Obesity? Evidence from Immigrant Experience.
         Journal of Health Economics 26 (5): 968–991.



                                               32
Kreider, B., Pepper, J.V., Gunderson, C., & Jolliffe, D. (2012). Identifying the Effects of
       SNAP(Food Stamps) on Child Health Outcomes When Participation is Endogenous and
       Misreported. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107:499, 958-975.
Lakdawalla, D., Philipson, T., and Bhattacharya, J. (2005). Welfare-Enhancing Technological
       Change and the Growth of Obesity. American Economic Review, 95(2): 253-257.
Lakdawalla, D. and Philipson, T. (2009). The Growth of Obesity and Technological Change.
       Economics and Human Biology, Elsevier, vol. 7(3), pages 283-293, December.
Meyer, B., Mok, W., Sullivan, J. (2009). The Under-reporting of Transfers In Household
       Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences. NBER Working Paper No. 15181, National
       Bureau of Economic Research. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
Meyerhoefer, C.D., and Y. Pylypchuk (2008). Does Participating in the Food Stamp Program
       Increase the Prevalence of Obesity and Health Care Spending? American Journal of
       Agricultural Economics. January.
Meyerhoefer, C.D., and Yang, M. (2011). The Relationship between Food Assistance and
       Health: A Review of the Literature and Empirical Strategies for Identifying Program
       Effects. Applied Economic Perspective and Policy.
Morrill, M. (2011). The effects of maternal employment on the health of school-age children.
       Journal of Health Economics, 30 (2011), pp. 240–257
Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. (2012). Prevalence of obesity in the United States,
       2009–2010. NCHS data brief, no 82. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health
       Statistics.
Ralston, Katherine, Constance Newman, Annette Clauson, Joanne Guthrie, and Jean Buzby. The
       National School Lunch Program: Background, Trends and Issues. ERR-61, U.S. Dept. of
       Agri., Econ. Res. Serv. July 2008.
Reese, K. (2006). An Analysis of the Characteristics of Multiple Program Participation Using the
       Survey of Income and Program Participation. SIPP Working Paper 246. US Census
       Bureau.
Ruhm C. (2005). Healthy Living in Hard Times. Journal of Health Economics. 24(2): 341-363.
Schmeiser, M. (2009). Expanding Wallets and Waistlines: The Impact of Family Income on the
       BMI of Women and Men Eligible for the Earned Income Tax Credit. Journal of Health
       Economics, 18(11), 1277-1294.
Seligman HK, Bolger AF, Guzman D, Lopez A, Bibbins-Domingo K. (2014). Exhaustion of
       food budgets at month's end and hospital admissions for hypoglycemia. Health Affairs.
       33(1):116–23.
Shapiro, J., M. (2005). Is There a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence From the Food Stamp
       Nutrition Cycle. Journal of Public Economic. 89, 303-323.
Surgeon General. (2001). The Surgeon General’s Call to Action To Prevent and Decrease
       Overweight and Obesity. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
       Service, Office of the Surgeon General, Rockville, MD.



                                              33
Todd, J.E., and Ver Ploeg, M. (2014). Caloric Beverage Intake Among Adult Supplemental
       Nutrition Assistance Program Participants. American Journal of Public Health. 104, 80-
       85.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, Office of Analysis, Nutrition and
       Evaluation, Study of Direct Certification in the National School Lunch Program, CN-00-
       DC, by Kenneth Jackson, Phil Gleason, John Hall, and Rhonda Strauss. Project Officer,
       Matthew Sinn. Alexandria, VA: 2000.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, Office of Research, Nutrition and
       Analysis, Diet Quality of Americans by Food Stamp Participation Status: Data from the
       National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999-2004, by Nancy Cole and Mary
       Kay Fox. Project Officer: Jenny Laster Genser, Alexandria, VA: 2008.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, Office of Policy Support, Direct
       Certification in the National Lunch Program: State Implementation Progress, School
       Year 2012–2013 by Quinn Moore, Kevin Conway, Brandon Kyler, and Andrew Gothro.
       Project Officer Dennis Ranalli. Report CN-13-DC. Alexandria, VA: November 2013.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Participation and
       Costs, 1969-2014. National Level Annual Summary. January, 2015
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Early Childhood
       Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 2010-11 (ECLS-K:2011), Preliminary
       Restricted-Use Data File. see Digest of Education Statistics 2012
Ver Ploeg, M., Ralston, K. (2008). Food Stamps and Obesity. What Do We Know? USDA
       Economic Information Bulletin, 34.
Whitmore, D. (2002). What Are Food Stamps Worth? Princeton University, Industrial Relations
       Section, Working Paper 468.
Wilde, P., E., McNamara, P., E., Ranney, C., K. (2000). The Effect on Dietary Quality of
       Participation in the Food Stamp and WIC Programs. USDA, Food and Rural Economics
       Division, Economic Research Service, Food Assistance and Nutrition Research Report
       Number 9.
Wilde, P., E., Ranney, C., K. (2000). The Monthly Food Stamp Cycle: Shopping Frequency and
       Food Intake Decisions in an Endogenous Switching Regression Framework. American
       Journal of Agricultural Economics, 82, 200-213.
Wilde, P., L. M. Troy, and B. L. Rogers. (2009). Food Stamps and Food Spending: An Engel
       Function Approach. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 91(2), 416-430.




                                             34
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of NLSY79 SNAP Recipients Over Time
                                                                             (1)             (2)              (3)
Variable Name                                                             1985-1989       1990-1994        1996-2008
SNAP Benefits per HH per year (2008 USD)                                      3,347             2,989           1,881
                                                                             [5,920]           [2,550]         [1,990]
SNAP Benefits per Person in HH per year (2008 USD)                             969               877             699
                                                                             [1,603]            [670]           [648]
SNAP Benefits per Adult in HH per year (2008 USD)                             2,246             2,380           1,674
                                                                             [4,502]           [1,951]         [1,900]
Total Net Family Income per year (2008 USD)                                  22,518            19,310          17,099
                                                                            [82,960]          [14,252]        [16,508]
Age (years)                                                                   25.64             30.87           40.08
                                                                              [2.68]            [2.68]          [4.67]
Household Size                                                                 3.86              3.67            2.91
                                                                              [1.78]            [1.78]          [1.69]
Number of Children                                                             1.96              2.17            1.64
                                                                              [1.38]            [1.51]          [1.55]
Proportion of Children in HH                                                  0.466             0.525           0.435
                                                                             [0.228]           [0.256]         [0.310]
Proportion of School-Age Ch. in HH                                            0.172             0.288           0.251
                                                                             [0.207]           [0.248]         [0.261]
Education (1= High School or more)                                            0.606             0.669           0.738
                                                                             [0.488]           [0.470]         [0.439]
Mother’s Education (1= High School or more)                                   0.357             0.374           0.379
                                                                             [0.479]           [0.484]         [0.485]
Employed (1= Worked 20 hrs./wk. or more past year)                            0.267             0.314           0.305
                                                                             [0.468]           [0.464]         [0.500]
Hours Worked per year if Employed                                             1,812             1,916           2,040
                                                                              [667]             [594]           [830]
Marital Status (1= Married)                                                   0.337             0.324           0.236
                                                                             [0.473]           [0.468]         [0.424]
Urban (1= lives in urban area)                                                0.699             0.746           0.682
                                                                             [0.458]           [0.435]         [0.465]
Hispanic (1= Hispanic)                                                        0.104             0.113           0.100
                                                                             [0.305]           [0.317]         [0.300]
Black (1= Black)                                                              0.353             0.356           0.342
                                                                             [0.478]           [0.479]         [0.475]
Female (1= Female)                                                            0.766             0.695           0.696
                                                                             [0.422]           [0.460]         [0.460]
Body Mass Index                                                               25.38             27.38           29.55
                                                                              [6.09]            [6.70]          [7.59]
Obese (1= BMI equal to 30 or more)                                            0.188             0.280           0.398
                                                                             [0.391]           [0.449]         [0.489]
Overweight (1= BMI equal to 25 or more)                                       0.409             0.574           0.698
                                                                             [0.491]           [0.495]         [0.459]
Underweight (1= BMI equal to 18.5 or less)                                    0.064             0.034           0.019
                                                                             [0.246]           [0.180]         [0.135]
WIC (1= currently participates in WIC)                                           -              0.247           0.141
                                                                                               [0.431]         [0.347]
Number of Observations                                                        3,608             3,745           3,281
Note: Weighted sample means with standard errors in brackets using NLSY79 sample weights for longitudinal analyses. All
SNAP benefits are reported in 2008 dollars adjusted by the CPI Food and Beverage Index. Total Net Family Income is
reported in 2008 dollars adjusted by the CPI Index.




                                                           35
Table 2: Changes in the Proportion of School-age Children on SNAP Participation and
Benefit Amount
                                            (1)              (2)             (3)
VARIABLES                                 SNAP         Benefits per     Benefits per
                                       Participation Person in HH       Adult in HH
Proportion of School-Age Children         0.0208           -70.99         431.0***
                                         (0.0175)         (51.87)          (154.2)

Household Demographic Controls                  Y                Y                   Y
Year Dummies                                    Y                Y                   Y
Observations                                 25,256            10,634             10,634
R-squared                                     0.095             0.072              0.111
Number of Respondents                         6,152             2,078              2,078

Note: Column 1 provides estimates from an individual fixed-effect specification of changes in
the proportion of school-age children on SNAP participation status for all households at or
below 130% of the Federal Poverty Line. Column 2 provides estimates from an individual
fixed-effect specification of changes in the proportion of school-age children on SNAP benefits
per person among households reporting SNAP receipt. Column 3 provides estimates from an
individual fixed-effect specification of changes in the proportion of school-age children on
SNAP benefits per adult among households reporting SNAP receipt. All specifications include
time-varying household demographic controls and year indicators. Robust standard errors in
parentheses clustered on individuals *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                              36
Table 3: Proportion of School-age Children on Adult Obesity by SNAP
Reporting Status and Household Income Level
                                                (1)          (2)
VARIABLES (Specification)                      BMI       Pr(Obese)  N-T
                                                         BMI ≥ 30
Panel 1: SNAP Recipients
(1) Proportion of School-Age Children              0.143      0.00526     10,634
 (Full Sample)                                    (0.194)     (0.0189)

(2) Proportion of School-Age Children            -0.924**     -0.101**     4,929
 (HHs with Child < 5)                             (0.435)     (0.0402)

Panel 2: Non-SNAP ≤130% FPL
(3) Proportion of School-Age Children            0.358**      0.0297*     16,336
 (Full Sample)                                   (0.173)      (0.0169)

(4) Proportion of School-Age Children              0.278       0.0415      4,784
 (HHs with Child < 5)                             (0.437)     (0.0401)

Panel 3: Non-SNAP 130% – 200% FPL
(5) Proportion of School-Age Children            -0.0841       -0.0155    15,082
 (Full Sample)                                   (0.133)      (0.0165)

(6) Proportion of School-Age Children              -0.276      -0.0579     5,413
 (HHs with Child < 5)                             (0.373)     (0.0469)

Note: Results from Column 2 are estimated using an individual fixed-effect linear
probability model. Row 1 examines the changes in the proportion of school-age
children in SNAP households on obesity. Row 2 examines SNAP households with
at least one child under the age of five. Rows 3 and 5 examine adults who do not
report using SNAP benefits at or below 130% and between 130% and 200% of the
Federal Poverty Level, respectively. Rows 4 and 6 restrict each income group
subsample to adults living in households with a child under the age of five. All
specifications include time-varying household demographic controls and year
indicators. Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered on individuals ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                        37
Table 4: Living with Children Who Are Not yet School Eligible Significantly Reduces
Adult Labor Force Participation
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)
VARIABLES (Sample)                   Employed        Hours       Zero Hours N-T
                                       PT or +    Worked/yr. Worked/yr.
Panel 1: SNAP Recipients
(1) Proportion of School-Age Children      0.129***       256.3***       -0.124***    10,634
 (Full Sample)                             (0.0223)        (44.20)        (0.0256)

(2) Proportion of School-Age Children        0.0591         127.6         -0.0832      4,929
 (HHs with Child < 5)                       (0.0437)       (80.04)       (0.0513)

Panel 2: Non-SNAP ≤130% FPL
(3) Proportion of School-Age Children      0.113***       199.1***      -0.0859***    16,336
 (Full Sample)                             (0.0245)        (53.54)        (0.0229)

(4) Proportion of School-Age Children        0.0834         52.15         -0.107*      4,784
 (HHs with Child < 5)                       (0.0606)       (131.9)       (0.0587)

Panel 3: Non-SNAP 130% – 200% FPL
(5) Proportion of School-Age Children       0.0357*         59.19         -0.0189     15,082
 (Full Sample)                              (0.0215)       (53.04)       (0.0167)

(6) Proportion of School-Age Children        0.0854         192.9         -0.0273      5,413
 (HHs with Child < 5)                       (0.0519)       (152.0)       (0.0488)

Note: Column 1 provides estimates from an individual fixed-effect specification of changes
in the proportion of school-age children on an indicator of part-time or more employment
status. Column 2 provides estimates from an individual fixed-effect specification of changes
in the proportion of school-age children on number of hours worked in the past year.
Column 3 provides estimates from an individual fixed-effect specification of changes in the
proportion of school-age children on an indicator for working zero hours in the past year. All
specifications include time-varying household demographic controls and year indicators.
Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered on individuals *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                               38
Table 5: Interaction of Proportion of School-Age Children and SNAP
dummy on Adult Obesity by Income Level
                                           (1)        (2)
VARIABLES (Specification)                 BMI     Pr(Obese)     N-T
                                                   BMI ≥ 30
Panel 1: At or Below 130% FPL
(1) PSAC x SNAP                              -0.190      -0.0200      26,970
 (Full Sample)                              (0.201)     (0.0191)

(2) PSAC x SNAP                             -0.800*    -0.0836**       9,713
 (HHs with Child < 5)                       (0.428)     (0.0424)

Panel 2: 130% – 200% FPL
(3) PSAC x SNAP                              0.253       0.0270       25,716
 (Full Sample)                              (0.206)     (0.0208)

(4) PSAC x SNAP                             -0.0951      -0.0585      10,342
 (HHs with Child < 5)                       (0.442)     (0.0453)

Note: Results from Column 2 are estimated using an individual fixed-effect
linear probability model. Rows 1 and 3 examine the interaction between the
proportion of school age children and reporting receiving SNAP benefits (1 =
yes) at or below 130% and between 130% and 200 of the Federal Poverty
Level, respectively while rows 2 and 4 restrict the sample to adults living in
households with at least one child under the age of five. All specifications
include time-varying household demographic controls and year indicators.
Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered on individuals *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                      39
Table 6: Variations in School-Age Eligibility Cutoffs on Adult Obesity Levels
                                                    (1)         (2)
VARIABLES (Specification)                          BMI      Pr(Obese)    N-T
                                                            BMI ≥ 30
Panel 1: Ages 4 to 14
(1) Proportion of School-Age Children                -0.0582      0.00982     10,634
 (Full Sample)                                       (0.185)      (0.0177)

(2) Proportion of School-Age Children                  -0.516      -0.0363     4,194
 (HHs with Child < 4)                                 (0.425)     (0.0452)

Panel 2: Ages 6 to 18
(3) Proportion of School-Age Children                  0.126      0.00945     10,634
 (Full Sample)                                        (0.206)     (0.0204)

(4) Proportion of School-Age Children                -0.866*       -0.0627     4,929
 (HHs with Child < 5)                                (0.471)      (0.0408)

Note: Results from Column 2 are estimated using an individual fixed-effect linear
probability model. All rows use baseline controls and year dummies. Rows 1 and 2
assume school-age eligibility between the ages of 4 and 14 years of age. Row 2
restricts the sample to adults living in households with a child under the age of four
to test for potential effects from participation in the Head Start Program or other
preschool programs that may increase availability of SNAP resources for adults.
Rows 3 and 4 assume school-age eligibility between the ages of 6 and 18 years of
age. Row 4 restricts the sample to adults living in households with a child under the
age of five. All specifications include time-varying household demographic controls
and year indicators. Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered on individuals
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                          40
Table 7: Proportion of School-age Children on Obesity of Women by SNAP
Reporting Status and Household Income Level
                                                    (1)       (2)
VARIABLES (Specification)                         BMI      Pr(Obese) N-T
                                                           BMI ≥ 30
Panel 1: SNAP Recipients
(1) Proportion of School-Age Children                  0.111      -0.00450    8,011
  (Women Only)                                        (0.217)     (0.0212)

(2) Proportion of School-Age Children                 -1.090**   -0.115***    3,862
  (Women: HHs with Child < 5)                          (0.498)    (0.0445)

Panel 2: Non-SNAP ≤130% FPL
(3) Proportion of School-Age Children                 0.493**     -0.00498    8,256
  (Women Only)                                        (0.244)     (0.0224)

(4) Proportion of School-Age Children                  0.911       0.0241     2,687
  (Women: HHs with Child < 5)                         (0.623)     (0.0538)

Panel 3: Non-SNAP 130% – 200% FPL
(5) Proportion of School-Age Children                  -0.184      -0.0150    7,522
  (Women Only)                                        (0.189)     (0.0234)

(6) Proportion of School-Age Children                  -0.296      -0.0515    2,777
  (Women: HHs with Child < 5)                         (0.565)     (0.0694)

Note: Results from Column 2 are estimated using an individual fixed-effect linear
probability model. Row 1 examines the changes in the proportion of school-age
children in SNAP households on obesity. Row 2 examines SNAP households with at
least one child under the age of five. Rows 3 and 5 examine adults who do not report
using SNAP benefits at or below 130% and between 130% and 200% of the Federal
Poverty Level, respectively. Rows 4 and 6 restrict each income group subsample to
females living in households with a child under the age of five. All specifications
include time-varying household demographic controls and year indicators. Robust
standard errors in parentheses clustered on individuals *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                         41
Table 8: Proportion of School-age Children on Obesity of Men by SNAP
Reporting Status and Household Income Level
                                                    (1)        (2)
VARIABLES (Specification)                         BMI      Pr(Obese) N-T
                                                           BMI ≥ 30
Panel 1: SNAP Recipients
(1) Proportion of School-Age Children                  0.351       0.0290     2,623
  (Men Only)                                          (0.414)     (0.0395)

(2) Proportion of School-Age Children                  -0.188      -0.0661    1,067
  (Men: HHs with Child < 5)                           (0.657)     (0.0997)

Panel 2: Non-SNAP ≤130% FPL
(3) Proportion of School-Age Children                  0.338     0.0845*** 8,080
  (Men Only)                                          (0.238)     (0.0267)

(4) Proportion of School-Age Children                  0.103       0.110*     2,097
  (Men: HHs with Child < 5)                           (0.515)     (0.0613)

Panel 3: Non-SNAP 130% – 200% FPL
(5) Proportion of School-Age Children                  0.153      -0.00905    7,560
  (Men Only)                                          (0.185)     (0.0234)

(6) Proportion of School-Age Children                 0.0968       -0.0482    2,636
  (Men: HHs with Child < 5)                           (0.456)     (0.0587)

Note: Results from Column 2 are estimated using an individual fixed-effect linear
probability model. Row 1 examines the changes in the proportion of school-age
children in SNAP households on obesity. Row 2 examines SNAP households with at
least one child under the age of five. Rows 3 and 5 examine adults who do not report
using SNAP benefits at or below 130% and between 130% and 200% of the Federal
Poverty Level, respectively. Rows 4 and 6 restrict each income group subsample to
males living in households with a child under the age of five. All specifications
include time-varying household demographic controls and year indicators. Robust
standard errors in parentheses clustered on individuals *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                         42
Table 9: Proportion of School-age Children on Adult Obesity: Continuous
SNAP Participation and Income-Eligible Adults who Never Participated
                                                    (1)        (2)
VARIABLES (Specification)                          BMI      Pr(Obese) N-T
                                                            BMI ≥ 30
Panel 1: 4+ Waves of Continuous SNAP Receipt
(1) Proportion of School-Age Children                  0.419*       0.0303      6,319
  (Full Sample)                                        (0.247)     (0.0255)

(2) Proportion of School-Age Children                 -1.088**     -0.110**     3,148
  (HHs with Child < 5)                                 (0.538)     (0.0503)

Panel 2: Never Received SNAP ≤130% FPL
(3) Proportion of School-Age Children                  0.363*       0.0278     10,402
  (Full Sample)                                        (0.218)     (0.0226)

(4) Proportion of School-Age Children                   0.289       -0.0236     2,970
  (HHs with Child < 5)                                 (0.517)     (0.0523)

Panel 3: Never Received SNAP 130% – 200% FPL
(5) Proportion of School-Age Children                  -0.0635     -0.0353*    11,846
  (Full Sample)                                        (0.150)     (0.0189)

(6) Proportion of School-Age Children                   -0.181      -0.0519     4,332
  (HHs with Child < 5)                                 (0.409)     (0.0515)

Note: Results from Column 2 are estimated using an individual fixed-effect linear
probability model. Row 1 examines the changes in the proportion of school-age
children in SNAP households on obesity. Row 2 examines SNAP households with at
least one child under the age of five. Rows 3 and 5 examine adults who report never
receiving SNAP benefits at or below 130% and between 130% and 200% of the
Federal Poverty Level, respectively. Rows 4 and 6 restrict each income group
subsample to adults living in households with a child under the age of five. All
specifications include time-varying household demographic controls and year
indicators. Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered on individuals *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                          43
