NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STABILIZATION WITH EXCHANGE RATE
MANAGEMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY

Allan Drazen
Elhanan Helpman

Working Paper No. 2268

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1987

For helpful comments we wish to thank seminar participants at the Institute
for International Economic Studies, Stockholm, the Hebrew University, and
Tel—Aviv University, and participants of the Sapir Center conference on
"Economic Effects of the Government Budget". Financial support from the
Bank of Israel is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2268
May 1987

Stabilization with Exchange Rate Management Under Uncertainty

ABSTRACT
Stabilization programs in open economies typically consist of two
stages. In the first stage the rate of currency develuatiori is reduced,
but the fiscal adjustment does not eliminate the fiscal deficit which

causes growth of debt and loss of reserves, making a future

policy change

necessary. Only later, at a second stage, is this followed by either an
abandonment of exchange rate management or by a sufficiently large cut in

the fiscal deficit. We study how different

second—stage policy changes

affect economic dynamics during the first stage. These changes include
tax increases, budget cuts on traded and nontraded goods, and increases

in the growth rate of money. Under certainty about the timing and nature
of a switch, current account developments provide information about which
policy instrument is expected to be used for stabilization.

Uncertainty

about the timing of a stabilization is shown to be important in explaining
phenomena such as Continuous reserve losses and the possibility that a
policy change is accompanied by a surprise discrete devaluation rather
than a run on reserves.

Allan Drazen
Department of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv, Israel 69978
(03) 420—488

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv, Israel 69978
(03) 420—712

1. Introduction
Several countries have attempted to reduce inflation via exchange rate
management. Sometimes it was the main instrument, as in the case of Argentina
and Chile in the late seventies; sometimes it was part of a comprehensive
policy package, as in the case of Argentina and Israel in 1985. However, in
all these cases exchange rate management was attempted without an immediate
balancing of the goveinment's budget which would make the policy sustainable
over the long run. Expectations of a future policy change were therefore
engendered. One may therefore think about such policies as

two-stage programs,

where in the first stage the exchange rate is frozen or the rate of currency
devaluation is substantially redued, while in the second stage the budget
deficit is eliminated or exchange rate management is abandoned. In Drazen and
Helpman (1987) we studied such programs for economic environments with
complete certainty, including certainty about timing of the second-stage

policy adjustment. Here we extend the analysis to an environment in which
there is uncertainty about the timing of the second-stage change.

The introduction of uncertainty helps to explain certain observed
phenomena which cannot be explained in its absence. These include discrete
devaluations upon the abandoning of exchange rate management and runs on

reserves which are not associated with the abandoning of exchange rate
management. Our work is in the spirit of Krugnian (1979) and elaborations which

followed, such as Flood and Garber (1984).

Our basic model is described in Section 2. In Section 3 we discuss the
certainty case in order to set the stage for a discussion of the role of
uncertainty. Finally, in Section 4 we distuss stabilization under timing
uncertainty.

-22.

The Basic Model
We consider a simple open economy model identical to

that in Drazen and

Helpman (1987). There are two consumption goods, traded and nontraded. Current
macroeconomic policy, consisting of a fixed level of public spending on traded
and on nontraded goods, fixed taxes in terms of traded goods, and a fixed
exchange rate, is infeasible in the long run. The precise nature of this
infeasibility will be spelled out later. There are no restrictions on
international capital movements, which, combined with the exchange rate

policy, means that the government has no direct control over the money supply.
Stabilization is effected by a change in at least one policy variable that is
under direct control of the government.
The utility of the representative individual is assumed to depend on
consumpton of the two goods and real money balances, where the instantaneous

utility function is assumed separable across consumption and real balances.
This is represented by

u(c(t),cN(t)) +

where t

is

v(M(t)/Q(t)),

a time index, and c, CN,

and

M, are real consumption of traded

goods, nontraded goods, and nominal domestic currency balances. Q,

the

domestic currency price index of the two goods, is defined by

Q(t)Q(€(t),PN(t)), where c is the exchange rate (the domestic currency price
of foreign exèhange), the foreign currency price of traded goods is constant
and equal to one, and where

is the domestic currency price of nontraded

goods. The functions u(.) and v(.) are increasing and concave, and the
function Q(.)

is

increasing and positivel,r linear homogeneous.

-3-

The individual may hold domestic currency or bonds denominated in foreign

currency, denoted b, with the latter paying the exogenously fixed world

interest rate r. We assume that the individual's subjective discount rate

equals r and that he receives fixed income of y in terms of traded goods
plus N in terms of nontraded goods. The assumption of constant output
levels eliminates employment considerations while the equality of the
subjective discount rate to the real interest rate in terms of traded goods
eliminates secular trends in the trade account. This allows us to focus
attention on the speculative aspects of stabilization.

We consider the case where the timing of a stabilization is not known
ex-ante. We assume that the switch may occur at any time between 0 and some

T

max

,

where the cumulative distribution of a switch occuring until T is

F(T). Clearly F(0) — 0

and F(T) — 1.

We consider the case where only

one switch takes place.

The individual maximizes expected discounted utility over his horizon

subject to his budget constraints, the expectation taken over dF(T). It will
be useful to write the individual's present discounted utility if a switch

occurs with certainty at T as follows. Let VS(.) be the present discounted
value of maximized utility from T onwards. It will be a function of the
real value of an individual's assets at T, and perhaps of T as well. The

present discotnted utility from 0 to infinity if a switch occurs at T is
then (using the instantaneous utility function from above):

rT
(1)
J0

et[u(c(t),cN(t))

+

v(M()/Q(t))]dt
+ e -rTV s(b(T) + m(T); T],

-4.

where b(T) is the stock of private bond holding at the time of stabilization
and m(T) is the stock of real balances. Expected welfare is then the
expected value of (1) taken over all possible

realizations of T. The

individual can switch between money and bonds at any instant of time. Using

traded goods as the nimeraire, his budget constraint may be written as,

PN(t)

(t)

(2) fe [c(t) + e(t) cN(t) + (t) +

r(t) -

y

-

PN(t)

e(t) y]dt

+E

t

where z(t) is the flow addition to nominal balances,
non-distortioflary taxes in terms of traded goods,

en

______
E(ti)

r(t) is the level of

LM(t) is the stock

increase in domestic currency holdings resulting from sale of foreign currency

to the monetary authority, and b0 is

the initial stock of bonds. All

variables in these equations represent values

conditional on no policy switch

taking place before t. Asset swaps take place at discrete points in time t.
The evolution of the stock of private bond holdings b(t) is given by

P

P

_rb.c_CNT+YYN fort't
(2')

btt) -

b(t)

—

- tM(t)/E(ti).

Nominal domestic balances at t are related to z

(3)

M(t) —

+

z(x)dx +

and M via

M(t) for all t,

-5-

where

is the initial stock of money holdings.

The individual chooses the functions c(t), cN(t), M(t), z(t), the timing

of stock adjustments t. and their size N(t.), to maximize the expected value
of the objective function given in (1) under constraints (2) and (3). (The
reader may refer to the Appendix for the exact mathematical formulation.)

Using the clearing condition in the market for nontraded goods

(4)

cN(t) + g(t)

where g(t) is government purchase of nontraded goods, the first-order
conditions of this problem imply (see the Appendix):

T

max

—

OS(T)

(5)

0(t)

(6)

p[c(t),yg.(t)] —

for

t < T

u[c(t)Iyg(t)] —

uj[c(t)Pyg(t)]

PN(t)

e(t)

for all t

T
1
e(t)

.

0(t)

.

max
r

e -r(T

-

t)

05(T)

+ 1T e-r(x -

ES(T) i

t)

v'(x) dx ]
dF(T)
- F(t)
1
Q(x)
j

for t<Tmax
where a superscript s indicates the value of a variable after stabilization.
Thus, 05(T) is the marginal utility of consumption of traded goods at time

T provided stabilization takes place at time T and ES(T) is the exchange

-6-

rate at time T provided stabilization takes place at time T. The value of
T

max

is smaller than or equal to the point in time at which the government

reaches the limit of its ability to finance the budget without further growth

of net debt. Wewill say more about this point in due course.
Equation (5) says that traded goods consumption is chosen at each point
before a stabilization to equalize current marginal utility of consumption to
conditional expected future post-stabilization marginal utility (that is,

conditional on no stabilization before t). This condition allows for the fact
that the marginal utility of consumption after a stabilization may depend on
the timing of the stabilization. Equation (6) represents the standard equality
of the marginal rate of substitution to relative prices. The marginal rate of
substitution p(.) is equal to the inverse of the real exchange rate, where the
real exchange rate is defined as the price of nontradeables in terms of

tradeables. Equation (7) is an asset pricing equation of money balances, with
the return on the asset being uncertain. The left-hand side is the real value

in terms of traded goods of one unit of nominal balances at t. On the
right-hand side, the term inside brackets is the sum of the present discounted

value of the resale value of one unit of money at T (in marginal utility
terms) and the discounted value of the flow of utility from money holdings

from t until T. Taking the expectation over all possible switch time gives
expected returns which, on division by 8(t), is in the same units as the
left-hand side.

The government, which consists of a fiscal and monetary authority, faces
the following consolidated budget constraint:

-7-

(8) f e

-

[g(t) +

PN(t)
(t)

g(t) r(t) - z(t)/e(t)
-

-

i

]dt

ei M(ti)/e(t) + b —0,

where g(t) is purchases of traded goods, g(t) is purchases of nontraded
goods, and bg is initial net debt in terms of traded goods. Net government
debt equals outstanding debt minus reserve holdings, where outstanding debt is

denominated in terms of foreign currency. Implicit in (8) is the assumption
that foreign exchange reserves, like all other foreign currency denominated

assets, bear interest at the rate r.
The evolution of the government's net debt bG(t) is given by

for
(8')

bC(t) -

bG(t)

— -

where use has been made of (3) to derive M—z for

since the stock of

money is not under the government's direct control when it controls the
exchange rate.

C
The difference between government net debt b and private holding of

interest-bearing assets b is net foreign indebtedness, which we denote by b —
bG

-

b.

Using (2'), (8'), and the clearing condition in the m&rket for

nontraded goods (4), we obtain

(9)

b—rb+g+c-y forallt,

-8-

where the right-hand side represents the deficit on current account.

It is clear that if (2) and (8) hold, meaning the private and government
sectors are intertemporally balanced, then the present value of net external

debt is nonpositive (i.e., urn eb(t)

0), and the economy is also

intertemporally balanced.

3. Stabilization under

Certainty

We consider a situation where the government fixes the exchange rate

without eliminating the budget deficit, implying growing government debt. In

addition, the spending levels g and

and the tax level r are

maintained constant before stabilization. Stabilization takes place at a point

in time T at which the government changes its policy instruments to new
constant levels so as to freeze its net debt at its then current level bG(T).
The case of certainty about the timing of a stabilization may be seen as

a special case of this formulation, where the probability distribution has all

its mass at a single T. This case, which is discussed in greater detail in
Drazen and Helpman (1986,1987), is meant to set the stage for the uncertainty

results. In the certainty case equation (5) would imply constancy of 8 over
time. This implies that private consumption of tradeables and nontradeables is

also constant before T, as well as being constant after T, although not
necessarily a the same level. Then (6) implies constancy of the real exchange
rate. Moreover, given the fixed exchange rate before T, (6) implies a

constant price of nontraded goods N and a constant price level Q before
T. In the steady state that is reached af'ter stabilization, the triple

is rising at the rate of money growth p. When the marginal utility

-9-

of consumption 9 is constant, (7) implies that the exchange rate e is
continuous even at T. Under these circumstances differentiation of the
first-order conditions yields (see the Appendix)

(10)

"m,'c1) —

(with p — 0

r

+ p

for t

for t < T under certainty), where q — OjE

and real balances m

are defined as M/E. The variable q is an alternative representation of (the
inverse of) a real exchange rate, with the real exchange rate here defined as
the price of traded goods in terms of a domestic basket of goods. In what
follows we use the earlier definition of the real exchange rate as the price
of traded goods in terms of nontraded, that is (by (6)) the inverse of PC.).
q is an increasing function of p (or a declining function of the real exchange
rate), since the price index function Q(e,PN) is positively linear

homogeneous, so that q

q [PC )]

Q(1 , PN/e) —

Q[l

,

p(.)].

Equation (10) implies constant nominal money balances before T (since
the exchange rate is fixed). Hence,

(11) z—M—0 and EM—0 for tt<T
and, from (8)

(12) C_rbG+g+pgrpm
with p — 0

for

tT,

for t < T. Our primary interest in these equations is to derive

- 10

the

-

post-stabilization terminal surfaces, which are relavant also in the case

of timing uncertainty. We will simply describe the characteristics of the

dynamic paths prior to stabilization, referring readers to our earlier papers
for more precise details.

When the stabilization date is known, some qualitative characteristics of
the dynamic path before a stabilization takes place do not depend on the

instruments that are used to stabilize. For every value of bC larger than kG
-

(g +

-

r)/r

government net debt will grow without bound for unchanged

policy parameters. At all t < T money balances are constant, as is private
consumption of traded and nontraded goods.
In the case of stabilizations effected by an increase in taxes, r, or a

cut in government consumption of traded goods, g, with no reliance on money

growth, real balances before T will be identical to those held after T, so
there will be no need for an asset swap. In this case the locus of mbC
combinations described by (10) and (12) is simply a horizontal line at the
pre-stabilization level of in, as in Figure I.

The anticipation of a g-based stabilization brings about an increase in

net external debt for t < T, but a constant level of private bond hoidings.
Since more resources will become available for private consumption after the

budget cut, the private sector's consumption of traded goods prior to T is
larger than iicome from traded goods and foreign asset holdings, generating a
deficit on current account prior to stabilization. The resources released by

the spending cut at T will be just sufficient to pay for the extra interest
on the additional foreign debt, by which the deficit on current account has

been financed. Constant private bond holdings and rising net government debt

- 11

imply

-

that all increases in net government debt result from

foreign borrowing,

budget deficits being financed by external debt. The consumption of tradeables

is c —

rb0

+ y

-

r

+

which is independent of T (see Drazen and Helpinan

(1987)).

A stabilization via an increase in taxes with no reliance on monetary
injections has similar implications for growth in the government's net debt

and constant money balances. However, unlike the case of a g-based
stabilization, a tax-based stabilization brings about a balanced current

account, which means that prior to T consumption is equal to income from
traded goods and foreign asset holdings. Constant private consumption and net
wealth are maintained by rising bond holdings which compensates for the rising
present value of tax obligations, with the reverse taking place within the

government sector. This means that the increase in government net debt is
held entirely by domestic residents, budget deficits being financed by
internal debt. Moreover, there is a unique value of

this outcome, namely, c —

y

-

g

-

rb0.

c that will bring about

As in the earlier case, this

consumption level does not depend on the timing of stabilization. This
observation will prove useful at a later stage (see Drazen and Helpman
(1987)).

A third case is a stabilization via a reduction in government spending on

nontradeableswith no reliance on money financing. It is straightforward to
show that a reduction in

(implying an increase in CN at T) reduces the

relative price of nontraded goods

p and q, and that it increases private

consumption of tradeables if and only if u12(.) > 0. This means that at the
moment of stabilization there is a real exchange rate devaluation

resulting

- 12

-

nontradeables PN; the nominal exchange
from a downward jump in the price of
rate remains constant. Prior to

stabilization, consumption of tradeables has

to be sufficiently low so that the implied current account surplus and foreign
asset accumulation generate enough interest

earnings to cover the costs of the

increased consumption of traded goods.

Since the budget cut reduces aggregate government

spending in terms of

tradeables (which is helped by the real devaluation), the

Figure I moves to the right. The

— 0 line in

fall in q implies a fall in the value of nt

which satisfies (10) when the elasticity of v'(.)

is larger than one in

absolute value. (See Drazen and Helpman (1986) for a discussion of both this
and the interest-elastic case.) Since the elasticity of the demand for money
with respect to the interest rate is equal to the inverse of the elasticity of

v'(.), this implies that in declines as a result of a cut in

if and only

if the elasticity of money demand is smaller than one. Thus, the curve mN(bG)
in Figure II describes all steady state points that can by attained by means

of a cut in

with an interest inelastic demand function for money. The

fall in m at the time of stabilization will clearly come about via an asset
swap in the certainty case (see Drazen and Helpman (1987)).
In the previously discussed cases stabilization at T did not require
abandoning the fixed exchange rate. When stabilization is effected via an

increase in the rate of monetary growth p, it must be abandoned. An increase
in the rate of monetary growth does not change private

the real exchange rate, but it nevertheless

consumption levels and

affects both of the steady state

and (10) implies
loci. After T the rate of depreciation 'c must equal ,
that an increase in p shifts down the steady state value of m. A positive

- 13

value of j

means that the line

-

— 0

will be upward sloping rather than

vertical (see (12)), increases in p shifting the line down. Therefore, as

long as increases in p increase seignorage the

new steady state point will

lie to the southeast of the original point, as does point

relative to point

E in Figure III. The locus of steady state combinations can be represented by
the curve m1(bG). We assume that the government chooses the lowest possible
rate of money growth whenever there is more than one value that can finance
the budget deficit. As in the previous

case, under certainty the fall in m

at the time of stabilization is brought about via a run on foreign exchange
reserves.

Since a money-based stabilization relies on the collection of an
inflation tax, it will have identical consequences to a tax-based

stabilization for consumption, the current account, and debt prior to T as
long as preferences are additively separable between

consumption and real

money balances. A difference emerges at T because in anticipation of an
inflation tax there is a run on reserves and

a drop in money holdings, while

no run takes place in anticipation of a lump-sum tax (see Drazen and Helpman
(1987)).

To summarize the results under certainty, current account developments
provide information about what type of stabilization is expected. There will
be a deficit pn current account when a budget cut on traded goods is expected,
a surplus when the expected change is a budget cut on non-traded goods, and a

balanced current account when a tax-based or money-based stabilization is
expected. Until the point of stabilization money balances are constant,
implying no loss of reserves. At the point of stabilization there will be a

- 14

discrete

-

change in money demand, and hence a run on reserves, in two cases,

those of a gbased and a money-based stabilization. The first is due to the
real exchange rate change which accompanies the stabilization, the second to
the accompanying increase in the nominal interest rate. In all cases the path
of the nominal exchange rate is continuous not only before a stabilization,

but at the point of stabilization as well. In no case is a stabilization whose
timing is certain accompanied by a discrete devaluation.
In actual practice, however, a policy of fixing the exchange rate without

balancing the budget often puts continual pressure on foreign exchange
reserves, causing partial runs which do not imply immediate abandonment of the
given policy. Even in the absence of discrete runs, fixing the exchange rate
in a way known to be unsustainable in the long run usually causes a continuous

loss of reserves. When the policy is abandoned, a discrete nominal devaluation
often takes place (see Helpman and Leiderman (forthcoming)). None of these

observed phenomena can be explained by the certainty model, but, as will be
shown below, can arise when there is uncertainty about the timing of a
stabilization.

4. The Importance of Timing Uncertainty
We now return to the more general formulation to show how timing
uncertainty can explain the above phenomena. Under uncertainty, the
first-order conditions (5) through (7) have a number of implications. First,

as t approaches T, they imply

(13)

OS(Tmax)

—9(Tmax)

- 15

-

and
(14)

ES(T
max )

— e(Tmax ).

Namely, at the moment in which stabilization is

sure to take place if it did

not take place before, there can be no jump in the marginal utility of
consumption of tradeables or in the exchange rate. This stems from the fact

that at T

max

there is no residual

uncertainty, so that we obtain the same

results as in the case of certainty.
Differentiation of the first-order

conditions, taking into account the

fact that the exchange rate is fixed prior to stabilization and assuming that

F(T) is differentiable for T < T
max ,

—

(15)

.-F

(1 -

9S

for

yields

t < T

and

—

(16)
9q

r+

l-FOL

for

- ----1
sj

where f is the density function of

t < T

max

F. The right hand side of (16)

represents the nominal interest rate, which equals the interest on foreign
currency denominated assets plus a term reflecting the

expected capital gain

or loss on nominal balance holdings as a result of a possible exchange rate

jump. This last term is the product of the
conditional on no stabilization having

change in the marginal utility of

density of a stabilization at t

occurred until t (the hazard rate), the

consumption, and the percentage change in

the foreign currency value of nominal balances due to an exchange rate
jump.

- 16

-

Given the available financing instruments of the government's
consolidated budget, there is a maximum level of debt consistent with a
stabilization. Therefore, one expects that if no stabilization has occurred
C
before debt hits some bmax ,

then a regime switch must occur at that point in

time. More generally, one may argue that the probability of a stabilization
C
G
grows as b (t) approaches bmax with a stabilization occurring with
. We
certainty sometime between time 0 and the time that b0(t) hits bG
max

therefore assume that the conditional density of a stabilization can be
expressed as a non-decreasing function of the level of net government debt,

namely

(17)

1

(bC(t))

F(t)

for

t < T

The restriction that F(Tmax) — 1 will imply that ()

debt approaches bC
max

,

becomes infinite as

unless the distribution has a mass point at Tmax

For r-based and g-based stabilizations, equilibrium time paths have the
same characteristics as in the certainty case, because under certainty the

trajectories did not depend on T, the date of stabilization. (See Drazen and
Helpman (1986).) When stabilization is effected by changes

in p or

however, uncertainty about timing does have an effect.
Considers first a stabilization effected by an increase in the rate of

monetary growth, so that (12) is satisfied with ..;G — 0

at the level of

government debt attained at the date of stabilization. To analyze this path
recall first that since consumption of traded goods is independent

of T in

the certainty case, it will also be constant over time in this case. The locus

- 17

of

-

steady state points (the terminal surface) is m(b5, as in the certainty

case, and it is described in Figure III. With constant consumption of traded
goods the marginal utility of consumption of traded goods is constant before
and after a switch, so that, taking account of (17), (16) becomes

(16')

v'(ni/g)
_______

—

r

+

(bG)[

P(bC)
1 - mS
]

for

where use has been made of the fact that MS(t) —

t

< T,

M(t) for t < Tmax Since
.

in this case stabilization also implies the abandoning of the fixed exchange

rate, there can be no jump

in

the quantity of money after stabilization.

Condition (16') describes a curve in bCm space on which the system has to
be prior to stabilization. The direction of its movement is determined by
(8'), which can be reproduced here as

(8') bC+I1_rbG+g+pg

for t<T.

Our assumption is that at time zero the right hand side of (8') is positive.
Therefore, it remains positive if net government debt is rising over time.
The downward-sloping arrow curve in Figure III describes the direction of

the system's movement. (See Drazen and Helpman (1986) for a proof.) On this
trajectory net government debt is rising and money holdings ar declining. The

decline in money holdings results in reserve losses. If a policy switch takes

place before point Z is reached, the system jumps downwards to the terminal
surface, like from C to D. This jump cannont involve a discrete change in

- 18

-

money holdings, because the policy switch brings to an end exchange rate
stabilization. Hence, the jump results from an unexpected discrete exchange

rate devaluation. The figure is drawn on the assumption that F() has a mass

point at T. (See Drazen and Helpman (1986) for details.) Therefore, if no
policy switch takes place before the system reaches point Z, then when it

reaches this point at t

T

max ,

there

is a run on reserves which brings it to

Q. The exchange rate does not jump at this last moment. Point Z is defined
by the intersection of the curve that satisfies (16') and a 45-degree line

that passes through Q (Q is the point on the terminal surface that

corresponds to bG
max).
Our analysis implies that expectations of a money-financed stabilization
lead to the same consumption levels and the same evolution of debt as
expectations of a tax-based stabilization, but that in the presence of

uncertainty they generate different expectations of exchange rate movements
and therefore also different trajectories of money holdings. In the latter
case no exchange rate jump is expected while in the former case a devaluation

is expected to follow a policy switch at t < Tmax Consequently, in the former
case there are no changes in the nominal interest rate and money holdings
while in the latter the nominal interest rate rises and money holdings decline
over time.

We now cpnsider a stabilization via a cut in expenditures on nontraded
goods. For the discussion that follows it is assumed for simplicity that

u(c,cN) is additively separable. In this case c is constant over time and
the same as the consumption level for a tax-based and a money-based

stabilization, so that the current account is balanced. This stems from the

- 19

fact

-

that in the certainty case this property of the utility function implies

a consumption level which is independent of the timing of stabilization. (See
Drazen and Helpman (1986)).

When stabilization includes the abandoning of exchange rate management,
the dynamic path is once again described by (16') with the terminal surface
for changes in

NC

namely m(b ),

.

replacing

pG

m5(b )

on the right-hand

side. The system must be on this curve and its direction of movement is given
by (8'). The path therefore depends on the characteristics of the terminal

NC

surface m(b ). In the previously discussed case where the interest
elasticity of money demand is smaller than one and the terminal surface is
falling, the dynamic path will be monotonically falling until the policy
switch takes place, as depicted by the downward-sloping arrow path in Figure

II. At Tm

the system reaches point Z if no policy switch took place before

that, and then jumps

to

Q via a run on reserves.3 If a policy switch takes

place before point Z is reached, the system jumps down to the terminal

surface, as from point C to point D. This jump results from an unexpected
devaluation. The real exchange rate also depreciates.
If the government were to maintain the fixed exchange rate also after

stabilization, then an unexpected policy switch would not result an exchange
rate jump, but rather a run on reserves that would

bring the system

instantaneous'y to the terminal surface. In this case (16) implies that prior
to stabilization the system moves on the horizontal line in Figure II

,

as in

the certainty case, and if an unexpected policy switch takes place when it

reaches point A it jumps instantaneously to point B. Point B is the

- 20

intersection

-

point between the terminal surface and a 45-degree line that

passes through A.
Hence, if the fixed exchange rate is not maintained after stabilization,

the dynamic trajectory prior to stabilization is characterized by a rising
nominal interest rate and a continuous reserve loss as a result of the decline
in money holdings, followed by a surprise devaluation if the policy switch

occurs before T
max

.

If,

on the other hand, the fixed exchange rate is

maintained after the policy switch, there is no reserve loss on account of
changes in the demand for money, but there is a run on reserves immediately
following the policy switch.

To summarize, the above analysis demonstrates a number of effects of
timing uncertainty for the non-traded-goods and money-based stabilizations.
Before a stabilization there will be a gradual decline in money holdings

brought about by a continuous loss of reserves. This arises from the nominal
interest rate rising over time, reflecting a rising risk premium (which in
turn reflects our assumption about the conditional probability of a switch
being an increasing function of government debt). Moreover, a discrete jump in
the nominal exchange rate will accompany a stabilization whenever exchange

rate management is abandoned (except when there is no residual uncertainty
about its timing). These characteristics are consistent with actually observed
episodes, such as those discussed in Helpman and Leiderman (forthcoming)).
Timing uncertainty may generate even richer time paths, a few examples of

which we now quickly discuss. In the case of a stabilization expected to be
effected by a budget cut on non-traded goods, the slope of the terminal

surface mN(b) will be positive when the interest elasticity of money demand

- 21

is

-

larger than one, and will change sign if money demand is neither everywhere

elastic nor everywhere inelastic. In the first case the time path for real
balances may be non-monotonic, while in the second case it must be

non-monotonic, as inspection of (16') indicates when m(bG) replaces
m"(b'5. Non-monotonicity means we will have alternating periods of reserve
gains and losses even with no money financing of the budget.

The above discussion on non-traded goods relied on the assumption that

u(.) is additively separable; that is,

u12 — 0. Non-separability makes

things more complicated. For u12 positive but small one can show that the
qualitative features of the dynamics described above will not change, except
that the currrent account will be at least initially in surplus rather than
being balanced. (A fuller discussion of this and the above extensions may be
found in Drazen and Helpman (1986).)

Finally, the observed phenomenon of partial runs on reserves not
necessarily associated with a breakdown of fixed exchange rates arises in our
model when the density function associated with F(.) Is not continuous (see
also Drazen and Helpman (1986) for a discussion of mass points). For example,
suppose that F(.) is continuous, but the density function f(.) has one point
of discontinuity at which it jumps up. The economic interpretation of this is
that if a particular point in time is reached and a policy change has not
taken place so far, then the chances of a policy change in the near future
increase discretely. This point in time may be associated with political or
other relevant events. Clearly, the upward jump in f(.) induces an upward jump
in the hazard-rate function 9S(.). Now suppose that stabilization is expected

to be effected by money financing and hence the abandonment of the fixed

- 22

-

exchange rate. Then it is clear from (16') that in this case the downward
sloping arrow path in Figure III is discontinuous at the debt level at which

(.)

is

discontinuous. In particular, it consists of two parts, with the part

further to the right being lower. The discontinuity reflects a downward jump
in the demand for money which results from an upward jump of the interest
rate. In turn, the upward jump in the interest rate is caused by an upward

jump of the risk premium reflecting the jump in the conditional density (.).

Since these jumps are fully expected once this point in time is reached, the
discrete adjustment of money balances will be effected by a run on reserves
which will shift the system from the higher to the lower branch of the
adjustment path. If no regime switch takes place at this point in time, the
economy moves on the lower branch. Hence, the model explains runs on reserves
that are not associated with a collapse of the exchange rate policy.

- 23

-

APPENDIX

In

this appendix, we derive the first-order conditions when the date T

of a switch is unknown. These will also apply to the certainty case when the

probability distribution has all its mass at a single T. When the cumulative

distribution of a switch occurring until T is F(T), maximization of the
expected value of (1) in the text subject to constraints (2') and (2) may be
written (where b(T) has been calculated by integrating (2'))

T

rmax T
Max

(A.l)

e rt[U(C()

J0

+ e

TVS(erTb0 -

- PN(t) y]dt e(t)

+

J-Y(t)[M0

where (t)

i

+

Je

er(Tt) M(t1) +

Jz(x)dx

M0

+

J z(x)dx

e(t)

+

<M(t.)

-

+ r(t) - y

cN(t) +

Tt)[c(t) +

Etj:ST

cN(t)) +

0

+
; T)

€(T)

M(t)]]dF(T),

the multiplier on constraint (2) in the text. Maximization of

(A.l) with respect to each of the c(t), cN(t), M(t), and z(t) yields

(where 0(t) is the marginal utility of traded goods at time t,

u2(t) is

the marginal utility of nontraded goods, and where a superscript s indicates
the variable after stabilization)

- 24

Tmax

T

max

(A.2)

et8(t)dF(T)

I

—

et9S(T)dF(T)

I
T

T
(A.3)

J

etu2(t)dF(T)

—

J e'0(T)

ettvt1(t)Qt)dF(T)

T

max

(A.5)

[eT05(T)
L

f

E(t)

dF(T)

max

max

J

P (t)

T

T
(A.4)

-

—

er(T-t) +
E( )

-y(t)dF(T)

T
) + I

tl(x)dxjdF(T)

— 0.

Maximization with respect to M(t) yields a condition identical to (A.5)

for t —

t.

(A.2) simplifies to

T

max

0(t) —

(A.6)

(A.3)

OS(T)

then yields equation (6) in the text. Since (A.4) implies

1(t) —

etvf(t)

Qt)' (A.5) becomes

T
. max1 -r(T-t) OS(T) + 1T -r(x-t) v'(x)d ldF(T)
—
Q(x) XJlF(t)•
je
0(t)
(t)
[e
ES(T)

J

(A 7)

As t approaches T, (A.2) implies that O(Tmax) — 05Tmax) while
(A.6) implies that e(Tmax) —

eS(T).

Differentation of (A.6) when F(T) is

differentiable yields equation (15) in the text while differentiation of (A.7)

when

is

constant, taking account of (15), yields equation (16). -

- 25

-

References

Drazen, Allan, and Elhanan Helpman, "Stabilization with Exchange Rate
Management," Working Paper No. 41-86, Foerder Institute for Economic
Research, Tel Aviv University, November 1986.

Drazen, Allan, and Elhanan Helpman, "Stabilization with Exchange Rate
Management," Quarterly Journal of Economics (forthcoming).
Flood, Robert D., and Peter M. Garber, "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some
Linear Examples," Journal of International Economics XVII (1984), 1-13.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Leonardo Leiderman, "Slowdown of Devaluations, Monetary
Accomodation, and Inflation: A Comparison of Argentina, Chile and
Israel," Economics Ouarterly, forthcoming (Hebrew).
Krugman, Paul R., "A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises," Journal of Money.
Credit and Banking XI (1979), 311-25.

m

o

B

m

v' (m/q)

=r

bG

Figure 1

m

0

v'(m/
eq

Q

mN(bG)
S

bG

Interest inelastic demand for money
Figure II

m

=0

4;
v'(m/g)

m

eq

ci
m(bG)

I.—

/
bG

bG (0)

Figure III

bG

max

=

r

