                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND MORTALITY:
                         EVIDENCE FROM 200 YEARS OF DATA

                                        David M. Cutler
                                           Wei Huang
                                      Adriana Lleras-Muney

                                       Working Paper 22690
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22690


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2016




We are grateful to Simon Board, Walker Hanlon and seminar participants at Harvard University,
MIT, Stanford University, Wisconsin University, University of Houston, University of Michigan,
University of Texas-Austin, University College London and the NBER Summer Institute for their
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22690.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by David M. Cutler, Wei Huang, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Conditions and Mortality: Evidence from 200 Years of Data
David M. Cutler, Wei Huang, and Adriana Lleras-Muney
NBER Working Paper No. 22690
September 2016
JEL No. H51,I1,I38,J10,N10

                                        ABSTRACT

Using data covering over 100 birth-cohorts in 32 countries, we examine the short- and long-
term effects of economic conditions on mortality. We find that small, but not large, booms
increase contemporary mortality. Yet booms from birth to age 25, particularly those during
adolescence, lower adult mortality. A simple model can rationalize these findings if
economic conditions differentially affect the level and trajectory of both good and bad inputs
into health. Indeed, air pollution and alcohol consumption increase in booms. In contrast,
booms in adolescence raise adult incomes and improve social relations and mental health,
suggesting these mechanisms dominate in the long run.


David M. Cutler                                   Adriana Lleras-Muney
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Harvard University                                9373 Bunche Hall
1875 Cambridge Street                             UCLA
Cambridge, MA 02138                               Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                          and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu                               alleras@ECON.UCLA.EDU

Wei Huang
Harvard University
1050 Mass. Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
huangw@nber.org




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22690
The relationship between economic conditions and mortality is a subject of much
debate. On the one hand, many historical studies conclude that economic growth has

been the dominant factor in improved health over time (Fogel, 1994; Costa, 2015).1
Recent studies using micro data also find that economic conditions in utero and early
in life are associated with lower mortality later in life (Currie et al., 2009; Currie,
2011; Almond and Currie, 2011; Hoynes et al., 2016; Aizer et al., 2016). On the

other hand, a significant body of evidence has found that improved economic condi-
tions raise mortality in developed countries (Ruhm, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2007; Adda,
2016).2 In fact studies show that recessions decrease mortality in the short term, but
increase it in later years, for instance among the elderly (Coile et al., 2014).

    The dichotomy between studies showing favorable and unfavorable effects of
economic booms raises several issues. First, how are these two facts related – how
do economic conditions influence health in the short and long run? Second, at what
ages are economic conditions particularly salient for health and why? Third, to what
extent can policy mediate the impact of the economy on health?

    In this paper we examine these questions by studying how unexpected changes
in GDP affect the lifetime mortality of cohorts who experience shocks at different
points in life. We first show theoretically the ambiguity of the link between eco-
nomic conditions and mortality. The model treats health as a stock, the level of

which determines mortality. Economic conditions affect mortality in several ways
by changing the level and the trajectory of inputs that determine the stock of health.
These inputs include basic resources such as food and medical care, health behaviors
   1 This  is not without controversy. For instance, mortality did not in fall in England during the
industrial revolution (See Cutler et al., 2006).
    2 There are some exceptions to this. For instance, mortality appears to be less procyclical in recent

time periods in the United States (Ruhm, 2015), and there is some debate about whether mortality
rises or falls in big recessions (Brenner, 1979; Granados and Roux, 2009).

                                                   1
like smoking and exercise; and environmental factors such as pollution. Economic
fluctuations also have long-term effects on mortality by influencing the composition

of people who survive to older ages (selection).
   To investigate these relationships empirically we match cohort life tables from
32 countries, compiled in the Human Mortality Database, to GDP data from various
official sources. The data cover more than 100 birth cohorts and track their actual

mortality over time. We identify unexpected shocks as deviations of GDP from its
long term trend. We then examine how contemporary shocks, and shocks from birth
to age 30, affect adult mortality.
   We reach four principal findings. First, booms and busts have a non-linear con-

temporaneous effect on health. Small booms increase mortality (as in the Ruhm
analysis); however, large recessions increase mortality and large booms decrease it,
consistent with studies of the Great Depression (Brenner, 1979).
   Second, adverse economic conditions at any point early in life significantly in-
crease later adult mortality. Our results support the fetal origin hypothesis that eco-

nomic conditions in utero are associated with mortality, but the magnitude is smaller
than the effects of economic conditions around adolescence. The micro-level data
explains why: earnings and other important lifetime inputs into health are more af-
fected by shocks in adolescence than by shocks at birth.

   Third, both pollution and alcohol consumption rise substantially in booms and
seem to explain the harmful effects of expansions. Over the longer run, booms and
busts also affect the path of income and other health inputs. More favorable early life
conditions raise lifetime incomes, particularly for youth (Oreopoulos et al., 2012).

Cohorts who are adolescents in good times are also more socially integrated and



                                          2
have better mental health as adults. In times and places with lower emissions of
polluting agents, procyclical mortality tends to disappear.

    Fourth, government spending appears to mitigate the effect of economic condi-
tions on health, at least outside of major booms and busts. In countries with high
levels of government spending as a share of GDP, both early life and contemporane-
ous economic conditions have smaller impacts on middle and late life mortality. But

large shocks are more difficult to insure, explaining why there is no difference in the
effects of large shocks for countries with high and low government expenditures.
    Overall, the findings on the link between contemporaneous economic conditions
and mortality is a balance between the positive impact of greater consumption and the

negative impact of pollution resulting from more output. And the difference between
short term and long term effects of recessions appears to be driven by how economic
shocks affect the profile of these health inputs over time. These ‘direct effects’ on
inputs are much stronger than any ‘selection effects’ from marginal survivors.
    The closest analog to our paper is van den Berg et al. (2006), who examine the

effects of economic conditions at birth on later life mortality in the Netherlands. By
making use of newly available data covering a much larger set of countries and time
periods, we show that their findings generalize to 32 countries, and we extend them
to show that conditions up to age 25 matter, with the greatest effects in adolescence.

We also investigate mechanisms and how policy influences the link between eco-
nomic outcomes and mortality. Finally, we offer a theoretical framework and a set
of empirical results which explain contradictory and heterogeneous findings in the
prior literature.

II. Data


                                          3
II.1 Human Mortality Database (HMD)

    Mortality data are taken from the Human Mortality Database (HMD). The HMD
contains detailed cohort life tables by age and gender in different years.3 To under-

stand the effects of economic conditions over the lifetime, we need populations with
significant time series representation. Appendix Table A1 lists the 32 countries we
study, all of which have with mortality data available prior to 1970.4 The average
number of years observed is 97.
    Figure 1 shows mortality rates by age for four cohorts: those born in 1850, 1875,

1900, and 1925. In each case, we report the logarithm of the average mortality
rate for men and women across countries. To approximate a ‘world’ population, we
weight each observation by the country’s population in the relevant years.
    Log mortality is J-shaped in age: it is high at very young ages, falls rapidly

and remains low from around age 10 to around age 40, and increases thereafter.
In addition to being non-monotonic in age, mortality exhibits great variability during
ages 10 to 40. For example, there is a spike in mortality for the 1875 and 1900 cohorts
at the time of the Great Flu epidemic (1918) and a spike for the 1925 cohort at the

time of World War II. Because mortality rates are low and variable, relationships
between economic conditions and mortality are sensitive to time periods and exact
ages examined in this age range. But past approximately age 40, the logarithm of
mortality is linear with age, as noted by Gompertz (1825) nearly two centuries ago.
    3 A typical observation in the HMD is the number of deaths per 100,000, for men (women) born in

a particular year in a particular country at some later age, along with the relevant population estimate.
    4 These countries are mostly European countries, and a few other developed countries. Six of the

countries are Eastern European (Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Russia, and Ukraine) and others
are formerly Soviet Union (Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and the Slovak Republic);
our results are not sensitive to including or excluding these countries. We exclude Chile (1992-),
Germany (1990-), Israel (1983-), Slovenia (1983-), and Taiwan (1970-) because the data covers very
few years.

                                                   4
We thus model log mortality as a function of economic conditions starting at age 45.
We also limit our analysis to the population aged 90 and below, because mortality

above these ages is imputed in the HMD. Our final sample includes 245,512 country-
gender-cohort-year observations.
    Figures 2a and 2b show the evolution of mortality rates for men and women ages
60-69 in 7 countries. The mortality rates of women started falling earlier and fell

substantially more than those of men. And although on average mortality has fallen,
mortality changes have not been uniform across countries. For example Japan ex-
perienced very rapid mortality declines. Other countries such as Denmark had less
rapid declines, and mortality increased in the case of Russia. Overall, the standard

deviation of male mortality in 1880, 1930, 1960 and 2000 is 1.4, 1.0, 0.8 and 1.4
percent, which correspond to about 32, 27, 26 and 58 percent of the mean, respec-
tively.5 Figures 2c and 2d repeat these analyses for people aged 50-59 to illustrate
that the trends also differ by age within countries. For example, the mortality rate of
those aged 60-69 in United States has declined by 1.2 percent per year since 1933 but

for those aged 50-59 it declined by 1.4 percent. Russia also shows a large deviation
between younger and older people.
    To account for these differential patterns, we model the log of the mortality rate
for each country, gender, and age as a quadratic function of time. This specification

allows for the observed non-linearities in Figure 2 and provides an equally good fit
as one with higher order terms.6
   5 The  increase in the variance of mortality in the late 20th century has also been noted before, for
instance Becker et al. (2005).
    6 The adjusted R-square is 0.988 if we control for country-gender-age dummies and country-

gender-age specific linear time trends, 0.994 if we include a quadratic time trend, 0.995 if we include
up to fourth order terms, and 0.996 if we control up to sixth order terms.




                                                   5
II.2 Historical GDP data

    The literature on the contemporary effects of recessions has focused attention on

the relationship between mortality rates and unemployment. However, high quality
unemployment rate data is not available for most countries prior to 1950. Instead we
follow van den Berg et al. (2006) and use the deviation of GDP per capita from its
long-term trend as our measure of interest. Real per capita GDP data are taken from

a variety of data sources, including Angus Maddison, IMF and World Bank, and start
from 1800 for most of the countries we study.7
    To measure good and bad economic conditions, we compute deviations of ln(GDP
per capita) from its long run trend. For each country, the long run trend in GDP is

estimated using a Hodrick and Prescott (1997) filter with a smoothing parameter of
500. We then define good (bad) economic times as periods when actual GDP is
above (below) its predicted long run trend. In a slight abuse of language, we refer
to a positive residual of GDP above trend as a ‘boom’ and a negative residual as a
‘bust’. We use a smoothing parameter of 500 because it makes the residuals most

predictive of unemployment rates (see Appendix C). But we extensively investigate
the robustness of the results to alternative parameters and de-trending methods in
Appendix C. Because GDP is measured with error, especially as we go back in time,
our results are likely underestimates of the true effects of economic conditions.

    As shown in Appendix Figure C1, the biggest divergence between GDP and its
long-run trend in the United States occurred during the Great Depression and the
immediate post-World War II era. Other significant divergences occur in the severe
recession of the 1890s and the Great Recession of 2008-09. Appendix Figures C3a
   7 The data are compiled on the Gapminder website:http://www.gapminder.org/data/documentation.
Amounts are expressed in fixed 2011 dollars using Purchasing Power Parities.


                                                6
and C3b show all periods/countries in the data where GDP diverges from its long
term trend by 10 percent or more.

       By construction, the average GDP fluctuation over all time periods is zero. How-
ever, the mean is not zero in a given time period. Appendix Figures C3c and C3d
show the mean and standard deviation of GDP fluctuations by year. The mean is
close to zero in 1800-1880, 1950-1970, and particularly negative in 1910-1940 as

well as in the 1990s.8 In the average year, the standard deviation of GDP fluctua-
tions is 8 percent, but it is greater than 10 percent in the late 1940s and late 1990s,
and lower than 2 percent around 1860 and 1960.
       All told, we have 6,816 country-years with GDP for the 32 countries. By com-

parison, there are only 1,366 country-years with unemployment rates. GDP fluctu-
ations are highly correlated with unemployment rates, consistent with Okun’s Law
(ρ = −0.25 taking out countery and year fixed effects). Figure C2b and Table C1
show the strong negative correlation in all the countries, consistent with Okun’s Law.
Controlling for country and year fixed effects, a negative 1 percent GDP fluctuation is

associated with a 0.11-0.21 percentage point increase in unemployment rates (Table
C1).9 We use this relationship to compare the magnitude of our results to previous
estimates.

III. A Model of Economic Conditions and Mortality

       In this section we provide a characterization of mortality based on frailty, in the
spirit of Vaupel et al. (1979), and use it to describe implications for the short and
   8 This  is largely driven by the eastern European countries.
   9
    Without country or year fixed effects, a negative 1 percent GDP fluctuation increases unemploy-
ment by 0.14 percentage points. With country and year fixed effects, the increase is 0.11 percentage
points. If we add country-specific quadratic trends, the increase is of 0.21 percentage points.



                                                 7
long term effect of economic fluctuations. This section is based on Lleras-Muney
and Moreau (2016) which fully characterizes the model.

    Assume individuals are born with an initial health level H0 . This initial health en-
dowment differs across individuals in the population and has a unknown distribution,
which is likely to be normal.10 In the absence of investments in health, the health
stock falls with age at an increasing rate: δ ∗ t α . It is also affected by random shocks

(diseases, wars, etc) given by εt , which are i.i.d. over time with distribution F(.). But
the health stock can be affected through technology I = I(Y, B), the health produc-
tion function which is affected by two sets of inputs Y and B. Y denotes the vector
                                                                              ∂I
of all inputs that increase health (food, shelter, health care, etc), so IY =     > 0.
                                                                              ∂Y
In contrast B captures smoking, drinking, stress, pollution and all others factors that
                    ∂I
lower health IB =      < 0. The health stock evolves according to
                    ∂B

                                Ht = Ht−1 + I(Yt , Bt ) − δ ∗ t α + εt                                (1)


People die when their stock of health first crosses a lower threshold H . We assume
that all individuals have a stock greater than this minimum at birth. Let
Dt = I(Ht ≤ H) denote the random variable equal to one if the individual dies in

period t, and define the mortality rate at time t as
MRt = E(Dt |Gt ) = P(Dt = 1|Dt−s = 0 ∀s < t, Gt ), where Gt = {g1 , g2 , ..., gt }
denotes the history of economic conditions up to time t.


III.1 Effect of economic conditions


    We assume that Yt = Y (Gt ) and Bt = B(Gt ) are functions of G(.), specifically: (1)
  10 Birth   weights and other traits measured at birth follow a normal distribution Wilcox (2001).


                                                    8
∂ Yt      ∂ Bt
     > 0,      > 0: good current economic conditions lead to increases in both types
∂ gt      ∂ gt
               ∂ Yt      ∂ Bt
of inputs; (2)      > 0,      > 0 for any s < t: past economic conditions can have
               ∂ gs      ∂ gs
effects on current inputs. For instance large recessions lower incomes of graduating
cohorts for many years thereafter (Oreopoulos et al., 2012). Similarly, individuals

facing large negative shocks can be more likely to smoke or drink many years later,
consistent with models of habit formation or addiction (Becker and Murphy, 1988);
        ∂ Yt   ∂ Bt
and (3)      =      ≡ 0 for any s > t: changes in economic conditions are not antic-
        ∂ gs ∂ gs
ipated and do not influence current inputs.11
    Short-term effects. Appendix A derives expression for the ambiguous impact

of an unexpected improvement in current economic conditions on mortality. There
                                 ∂ Yt                             ∂ Bt
are two effects, one through Y (      ) and the other through B (      ). Because the
                                 ∂ gt                             ∂ gt
two inputs have opposite effects on health, the overall sign of the short-term effect
of improved conditions is determined by the relative magnitudes of the two effects,

which input changes more when GDP changes and which input matters more for
health. These effects could well differ across individuals. For example retired indi-
viduals will not necessarily see their incomes increase during booms, but they will
be exposed to increased pollution. In countries with high levels of (countercyclical)
                                                              ∂ Ys
expenditures, the government provides some insurance so that       is smaller, at least
                                                              ∂ gs
for small shocks. Lastly the responsiveness of health to a given input (IY , IB ) could
vary across individuals, and by age.
    Long term effects. Consider now the effect of economic conditions earlier in life,
  11 Ifinputs are like food, more of which are purchased with greater incomes, then we are assuming
that there is no full insurance at a population level over time. If inputs are like pollution, a by-product
of production, then we are assuming that in the short run technology is fixed: when a good shock leads
to more production, the technology is not available to increase output without increasing pollution as
well.



                                                    9
specifically the effect of economic conditions one period earlier. This comparative
static (in Appendix A) also has an ambiguous sign and might differ from the sign of

the short term effect.
    Intuitively several effects operate. First, economic conditions in the past affect
                                   
                     ∂ Yt−1 ∂ Bt−1
prior investments           ,         and this also affects health in period t. Second,
                     ∂ gt−1 ∂ gt−1                                     
                                                           ∂ Yt   ∂ Bt
past conditions affect the level of current investment          ,        , with ambigu-
                                                          ∂ gt−1 ∂ gt−1
ous effects on health. For many inputs Y and B, one might suspect that the effects on
Y are longer lasting than the effects on B. For example, one might hypothesize that
                                                                         ∂ Bt
pollution generated in prior times does not remain in the air for long,         = 0, but
                                                                        ∂ gt−1
                                                            ∂ Yt
the effect on income and thus food consumption persists,           > 0. In this case the
                                                           ∂ gt−1
positive effect of increased income could potentially offset the negative short-term
pollution effect, generating a positive effect of economic conditions over time, de-
spite a negative impact in the short term. These effects on inputs and health may
vary by age if there are “critical periods” during which individuals are particularly
sensitive to shocks. For instance adolescent smoking responds more to income and

price than adult smoking (Chaloupka and Warner, 2000). Cognition appears more
sensitive to inputs early in life, while social traits appear more sensitive to events in
adolescence (Cunha and Heckman, 2007).
    Lastly mortality in previous periods gives rise to selection effects, which are also

of ambiguous sign. A negative investment results in fewer individuals right at the
threshold surviving, which lowers mortality the next period. But a negative invest-
ment decreases the health stock of the entire population, thus potentially increasing
the number of individuals at the threshold the next period.12
  12 The Appendix and Lleras-Muney and Moreau (2016) also consider temporary shocks to mortality

that do not affect the stock of health, such as idiosyncratic shocks to the dying threshold. In this case


                                                  10
III.2 Model properties from simulated data

    The expression for mortality rates at age t is a non-linear function of the history

of shocks and investments from birth up to period t. To understand the behavior of
mortality in this model, we simulate the evolution of mortality and of the average
health stock. Appendix Figure A1a shows that the model reproduces the shape of
the mortality rates well: the log of mortality starts high and falls to very low levels

by adolescence. It remains low and highly variable until around age 40, and then it
rises linearly with age.
    Appendix Figure A1c illustrates the effect of a negative shock lasting two periods
but occurring at different ages. It shows that mortality after age 40 is more affected

by shocks at age 15 than by shocks at birth and age 1, because at age 1 mortality
is high even in the absence of a shock. It also shows that the effects of a shock on
mortality are dominated by the sign of the shock (the curves do not cross): good
shocks lower subsequent mortality and bad shocks increase it. Appendix Figure A1d
illustrates the effect of a shock at age 15 that increases both bad and good inputs,

but differentially over time. During the first two years the overall effect of pollution
is larger than the effect of increased consumption. After two years pollution effects
fall to zero (by assumption) but the affected cohorts have higher incomes until age
30. This “lucky” cohort experiences high mortality until age 19, but lower mortality

thereafter, resulting from higher incomes.
    Empirical implications. We do not observe a measure of the health stock through-
out the lifetime. Nor do we observe all health inputs or how they evolve in response
to changes in economic conditions. Also the data that we have on mortality, GDP,
the long term effects of shocks are standard: when more survive in one period more will die the
following period.


                                              11
and various health inputs begin in different time periods and have different missing
data patterns. Thus, there is not enough data to estimate a fully structural version of

the model.
   Instead, we first look to study the “reduced form” implications of the model,
namely how unexpected economic shocks affect mortality and health inputs, by esti-
mating the sign of economic shocks in the short- and long-term. We then look at how

a few inputs respond to economic conditions, and discuss the implications of the re-
sults in light of the model’s predictions. By taking the model in stages – first relating
GDP to mortality, and then seeing how various investments mediate that relationship
– we can draw relatively firm inferences about the underlying hypotheses.

IV. A Comparison of Cohorts

   We start by investigating the relationship between GDP fluctuations and adult
mortality non-parametrically. Since GDP data begin in 1800, and we wish to analyze
the relationship between early life GDP and mortality after age 45, we work with

mortality starting in 1860. This includes a total of 245,512 observations.
   To compare cohorts, we need to take out trends in mortality - as noted above,
by age, gender, and country. We regress the logarithm of the mortality rate for each
country-age-gender-year cell on a full set of age-gender-country interaction dummies
(2880 terms), along with their interactions with a time trend and that trend squared

(2880 terms*2). We also include gender-specific year dummy variables (149*2 vari-
ables) and year of birth dummy variables (161*2 terms). Effectively, we are estimat-
ing a different mortality regression for each age, gender and country, modeling the
time series as a quadratic function of time. In addition, we allow for common cohort

effects and year effects.

                                           12
   After de-trending mortality, we relate mortality residuals to GDP fluctuations
at different ages. We present these results graphically by dividing the sample into

percentile bins based on GDP fluctuations. For each bin, we calculate the average
GDP fluctuation, along with the average residual mortality.
   Figure 3 shows the results. The first figures look at GDP fluctuations when
young: at birth and in utero (age -1 to 0), ages 1-5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, 21-25, and

26-30. There is no obvious relationship between mortality after age 45 and economic
conditions at birth and up to age 10. A negative relationship emerges between GDP
fluctuations during adolescence and young adulthood (ages 11-25) and middle/late
life mortality. While noisy, the relationship appears linear. After age 25 a positive

relationship emerges, though it is not large. Overall good economic conditions in the
teenage years are associated with lower mortality in adulthood.
   The last panel in the figure shows the relationship between mortality residuals
and contemporary GDP fluctuations. To allow effects to play out over a short period
of time, we take the average fluctuation in the year we are considering mortality

and the two previous years. We do this throughout our analysis. Very large booms
(fluctuations greater than the 90th percentile, larger than 0.05) lower mortality; and
very large busts (below the 10th percentile, or lower than -0.05) increase it. But
between the 20th and the 80th percentile (i.e., relatively small fluctuations) there is a

positive slope: small positive fluctuations increase mortality.

V. Regression analysis

   We now estimate the formal relationship between mortality rates and unantici-
pated economic conditions throughout the lifetime. The model is quite similar to the



                                           13
non-parametric analysis presented above:

ln(MR)bgct = β0 + βc f lucct + β−1−0 f luc−1−0
                                          bc   + β1−5 f luc1−5                    26−30
                                                           bc + ... + β26−30 f lucbc

            + θagc + θagc ∗ t + θagc ∗ t 2 + θgt + θgb + εbct                            (2)


The dependent variable, ln(MR)bgct , is the (natural logarithm of the) mortality rate
in year t for birth cohort b, gender g, born in country c. We include a full set of
age-gender-country interaction dummies (θagc ), along with their interactions with a
time trend and its square (θagc ∗ t and θagc ∗ t 2), gender-specific year dummy

variables (θgt ), and gender-specific year of birth dummy variables (θgb ).


   The key explanatory variables are contemporaneous GDP fluctuations in country
c and year t (i.e., mean value of log GDP fluctuations previous three years), denoted
f lucct , and lagged fluctuations, using the same time periods as in figure 3. We av-
erage over five year intervals, which successfully lowers collinearity in fluctuations

across periods (Appendix Table C1). The identifying assumptions are that economic
shocks are not caused by mortality itself (no reverse causality), and that there are no
omitted factors affecting both mortality and economic conditions.
   Our non-parametric analysis suggests that contemporaneous GDP fluctuations

have a non-linear effect on mortality. Therefore we model GDP fluctuations linearly
within |5%| and estimate a different line in large booms and busts. To do so, we
include a dummy for an economic boom or recession (defined as GDP fluctuations
> 5% or < -5%) and the interaction of each of these with GDP fluctuations. Follow-

ing Ruhm (2000), we weight each observation by the square root of the population.
Standard errors are all clustered at the country level to allow for serial correlation in
mortality within countries: residual mortality rates still exhibit serial correlation.


                                            14
   A few issues about this specification are noteworthy: First, we have fully ac-
counted for cohort effects with the gender-specific year-of-birth dummy variables.

Thus, any secular factor, such as improved nutrition or aggregate changes in dis-
ease patterns, will not influence our results. Second, because contemporaneous GDP
fluctuations vary by country-year, country-year effects cannot be included when ex-
amining the effect of current GDP fluctuations. In examining the effect of lagged

economic shocks only, we control for country-year fixed effects. Similarly, we can
include country-specific cohort effects when examining the impact of contempora-
neous GDP fluctuations alone. We also note that GDP and mortality are implic-
itly detrended in different ways. Mortality detrending is quadratic in time, whereas

GDP detrending uses the Hodrick-Prescott filter (and is additionally detrended using
quadratic trends in the regression). We return to this below.
   Table 1 shows the results from estimating equation (2), and Figure 4 displays
the results graphically. The first rows of the table, along with Figure 4(a), show the
impact of contemporary economic fluctuations on mortality. When per capita GDP

is within 5 percent of its trend, higher GDP is associated with higher mortality: a
move from the 25th to the 75th percentile of GDP fluctuations raises GDP by about
5.4 percent, and translates into an increase in mortality of 0.92 percent. On average,
mortality declines by about 0.6 percent annually, so this is about 1.5 years of progress

in mortality.
   But large booms lower mortality; the bigger the boom, the lower is mortality. On
average, economies more than 10 percent above trend (roughly 5.2 percent of the
observations) experience mortality that is 4 percent lower. Conversely a large bust

is associated with an increase in mortality. On average, mortality is about 5 percent



                                          15
higher when GDP is 10 percent or more below trend. We cannot reject the null that
the effects are symmetric (F-statistic = 1.06, p-value = 0.31).

   The second half of Table 1 (and Figure 4b) shows the coefficients for economic
conditions between birth and age 30. All these coefficients are negative and statis-
tically significant with the exception of economic conditions between ages 26 and
30. Moreover these coefficients exhibit a U-shaped pattern in age: although all co-

horts benefit from growing up in good times, cohorts that experience booms between
ages 11 and 20 have the lowest mortality after age 45. The impact of economic de-
privation at birth is consistent with the findings in Barker (1995) and the review by
Almond and Currie (2011), that fetal under-nutrition and other stressors in utero are

associated with later coronary heart disease. But our results are surprising–we find
that effects in adolescence matter more. We explore this later in the paper.
   The second and third columns examine the impact of contemporaneous GDP
fluctuations and early life GDP fluctuations in more demanding specifications. In
the second column we control for country-by-birth-year fixed effects, which fully

absorb early-life GDP. The coefficients on contemporaneous GDP are statistically
identical, as shown in Figure 4a. The third column includes country-by-year dummy
variables, which fully absorbs contemporary GDP fluctuations. The coefficients on
GDP fluctuations in earlier life are very similar to those in the first column, or a bit

larger in magnitude, as shown in Figure 4b.

V.1 Selection and treatment

   Our model showed that early life GDP fluctuations could affect later life mortality
through two channels: selection and scaring. To separate these two factors, column

4 of Table 1 shows the impact of including the share of people who survive up to age

                                          16
45.13 A larger share of survivors at age 45 is associated with lower mortality after
age 45. In contrast, selection effects would imply the opposite. The data suggests

that shocks affect the stock of health rather than the threshold for dying. Further, the
effects of contemporary economic conditions remain unchanged. The coefficients on
early conditions remain negative and significant, though some are a bit smaller.
       To further investigate selection effects we directly examine how early life con-

ditions affect the share of individuals that make it to adulthood. We group the data
so that there is one observation per gender-country-cohort. On average, we have
approximately 120 cohorts for each gender for 32 countries, for a total of 3,680 ob-
servations.14 For each, we construct the share of the population of a given gender,

born in a given country and birth year that survived to age 45. We relate this share to
the early life conditions faced by that cohort:

        Propcb = β0 + β−1−0 f luc−1−0
                                 bc   + β1−5 f luc1−5                    26−30
                                                  bc + ... + β26−30 f lucbc

                      +θgc + θgc ∗ b + θgb + εbct                                                   (3)

       To control for other factors influencing childhood survival, we include dummies
for cohort, gender, and country, along with country-specific linear trends in year-of-
birth (θgc ∗ b). All regressions are weighted by the square root of cohort size and
standard errors are clustered at country level.

       Table 2 shows the results. Positive GDP fluctuations before age 30 increase the
  13
      The share of the population surviving to age 45, included in columns 4 and 7, is not known for all
birth cohorts. Therefore a set of dummies is included for the beginning age for the birth cohorts. For
those birth cohorts with minimum age above 45 (about 20% of the observations), we use the sample
mean and include a missing indicator. The results are similar if we only use observations with valid
values of the share of the population surviving to age 45.
   14 For cohorts with data since birth we compute share surviving since birth. For other cohorts we

compute survival from the earliest observed age (1, 2, 3, etc). We only keep cohorts that we can
observe starting at age 10 or younger, discard cohorts only observed after age 10 and include dummy
variables for the youngest age at which the population is measured. The results are robust if we use
other ages as thresholds.


                                                  17
share of those who survive to age 45. The effects are roughly similar at all ages
from 6-20. Columns 2 and 3 show these selection effects are similar for men and

women: the F-test marginally rejects the equality of those coefficients at 10 percent
significance level (p-value = 0.10). Columns 4 and 5 divide the sample by whether
the cohorts were born before or after 1910. Consistent with intuition, effects on
survival are much larger for early cohorts for whom mortality early in life is large

(only 58 percent make it to age 45 for the pre-1910 cohorts, compared to 87 percent
of those born after 1910). The effects are statistically insignificant for cohorts born
after 1910, and the coefficients for cohorts born after 1910 are statistically different
from those for cohorts born in 1910 or earlier (p-value < 0.01).

V.2 Differentiation by gender and age

   Previous research and our descriptive statistics show that compared to men women’s
life expectancy has increased substantially more (Cullen et al., 2015), and mortality
has fallen much more at younger ages (Cutler et al., 2006). Next we investigate if

economic factors have differential effects by age and gender.
   Figure 4 (c) and (d) divide people into two age groups: younger adults (45-65)
and older adults (66-90). The results show that the contemporary effects of GDP
fluctuations are more muted among the older adults–in fact there is no significant ef-
fect of fluctuations for 66-90 year-olds, and the effects are very close to zero for small

GDP fluctuations. One explanation might be that those over 65 are protected from
income fluctuations because of social insurance programs such as Social Security.
We investigate this later. But the long-term effects of fluctuations are qualitatively
similar for both groups–though significantly larger for the older cohorts (p-value <

0.01).

                                           18
   Panels (e) and (f) show the impact of contemporaneous and early life conditions
by gender. Panel (e) shows that contemporary effects are almost identical between

men and women (though women appear to benefit slightly less from large booms).
Because women in our cohorts participated in the labor force at much lower rates,
these results suggest that work per se (and its associated stress) is unlikely to explain
our short run effects. On the other hand Panel f shows that the long term effects

of economic conditions are economically and statistically significantly smaller for
women than men. The impact of economic deprivation at birth is relatively similar
for men and women. But there is no significant impact of economic fluctuations
after age 6 on women’s mortality. In contrast we observe a pronounced U-shape for

men, with larger effects in adolescence than in utero. These findings are consistent
with two explanations. One is that women are “sturdier” (have a larger initial health
stock), consistent with higher mortality of men than women at almost every age in
now-developed countries (Cullen et al., 2015). Another is that economic conditions
in adolescence are larger predictors of male lifetime incomes, because that is when

they enter the labor market, whereas women’s lifetime resources are more tied to
their husbands’ incomes. We return to this issue in Section 6.

V.3 Comparison with previous literature

   Contemporaneous effects. Our results relating short term GDP fluctuations to

mortality are not directly comparable to past literature, which typically relates un-
employment rates to mortality. However, we can translate between our results and
previous literature. As noted above, a 1 percent GDP fluctuation is associated with
a 0.11-0.21 percentage point reduction in unemployment. In table 1, it is also asso-

ciated with a 0.17 percent increase in mortality. Thus mortality increases by 0.8-1.5

                                           19
percent when unemployment falls by 1 percentage point (i.e., 0.17/0.14 or 0.17/0.21).
These estimates are higher than those in Ruhm (2000), which finds that a one percent-

age point decrease in unemployment increases mortality by 0.5 percent, or Stevens
et al. (2015) which report estimates around 0.3. There are two likely reasons for this.
One is that estimates at higher levels of aggregation like ours (at the country level)
tend to be higher than estimates at lower levels of aggregation, such as states, from

which the Ruhm and Stevens results are derived. (See Lindo (2015) for a detailed
exposition.) The other reason is that we have a broader set of countries and time pe-
riods. Section 6 shows that the effects of fluctuations vary depending on the period
and the composition of economic activity.15

    Early life effects. To gauge the magnitude of the effect of early life economic
conditions on late life mortality, we consider how economic shocks have affected
different cohorts’ life expectancy at age 45. We estimate predicted mortality at each
age for each cohort, and then re-estimate predicted mortality assuming there were
no economic shocks from birth to age 30. Because selection is important for early

cohorts, we concentrate on cohorts born post 1910, and use estimates from 1945 on
– shown in column 6 of table 1 and discussed more below. Appendix Figure D1
shows the distribution of life expectancy differences owing to different economic
conditions. In general, the effects are not large:16 the standard deviation of predicted

life expectancy changes is 0.077 years. However some of the effects at the tails are
larger. For example, the 1915 cohort of the United States, which experienced the
Great Depression in the 1930s, lost 0.18 years of life as a result. The 1957 cohort of
Japan lived 0.16 years longer because of large booms in the 1960s and early 1970s.
  15 Appendix Table D3 shows how mortality relates to unemployment rates for the sub-sample of
country*years with unemployment rates.
  16 We evaluate life expectancy changes using 1997 US life table.



                                             20
    While these impacts are significant, they are not overwhelmingly large. Partly
this is because an average cohort experiences both booms and busts in their first 30

years of life. If we estimate the effect of having the great depression for the first
30 years of life then we find a reduction of one year of life.17 Another important
reason is that our fluctuations are likely measured with substantial error. Finally our
estimation methods are conservative in that we add many fixed effects.

    The only other study of early life economic fluctuations and late life mortality is
van den Berg et al. (2006). It reports that a boom at birth lowers lifetime mortality
by 9 percent (-0.09). If we re-estimate our model using a dummy for boom around
birth we find a (statistically significant) coefficient of -0.003, an order of magnitude

smaller. We investigated this discrepancy by replicating van den Berg’s results using
their original data and the HMD (see Table D1). Although there are several material
differences between their set-up and ours (e.g. they use GNP instead of GDP and
look at cohorts born 1810 to 1903, whereas we include cohorts born up to 1962), the
most important reason for the difference in magnitude is that they look at mortality

from birth until death, while we only consider mortality of adults ages 45 and over.
As we showed, for cohorts in the 19th century, survival to age 45 was low, and
economic conditions early-on affected survival to 45 quite strongly. This is not true
for more recent cohorts.

V.4 Specification checks and robustness

    Outliers. One concern is whether our results are driven by outlier countries or
time periods. We have explored the sensitivity of our findings to excluding Eastern
  17 This
        is an out of sample exercise. It is likely that if a cohort were to experience such a long
downturn, effects would likely differ.



                                               21
European countries and periods of global war, where mortality and economic con-
ditions may both be determined by other factors. As shown in Appendix Table D2,

none of our results are materially changed by this. This is not surprising given the
dummy variables that capture the main differences across cohorts and time periods.
    We also re-estimated our short term effects dropping one country at a time, with
or without country-cohort fixed effects (64 regressions). The coefficients on GDP

fluctuations range from 0.08 to 0.21 (mean: 0.14, standard deviation: 0.03). Thus
there is some heterogeneity, but the results are very consistent across regressions. We
reach similar conclusions for the effects of large booms and busts.18 For long term
conditions effects we estimate 64 regressions, dropping one country at a time, with or

without country*year fixed effects. The coefficient for fluctuations at birth has mean
-0.03 and ranges from -0.03 and -0.04. In contrast the coefficient on fluctuations at
age 11-15 or 16-19 have mean -0.09 and range from -0.07 and -0.11. Finally we
estimate survival to age 45, dropping one country at a time (32 regressions) with
similar results (see Appendix C). We conclude that our results are not driven by

outlier countries or periods.
    De-trending. A second key issue is how we detrend GDP and mortality. A
number of detrending methods have been proposed in the literature, including the
Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter, non-linear time trends, the Baxter-King (BK) method

(Baxter and King, 1999), and the Hamilton (2016) filter. Two criteria stand out in
determining the ‘best’ filter: the correlation with other macroeconomic indicators
such as unemployment, and serial correlation. The two best filters by these criteria
are the HP filter with smoothing parameter 500, and the BK filter. GDP residuals
  18 The coefficient on booms (busts) ranges from -0.62 to -0.41 (–0.37; -0.23), with mean of -0.55
(-0.3) and a standard deviation of 0.03 (0.03)



                                               22
defined from these specifications have a large correlation with unemployment and
small serial correlation (Appendix Table C1). Appendix Table C3 shows that we get

identical qualitative results if we use the BK filter instead of the HP filter.
   We systematically investigated the filtering issue by estimating 144 different re-
gressions, with 8 filters for mortality (HP 100, 500, 1000; quadratic, cubic and quar-
tic time trends for each country age gender group, 4- and 5-year moving average),

and 9 filters for GDP (HP 10, 100, 500, 1000, BK, and 2-, 3-, 4- and 5-year moving
averages), with or without country*year/cohort fixed effects. Appendix C shows the
results from all these permutations. We summarize the results here.
   Short term effects are very robust to how we detrend mortality and GDP. As

expected the coefficients vary because the size of the residuals changes with the
detrending method. But the sign of GDP fluctuations in the “small” range is positive
in 100% of the regressions, and statistically significant (at the 5 percent level) in
60 percent of the cases. The robustness of the results for large booms and busts is
harder to assess: if we use a BK filter there are no recessions or booms that we would

categorize as large using the definitions we established for the HP filter. But if we
always categorize large booms as fluctuations above the 90th percentile and large
recessions as those below the 10th percentile, we find that large recessions always
increase mortality. The results are not as robust for large expansions however, which

are sometimes still harmful to health.
   The long term results are more sensitive to our detrending choices. If we con-
centrate attention on the coefficient for economic conditions in adolescence, we find
that 70% of the regressions give a negative coefficient, and among these 70% are

statistically significant. Among the 30% with positive coefficients, none are statisti-



                                           23
cally significant. There is a pattern to these results. The long term results are always
positive and insignificant when we detrend mortality in a way that results in negative

serial correlation (HP 10, 100 or moving average of 2, 3 or 4)–because the results
are then very sensitive to the exact timing of GDP and the ages over which we aver-
age. Similarly certain detrending methods for GDP do not produce stable estimates.
When residuals are small (e.g., those resulting from HP 10), averaging over years

reduces the size of fluctuations immensely,19 and the coefficients are insignificant.
In this case, we might enter GDP fluctuations annually rather than with five year
averages. But here, collinearity becomes a problem: even with detrending, lagged
GDP remains significantly related to current GDP, unless we average over five years

(Appendix Table C1).20 We cannot entirely resolve these issues: we face a trade-
off between collinearity and variation. In general, the long term results hold if a)
the method for detrending GDP yields residuals that are highly correlated with un-
employment, and b) both mortality and (5-year average) GDP residuals have AR(1)
coefficients that are positive but far from one. We view these as fairly robust, since

these are reasonable requirements for the choice of detrending.
    Reverse Causality. We interpret our results as reflecting the causal effects of
GDP on mortality rather than the reverse. Throughout our period, with the exception
of wars and pandemics, the mortality rates of the working age population is small,

making it unlikely that mortality directly impacts GDP. Further, the results are robust
to excluding periods of high mortality of prime age adults. Lastly our results are
  19 For example, the cohort that  was age 16 in the US in 1930 experienced a GDP fluctuation of only
-3.8 percent between ages 16-20 with an HP value of 10, but a fluctuation of -17.8 percent with an HP
value of 500.
   20 Appendix Figure C6 shows the coefficients by single-year of age for different filters: for fluc-

tuations that are large and not very serially correlated we find a hump-shaped pattern of effects–for
small, highly serial correlated residuals we do not.



                                                 24
similar when we use unemployment rates rather than GDP, in the time period where
we have both (see Table D3).

   Omitted variable bias. A related concern is omitted variable bias. Wars are
an obvious possibility, which we discussed already–our results are not driven by
war time periods. Another possibility is weather. In predominantly agricultural
economies, droughts or periods of excessive rain will have a large impact on out-

put. And very hot and very cold spells also result in higher short term mortality
(Deschenes and Moretti, 2009). Therefore extreme weather can potentially increase
mortality directly in addition to affecting incomes and GDP. We do not have data on
temperature and rain for the last 200 years to directly examine this. But this omit-

ted variable is likely to result in underestimating the effect of GDP. We find that
mortality increases in good economic times (for deviations that are less than 5% of
GDP). If good weather is driving GDP increases and lowering mortality, controlling
for weather would be expected to increase the adverse effect of GDP (make it more
positive). At the tails, we find that large busts increase mortality. The effects could

be over-estimated if both busts and mortality are the result of exogenous events, for
instance a bad weather event. But Figure C3 shows extremely good times and bad
times are correlated across countries that are far apart, suggesting weather is not the
cause.

   Migration. Migration is a concern for long term effects since adults ages 45 and
older in a given country may have lived elsewhere before age 45. All life tables
suffer from this composition problem, and there is no good historical migration data
to address this. We investigate migration instead using the European Community

Household Panel described in Section 8. The long term effects we estimate are larger



                                          25
and statistically significant when we include only those born in the country where
they live as adults (Appendix Table D4), suggesting our main results using the HMD

are underestimated.
   Weights. We typically follows Ruhm (2000) and weight regressions using the
square root of the population in the cell as the weight. The results are robust to using
different weights, for instance weighting by population over the entire period for

each country (Appendix Table D2).

VI.Why do economic conditions worsen health in the short term?

   Our analysis so far has shown that mortality is related to economic conditions.
We now consider why. The literature suggests several possibilities: pollution, stress,

and alcohol among others. To examine these theories, we first determine whether
these potential mediators are procyclical. We then check if the coefficient on con-
temporary GDP fluctuations declines when these variables are included in our main
specification (column 2 of Table 1). Because we cover a much smaller period of time,

we cannot estimate the effects of large booms and busts with much precision–we re-
port those in the Appendix. We also estimated models dropping one country at a
time (Appendix D7) We report results for the full sample and note when the results
are not robust to excluding a specific country.

VI.1 Pollution, economic activity and business cycles

   A number of studies have shown that PM2.5 , a measure of small particulate matter
in the air, is positively associated with mortality (Frankel et al., 2013). We do not
have lengthy time series data on PM2.5 across countries; the data we have exist from



                                          26
2000.21 We do have data from the World Development Indicator (WDI) on CO2
emissions from 1960, which are estimated using data on consumption of solid, liquid,

and gas fuels and gas flarings (Bank, 2015). Although CO2 by itself is not harmful
to health, it is highly correlated with PM2.5 (Appendix Figure B2). Table 3 shows
that pollution is procyclical: GDP fluctuations are a large and statistically significant
predictor of CO2 emissions (column 1), and of PM2.5 (column 3).

    To test the pollution explanation using the long time series, we examine how
fluctuations are related to mortality in agricultural versus industrial economies. Un-
til recently, prior to the use of pesticides and fertilizers, agriculture involved rel-
atively little pollution. And prior to environmental regulation, manufacturing and

transportation were extremely “dirty”.22 If large GDP fluctuations are most associ-
ated with the biggest industries, areas and times that have greater agricultural shares
should see less harmful effects from GDP fluctuations. Data on agriculture shares are
compiled from multiple national and international sources and reported by the Inter-
national Historical Statistics.23 Columns (2) and (4) of table 3 confirm that emissions

(both CO2 or PM2.5 ) are only statistically higher during booms in countries with large
non-agricultural shares.
    Agricultural shares have been trending down over time (Figure B1). They av-
eraged 40 percent around 1850 and 3 percent in the 2000s. One prediction of the

pollution explanation is that the harmful effects of GDP fluctuations should be in-
  21 The  PM 2.5 data are from the Atmospheric Composition Analysis Group. See the website for
details: http://fizz.phys.dal.ca/~atmos/martin/?page_id=140
   22 Hanlon (2015) argues that coal use during the industrial revolution in England explains the large

urban mortality penalty observed in the 19th century.
   23 The data go back to 1800 but only cover 23 countries in our database. We attempted to examine

the industrial and service share of the economy as well, but these are not measured as consistently
across time or over countries. Thus, we confine our analysis to agriculture.




                                                 27
creasing over time. Consistent with this hypothesis, Columns 5 and 6 of Table 1
show a countercyclical but insignificant relationship between economic conditions

and contemporary mortality before 1945,24 but a strong pro-cyclical relationship
post-1945. If we further interact fluctuations with agriculture shares, we find that
adult mortality decreases in good times in high agricultural-share economies; but in-
creases in low agricultural-share economies (Column 6 of Table 3). Columns 7 and

8 show that the same result obtains for children under five years of age, so this is not
a result of differential survival to adulthood.
    We then look at the direct impact of pollution using the shorter time series. Ta-
ble 4 reports the results from including CO2 emissions (averaged over three years to

allow for lagged effects). The first row shows that in this recent sample, contempo-
raneous GDP has a positive relationship with mortality. The next row shows that the
impact of economic booms on mortality is reduced by two-thirds, and becomes sta-
tistically insignificant, when CO2 is controlled for. Also CO2 emissions significantly
increase mortality. These estimates are robust to dropping one country at a time.

    The concern with this specification is that emissions might just be another mea-
sure of economic activity, particularly since emissions are (partly) estimated based
on selected production inputs and outputs. To differentiate pollution from economic
activity we control for additional measures of economic activity. If pollution is pick-

ing up unmeasured economic activity, we would expect that including more measures
of activity would reduce the impact of pollution. The third row of Table 4 includes
labor force participation of men and women from 1960 on in the regression. Labor
force participation indeed captures economic activity – when individuals work more,
  24 This result is not driven by selection; the last column shows very similar results with controls for
the share of the population surviving to age 45.



                                                  28
adult mortality rises, and this explains much of the residual GDP fluctuation effect.
But including labor force participation has little impact on the effect of CO2 . Panel

B shows similar results for under-five mortality, which has been shown in previous
work, using measures of particulate matter, to be very affected by pollution (Currie,
2013). Thus CO2 appears to capture air quality separate from employment and other
measures of economic activity. The results suggest that the adverse effects of booms

is largely due to pollution.

VI.2 Other explanations

   Adverse behaviors. Ruhm (2000, 2005) show that some adverse health-behaviors
increase during booms, potentially explaining the harmful short-term effects of ex-

pansions. We use data on per capita alcohol and tobacco consumption from OECD
countries since 1960 to investigate this. Figure B4 in the Appendix shows that alco-
hol and tobacco consumption are procylical, consistent with evidence that these are
normal goods (Cawley and Ruhm, 2012).

   Panel C of Table 4 then shows that only alcohol varies cyclically in a way that
is correlated with mortality. Adding alcohol consumption into the regressions re-
duces the effects of the contemporary GDP fluctuations by 40 percent; the impact of
adding tobacco is only 7 percent. The large effect of alcohol is in part driven by Rus-
sia, where binge drinking is relatively common (Kueng and Yakovlev, 2016). If we

drop Russia from the analysis, then the reduction in the GDP coefficient is smaller,
about 15 percent. Additional analysis shows that the alcohol effects are particularly
apparent for younger (45-65) males (Appendix Table D7).
   Time use and stress. People work more in expansions, which may increase stress

and lower immune function. It may also reduce time available for tending to el-

                                          29
derly parents or children, whose health could deteriorate as a result. We examine the
possible role of work-induced stress using OECD data on hours worked per worker,

available only from 1981 on for 28 countries. Generally, hours worked per worker
vary only a little over the cycle. From trough to peak, for example, hours per worker
tend to change by 0.1 percent. Further, average hours are not particularly correlated
with the economy (ρ = 0.06). When average work hours are added to the regression,

the coefficient falls by 17%. But strangely the coefficient on work hours is nega-
tive, rather than positive as the stress hypothesis suggests. In addition, if we drop
Japan, then in this smaller sample the coefficient on hours is small and insignificant.
Because these results are not as robust as the results for alcohol or CO2 we do not

emphasize this explanation.
   Transportation and related explanations. Transportation is pro-cyclical, as are
transport accidents. Next we investigate whether increased transportation explains
mortality effects. Data on millions of vehicle kilometers are available from the
OECD website from 1970 on for 26 countries in our sample. We normalize these

by population to get annual data on kilometers per capita. Vehicle kilometers driven
are positively related to GDP fluctuations, particularly in the tails (Figure B4d). But
the last row of table 4 shows there is no statistically significant relationship between
miles driven and mortality. Further, the regression does not attribute any of the im-

pact of GDP fluctuations to increased automobile travel. This remains true in sub-
samples of countries.
   There are other reasons why more economic activity could lead to more deaths,
though we suspect some would be proxied by transportation. Infectious diseases

spread in good times because more individuals are working, traveling and interact-



                                          30
ing with others (Adda, 2016). However, influenza mortality is uncorrelated with
GDP fluctuations, and controlling for it has no effect on the coefficients of interest

(Appendix Table D7). Work accidents are also likely pro-cyclical. We have no data
to directly assess this, but work accidents are a small contributor to overall deaths
among adults over 45 and practically non-existent in the over-65 population.
    Periods of expansions could be associated with greater inequality. We explored

this possibility but found it difficult to establish whether inequality is pro-cyclical or
countercyclical in the short term. The results depend significantly on the measure of
inequality chosen.
    Overall, the strongest link between economic fluctuations and contemporaneous

mortality is found through the pollution channel. As much as two-thirds of the ad-
verse effect of booms may be the result of increased pollution. We also found that
increased alcohol consumption explains a (smaller) part of pro-cyclical mortality,
especially in Russia.25

VII. Understanding The Impact of Early Life Conditions

    To understand the relationship between early life economic circumstances and
later life health, we use micro level data from three sources: the European Com-
munity Household Panel (ECHP), Eurobarometer (EB), and the Survey of Health,
Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE). The ECHP is the largest of the surveys,

with about 750,000 observations for about 150,000 unique individuals, correspond-
ing to 31 countries and covering cohorts born 1911 to 1972. The two other surveys
include additional outcomes of interest, as noted below. Summary statistics for each
  25 Although micro studies find that job losers see their mortality go up (Sullivan and Von Wachter,
2009), they only constitute a small share of the population.



                                                31
survey are reported in Appendix A. We sample people aged 30 and older who live in
the country where they were born (95.8 percent of the ECHP sample).

       For each individual i from cohort b born in country c and of gender g, we relate
early life fluctuations (fluc) to economic, social, and health outcomes later in life (Y):

          Yibcg = β0 + β−1−0 f luc−1−0
                                  bc   + β1−5 f luc1−5                   26−30
                                                   bc + ... +β26−30 f lucbc

                              +δcgt + δcag + δbg + εbct .                             (4)

       We control for country-gender-year fixed effects effects (δcgt ), fully absorbing
current economic and social conditions in the country (which we cannot study be-
cause the panels are short). We also control for country-age-gender effects (δcag ) and

cohort-gender fixed effects (δbg ), and cluster the standard errors at the country-cohort
level.
       Table 5 investigates how early life fluctuations are related to various outcomes.
The first column considers self-rated health on a 1 (very good) to 5 (very bad) scale.
Self-rated health is a well-known predictor of mortality (Idler and Benyamini, 1997).

Not surprisingly, a better economy when young leads to improved self-rated health
in adulthood. Further, the effect is U-shaped: the largest coefficient is for economic
conditions between the ages of 11 and 20. We find very similar results using the
smaller SHARE sample (Appendix Table D9).

       The next column shows that economic conditions before age 30 affect incomes
after age 30. The largest effect is for economic conditions at ages 16-20, the age
at which people typically leave school.26 This is consistent with other micro data
findings, like those in Oreopoulos et al. (2012) or Rao (2016). Columns 3-5 show

that good economic conditions during childhood increase satisfaction with life in
  26
       We also found they have longer tenures at their jobs, See Appendix Table D9.



                                                  32
general and with finances, though not with leisure time. These are reported on a 1 to
6 scale, with higher levels corresponding to greater satisfaction. As with income, the

largest effects are associated with fluctuations during teenage years.
   The next columns look at self-reported health behaviors: current smoking and
obesity (BMI≥30). Smoking is higher for lucky cohorts, consistent with a positive
income effect for cigarettes, though the effect is only significant in one age group (16-

20) (Townsend et al., 1994). Obesity is unrelated to early life economic fluctuations.
Neither of these variables explain the positive impact of booms on adult mortality.
   In contrast to the health behaviors, individuals who grew up during good times
are much more likely to have positive social interactions measured by the frequency

with which people talk with others and meet with friends, ranging from 1 “never” to
5 “on most days”. These effects are relatively constant across ages of early life GDP
fluctuations (columns 8 and 9).
   We construct an overall mental health index using nine questions in the EB (mean
zero and standard deviation of 1.09; see Appendix B). A higher score corresponds to

better mental health. Column (10) shows that individuals growing up in good times
report improved mental health, with effects larger for fluctuations in adolescence.
The next column shows that daily alcohol consumption resembles smoking: those
who grew up in good times are more likely to drink as adults. The final columns in

Table 5 show that good economic conditions in early life increase years of education
and cognition, computed as an index (mean zero and standard deviation of 1.38)
based on numeracy, verbal fluency and word recall (see Appendix D).
   Overall, better health behaviors are not the reason why growing up in a good

economy improves late life health. Rather, people in their teens in a good econ-



                                           33
omy have higher human capital (measured by physical, mental and cognitive ability),
higher incomes when older and are more socially integrated.

VIII. The size of government and the impact of fluctuations

    Government expenditures account for nearly half of GDP in many OECD coun-
tries. This spending could moderate the link between economic conditions and health
in two ways. The first is through countercyclical taxation and spending. A contempo-

rary change in economic conditions will have a smaller effect on the consumption of
                                                     ∂ Yt     ∂ Bt
normal goods and services that affect health - i.e.,      and      – when government
                                                     ∂ gt     ∂ gt
taxes and transfers are countercyclical. In addition, governments have substantial so-
cial insurance programs designed to protect individuals against large lifetime shocks

to permanent incomes, such as disability, poverty in childhood, and old age. If these
programs succeed, the effect of economic conditions on long term outcomes will be
smaller in countries with more extensive programs.
    Unfortunately long annual time series of government expenditures as a share of

GDP are not available. Instead we use OECD data from 2000 to categorize countries
into high and low spending countries, based on whether government spending as a
share of GDP is above or below the median (Appendix A). This is available only
for two former communist OECD countries (Russia and Estonia), so our sample size
falls a bit. Appendix Figure B6 shows that consumption is strongly procyclical, con-

sistent with the lack of full social insurance at the population level over time, and it
is more procyclical in low-spending countries compared to high spending countries,
also consistent with past studies (Frankel et al., 2013; Vegh and Vuletin, 2015).27
  27 We    use Barro’s data (www.economics.harvard.edu/barroursuamacrodata.com) to construct these
figures.



                                                 34
   Figure 4 (g) and (h) show the relationship between economic conditions and mor-
tality for high and low government spending countries. In countries where govern-

ment spends above the median amount, there is no effect of contemporary economic
conditions on adult mortality, nor is there a negative effect of early life conditions
on late life death. But in countries with lower levels of expenditures, we observe
the same pattern as in the overall sample: small booms increase mortality, but large

booms decrease it. Consistent with our findings for short term mechanisms, alco-
hol consumption is more procyclical in low expenditure countries (Appendix Figure
B5).
   Figure 5 shows that the effects of early life GDP fluctuations on almost all adult

outcomes is larger in countries with low levels of government spending. This is
true for income, life satisfaction, self-reported overall and mental health, cognition
and education. These results are consistent with the idea that transfers moderate the
effects of fluctuations both in the short and the long term. Of course we are only
studying recent cohorts–for cohorts born before 1910 living in moslty agricultural

economies, other mechanisms could be at play–for instance busts could significantly
worsen nutrition which is particularly important during the adolescent growth spurt.

IX. Discussion

   In this paper we use cohort life tables from the Human Mortality Database matched

to GDP time series to examine the short- and long-term relationship between eco-
nomic conditions and mortality. We confirm that mortality of adults is procyclical,
but we also show that in large recessions mortality increases, and in large booms mor-
tality falls. The contemporaneous relationship between booms and mortality varies

across cohorts and countries. In settings where pollution is low or not variable – agri-

                                          35
cultural economies, for example – mortality falls with expansions, but this reverses
in industrial economies, where pollution varies with output. The harmful effects of

recessions are larger in places where government spending is a smaller share of the
economy.
   Our overall findings are consistent with Granados and Ionides (2008), who doc-
ument that the relationship in Sweden reversed from countercyclical in the 19th

century to pro-cyclical in the 20th century, and with Gonzalez and Quast (2010),
who find pro-cyclical mortality in developed states in Mexico, but counter-cyclical
mortality in the poorest states. These results may also explain why expansions to-
day are good in most developing countries (Bhalotra, 2010; Jensen, 2000; Paxson

and Schady, 2005), but not in middle-income or rich countries (Dehejia and Lleras-
Muney, 2004). And they can possibly explain why recessions appear to be less harm-
ful to health today than in the recent past (Ruhm, 2015): The US has increasingly
controlled emissions and expanded government expenditures. Finally because pol-
lution travels, the correlation between economic activity and pollution at a given lo-

cation is weak; which explains why the impacts of recessions are smaller at smaller
levels of aggregation (Lindo, 2015).
   We also find that economic conditions from age 0 to 30 have long lasting ef-
fects on mortality, which are also different over time and space. For earlier co-

horts and more agriculture-based economies, these effects are large and they affect
mostly survival to adulthood. But these beneficial effects are smaller in more in-
dustry based economies. The effects of economic conditions are substantially more
muted in countries with larger government transfers.

   This set of observations can be explained by considering how economic condi-



                                         36
tions affect two inputs to health: incomes and pollution. Expansions increase in-
comes but also industrial pollution. In the short term, pollution effects outweigh

the benefits of income, particularly in places where government significantly re-
distributes income, resulting in larger immediate mortality. But when recessions
(booms) are large, income effects dominate, explaining the non-linear patterns we
observe. We provide evidence that when pollution is accounted for, mortality is

much more likely to exhibit countercyclical fluctuations. We also find that alcohol
consumption increases in good times, explaining some of the short term increases in
mortality, particularly among men.
   In the long run good economic conditions in adolescence have a particularly

long lasting effect on lifetime incomes, and appear to improve health substantially
by providing individuals with more satisfying lives, better social connections and
improved mental health and cognitive abilities. The economic and overall health
and wellbeing of individuals is better for those growing up in good times, despite
the short term increases in pollution that accompany expansions, and the bad health

habits that more money allows.




                                        37
References
Adda, Jérôme, “Economic Activity and the Spread of Viral Diseases: Evidence
 from High Frequency Data,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016.

Aizer, Anna, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “The Long-
  Run Impact of Cash Transfers to Poor Families,” American Economic Review,
  April 2016, 106 (4), 935–71.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie, “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hy-
  pothesis,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 153–72.

Bank, World, “World development indicators,” World Bank, 2015.

Barker, David J, “Fetal origins of coronary heart disease.,” BMJ: British Medical
  Journal, 1995, 311 (6998), 171.

Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King, “Measuring Business Cycles: Approxi-
  mate Band-Pass Filters For Economic Time Series,” The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, November 1999, 81 (4), 575–593.

Becker, Gary S and Kevin M Murphy, “A Theory of Rational Addiction,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 1988, 96 (4), 675–700.

  , Tomas J Philipson, and Rodrigo R Soares, “The Quantity and Quality of
  Life and the Evolution of World Inequality,” American Economic Review, 2005,
  pp. 277–291.

Bhalotra, Sonia, “Fatal fluctuations? Cyclicality in infant mortality in India,” Jour-
  nal of Development Economics, 2010, 93 (1), 7–19.

Brenner, M Harvey, “Mortality and the national economy: A review, and the expe-
  rience of England and Wales, 1936-76,” The Lancet, 1979, 314 (8142), 568–573.

Cawley, John and Christopher J Ruhm, “The Economics of Risky Health Behav-
  iors,” Handbook of Health Economics, 2012, 2, 95.

Chaloupka, Frank J and Kenneth E Warner, “The economics of smoking,” Hand-
 book of health economics, 2000, 1, 1539–1627.

Coile, Courtney C, Phillip B Levine, and Robin McKnight, “Recessions, older
  workers, and longevity: How long are recessions good for your health?,” American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2014, 6 (3), 92–119.



                                         38
Costa, Dora L., “Health and the Economy in the United States from 1750 to the
  Present,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2015, 53 (3), 503–70.

Cullen, Mark R, Michael Baiocchi, Karen Eggleston, Pooja Loftus, and Victor
 Fuchs, “The Weaker Sex? Vulnerable Men, Resilient Women, and Variations in
 Sex Differences in Mortality since 1900,” Technical Report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research 2015.

Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman, “The Technology of Skill Formation,” Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 31–47.

Currie, J et al., “Healthy, wealthy, and wise: socioeconomic status, poor health
 in childhood, and human capital development.,” Journal of Economic Literature,
 2009, 47 (1), 87–117.

Currie, Janet, “Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences,” American
 Economic Review, 2011, 101 (3), 1–22.

  , “Pollution and Infant Health,” Child development perspectives, 2013, 7 (4), 237–
  242.

Cutler, David M, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “The Determinants
 of Mortality,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (3).

Dehejia, Rajeev and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “Booms, Busts, and Babies’ Health,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (3), 1091–1130.

Deschenes, Olivier and Enrico Moretti, “Extreme weather events, mortality, and
  migration,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2009, 91 (4), 659–681.

Fogel, Robert W, “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The
  Bearing of Long-Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy,” The Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 1994, pp. 369–395.

Frankel, Jeffrey A, Carlos A Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin, “On graduation from
  fiscal procyclicality,” Journal of Development Economics, 2013, 100 (1), 32–47.

Gompertz, Benjamin, “On the nature of the function expressive of the law of human
 mortality, and on a new mode of determining the value of life contingencies,”
 Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London, 1825, pp. 513–583.

Gonzalez, Fidel and Troy Quast, “Mortality and business cycles by level of de-
 velopment: Evidence from Mexico,” Social Science & Medicine, 2010, 71 (12),
 2066–2073.

                                        39
Granados, José A Tapia and Ana V Diez Roux, “Life and death during the Great
 Depression,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2009, 106 (41),
 17290–17295.

   and Edward L Ionides, “The reversal of the relation between economic growth
  and health progress: Sweden in the 19th and 20th centuries,” Journal of Health
  Economics, 2008, 27 (3), 544–563.

Hanlon, W Walker, “Pollution and Mortality in the 19th Century,” Technical Re-
 port, National Bureau of Economic Research 2015.

Hodrick, Robert J and Edward C Prescott, “Postwar US business cycles: an em-
 pirical investigation,” Journal of Money, credit, and Banking, 1997, pp. 1–16.

Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond, “Long-
 Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net,” American Economic Review,
 April 2016, 106 (4), 903–34.

Idler, Ellen L and Yael Benyamini, “Self-rated health and mortality: a review of
  twenty-seven community studies,” Journal of health and social behavior, 1997,
  pp. 21–37.

Jensen, Robert, “Agricultural volatility and investments in children,” The American
  Economic Review, 2000, 90 (2), 399–404.

Kueng, Lorenz and Evgeny Yakovlev, “Long-Run Effects of Public Policies: En-
 dogenous Alcohol Preferences and Life Expectancy in Russia,” Available at SSRN
 2776422, 2016.

Lindo, Jason M, “Aggregation and the estimated effects of economic conditions on
  health,” Journal of Health Economics, 2015, 40 (C), 83–96.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana and Flavien Moreau, “The Shape of Mortality: Implica-
  tions for Economic Analysis,” Working Paper, 2016.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz, “The short-and long-
 term career effects of graduating in a recession,” American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics, 2012, 4 (1), 1–29.

Paxson, Christina and Norbert Schady, “Child health and economic crisis in
  Peru,” The World Bank Economic Review, 2005, 19 (2), 203–223.

Rao, Neel, “The Impact of Macroeconomic Conditions in Childhood on Adult Labor
  Market Outcomes,” Economic Inquiry, 2016.

                                        40
Ruhm, Christopher J, “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2000, 115 (2), 617–650.

  , “Good times make you sick,” Journal of Health Economics, 2003, 22 (4), 637–
  658.

  , “Healthy living in hard times,” Journal of Health Economics, 2005, 24 (2), 341–
  363.

  , “A healthy economy can break your heart,” Demography, 2007, 44 (4), 829–848.

  , “Recessions, healthy no more?,” Journal of Health Economics, 2015, 42, 17–28.

Stevens, Ann H, Douglas L Miller, Marianne E Page, and Mateusz Filipski,
  “The Best of Times, the Worst of Times: Understanding Pro-cyclical Mortality,”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015, 7 (4), 279–311.

Sullivan, Daniel and Till Von Wachter, “Job displacement and mortality: An
  analysis using administrative data,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009,
  pp. 1265–1306.

Townsend, Joy, Paul Roderick, and Jacqueline Cooper, “Cigarette smoking by
  socioeconomic group, sex, and age: effects of price, income, and health publicity,”
  Bmj, 1994, 309 (6959), 923–927.

van den Berg, Gerard J, Maarten Lindeboom, and France Portrait, “Economic
  conditions early in life and individual mortality,” The American Economic Review,
  2006, pp. 290–302.

Vaupel, James W, Kenneth G Manton, and Eric Stallard, “The impact of hetero-
  geneity in individual frailty on the dynamics of mortality,” Demography, 1979, 16
  (3), 439–454.

Vegh, Carlos A and Guillermo Vuletin, “How Is Tax Policy Conducted Over the
  Business Cycle?,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015, 7 (3),
  327–370.

Wilcox, AJ, “On the importance–and the unimportance–of birthweight.,” Interna-
 tional Journal of Epidemiology, 2001, 30 (6), 1233.




                                         41
Figure 1: Logarithm of Mortality Rates by Age. 1850, 1875, 1900 and 1925 Birth
Cohorts




                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                 Birth Cohorts
                                                                                                                                                              1850                               1875
                                                                                                                                                              1900                               1925




                                                                                                          3
                                                                          Logarithm of Mortality Rate (%)
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                    Franco
                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                           Great                                Great
                                                                                                                                   −Prussian
                                                                                0          −1                            Influenza   War                      Influenza




                                                                                                                                    WWII
                                                                                           −2




                                                                                                                0        10          20           30           40 45 50                          60              70             80   90
                                                                                                                                                                  Age


Notes: Authors’ calculations from Human Mortality Database (HMD). Logarithm of the population-
weighted mean mortality rates are plotted. We average mortality across all countries with data for
each cohort. Thus, there are more countries represented for more recent cohorts.


  Figure 2: Logarithm of Mortality Rates over Time, by Gender, Age and Country
                                                        (a) Men, 60-69                                                                                                                                         (b) Women, 60-69
                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                    Russia
                                                                  Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                       1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Spain
                                                                                                                 Japan


                                                      Australia
                                            Demark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Japan
                                                                                                                                                    Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Demark
                       1
                LnMR




                                                                                                                                                                             LnMR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Russia

                                                                                                                                                     US
                                                                                                                                                                                    .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Poland
                       .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   US
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                    −.5
                       −.5




                             1890           1910                  1930                                         1950        1970            1990              2010                         1890         1910                   1930   1950     1970      1990                      2010
                                                                                                               Year                                                                                                                  Year




                                                     (c) Men, 50-59                                                                                                                                            (d) Women, 50-59
                                                                                                                                                                             1
                1




                                          Spain
                                                                                                                                                                             .5




                                                                               US                                        Russia                                                                        Spain
                .5




                                Denmark              Australia                                                                                   Poland                                      Denmark


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Japan
                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Australia                                               Russia
                0
         LnMR




                                                                                                                                                                      LnMR




                                                                                                                                  Japan
                −.5




                                                                                                                                                                             −.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               US                Poland
                −1




                                                                                                                                                                             −1
                −1.5




                                                                                                                                                                             −1.5




                       1890               1910               1930                                             1950       1970             1990            2010
                                                                                                              Year                                                                   1890              1910               1930       1950     1970        1990                      2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Year




Notes: Authors’ calculations from Human Mortality Database (HMD).


                                                                                                                                                              42
                                                                               Figure 3: GDP fluctuations during the lifetime and residual mortality
                                                         (a) GDP fluc. at ages -1-0                                                                                                              (b) GDP fluc. at age 1-5                                                                                                                            (c) GDP fluc. at age 6-10




                                        .03




                                                                                                                                                                               .03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .03
                                        .02




                                                                                                                                                                               .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .02
                                               .01




                                                                                                                                                                                     .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .01
                               Residuals of LnMR




                                                                                                                                                                     Residuals of LnMR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Residuals of LnMR
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                              −.01




                                                                                                                                                                    −.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −.01
                                        −.02




                                                                                                                                                                               −.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                −.02
                                                          Corr = −.06.                                                                                                                          Corr = −.09.                                                                                                                                          Corr = .03.

                                        −.03




                                                                                                                                                                               −.03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                −.03
                                                     0                    20         40                                 60              80        100                                       0                   20        40                                  60                        80               100                                     0                  20      40                 60         80   100
                                                                                 Percentiles of GDP fluc. −1_0                                                                                                         Percentiles of GDP fluc. 1_5                                                                                                                      Percentiles of GDP fluc. 6_10




                                                     (d) GDP fluc. at ages 11-15                                                                                                           (e) GDP fluc. at age 16-20                                                                                                                            (f) GDP fluc. at ages 21-25
                                    .03




                                                                                                                                                                          .03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .03
                                    .02




                                                                                                                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .02
                                           .01




                                                                                                                                                                                 .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .01
                           Residuals of LnMR




                                                                                                                                                                 Residuals of LnMR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Residuals of LnMR
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                          −.01




                                                                                                                                                                −.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −.01
43




                                    −.02




                                                                                                                                                                          −.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −.02
                                                         Corr = −.21**.                                                                                                                        Corr = −.3.***                                                                                                                                         Corr = −.1.
                                    −.03




                                                                                                                                                                          −.03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −.03
                                                     0                20            40                            60                   80        100                                       0                20           40                            60                              80                100                                     0                  20       40                 60        80   100
                                                                                Percentiles of GDP fluc. 11_15                                                                                                       Percentiles of GDP fluc. 16_20                                                                                                                      Percentiles of GDP fluc. 21_25




                                                                                                                        (g) GDP fluc. at age 26-30                                                                                                               (h) Contemporary GDP fluc.
                                                                                                           .03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .04
                                                                                                           .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .03
                                                                                                                  .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .01 .02
                                                                                                  Residuals of LnMR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Residuals of LnMR
                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −.04 −.03 −.02 −.01 0
                                                                                                 −.01      −.02




                                                                                                                             Corr = .19*.                                                                                                                                        Corr = −.17* (All)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Corr = .38*** (10th−90th)
                                                                                                           −.03




                                                                                                                         0                  20       40                                    60               80          100                                                  0               20                40                                60                 80      100
                                                                                                                                                 Percentiles of GDP fluc. 26_30                                                                                                                     Percentiles of contemporary GDP fluc.




     Notes: Mortality is detrended by regressing the logarithm of the mortality rate on country-age-gender fixed effects, those fixed effects interacted
     with a linear and quadratic term in time, gender-year of birth fixed effects, and gender-year fixed effects. GDP is detrended using a HP filter with
     smoothing parameter 500. Each observation is placed into a centile bin based on the GDP fluctuation at the relevant time/age group. The mortality
     residual is then averaged within each cell. The red line is the local smoothed regression given by the centile points. The blue line is the linear
     regression, with the exception of figure (h), which is piecewise linear.
    Figure 4: Short and Long-term effects of GDP fluctuations on adult mortality
           (a) Contemporary effects, full sample                                                                                            (b) Long-term effects, full sample




                                                                                                                                     .05
                         .06
                                                             w/o Country−Cohort FE                  w/ Country−Cohort FE                                    w/o Country−Year FE                 w/ Country−Year FE
                         .04                                 90% CI                                 90% CI                                                  90% CI                              90% CI




                                                                                                                                     0
            Predicted values of LnMR
                                  .02




                                                                                                                                     −.05
            −.02        0




                                                                                                                                     −.1
                                                                 slope = 0.17** (w/o cty−cohort FE)
                         −.04




                                                                  slope = 0.11** (w/ cty−cohort FE)




                                                                                                                                     −.15
                         −.06




                                        < −.1   −.1 ~ −.05   −.05 ~ −.02    −.02 ~ 0      0 ~ .02    .02 ~ .05     .05 ~ .1   > .1          −1−0      1−5      6−10           11−15             16−20          21−25   26−30
                                                                             GDP fluc. intervals                                                             Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups




                                  (c) Contemporary effects, by Age                                                                                 (d) Long-term effects, by Age
                         .06




                                                                       Young (46−65)                 Old (66−90)                                                     Young (46−65)               Old (66−90)




                                                                                                                                     .05
                                                                       90% CI                        90% CI                                                          90% CI                      90% CI
                         .04




                                                                                                                                     0
            Predicted values of LnMR
                                  .02




                                                                                                                                     −.05
              −.02       0




                                                                                                                                     −.1




                                                                       slope = 0.26*** (Young)
                         −.04




                                                                           slope = 0.04 (Old)
                                                                                                                                     −.15
                         −.06




                                                                                                                                     −.2




                                        < −.1   −.1 ~ −.05   −.05 ~ −.02    −.02 ~ 0      0 ~ .02    .02 ~ .05     .05 ~ .1   > .1          −1−0      1−5      6−10           11−15             16−20          21−25   26−30
                                                                             GDP fluc. intervals                                                             Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups




            (e) Contemporary Effects, by Gender                                                                                             (f) Long-term Effects, by Gender
                         .06




                                                                                                                                     .1




                                                                             Men                    Women                                                                Men                    Women
                                                                             90% CI                 90% CI                                                               90% CI                 90% CI
                                                                                                                                     .05
                         .04




                                                                                                                                     0
            Predicted values of LnMR
                                  .02




                                                                                                                                     −.05
                        0




                                                                                                                                     −.1
            −.02




                                                                                                                                     −.15




                                                                           slope = 0.14* (Men)
                         −.04




                                                                       slope = 0.20*** (Women)
                                                                                                                                     −.2
                         −.06




                                                                                                                                     −.25




                                        < −.1   −.1 ~ −.05   −.05 ~ −.02    −.02 ~ 0      0 ~ .02    .02 ~ .05     .05 ~ .1   > .1          −1−0      1−5      6−10           11−15             16−20          21−25   26−30
                                                                             GDP fluc. intervals                                                             Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups




           (g) Short-term effects, by gov. exp. lvl (h) Long-term effects, by gov. exp. lvl
                         .08




                                                                                                                                     .2




                                                                 High Gov Exp Ctys                  Low Gov Exp Ctys                                             High Gov. Exp                  Low Gov. Exp
                                                                 90% CI                             90% CI                                                       90% CI                         90% CI
                         .04




                                                                                                                                     .1
             Predicted values of LnMR
                            0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                   slope = −0.02 (High Gov Exp)
            −.04




                                                                   slope = 0.28*** (Low Gov Exp)
                                                                                                                                     −.1
                         −.08




                                                                                                                                     −.2




                                        < −.1   −.1 ~ −.05   −.05 ~ −.02    −.02 ~ 0      0 ~ .02    .02 ~ .05     .05 ~ .1   > .1          −1−0      1−5      6−10           11−15             16−20          21−25   26−30
                                                                             GDP fluc. intervals                                                             Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups




Notes: Each point in the left column figures is the predicted log(mortality) from a regression in a
particular interval defined on the X-axis. Each point
                                                  44 in the right column figures is the coefficient on
the early life GDP fluctuation in the ages indicated on the X-axis. Regressions in column 1 of 1 are
used for panels c-f.
     Figure 5: The Impact of Early Life GDP on Quality of Life at Older Ages
                                                                                                 (a) Income, ECHP                                                                                                                                                    (b) Life Satisfaction, ECHP
                                                                                       Relationship between Early Life Economic Shocks and Individual Income                                                                                                             Relationship between Early Life Economic Shocks and Life Satisfaction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.5
                                                               1.5
      Effects of GDP fluc. on logarithm of individual income




                                                                                                                                                                                           Effects of GDP fluc. on Life Satisfaction (1−6)
                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                               .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                               −.5




                                                                                                         High Gov. Exp.                  Low Gov. Exp.                                                                                                                                    High Gov. Exp.                  Low Gov. Exp.
                                                                                                         90% CI                          90% CI                                                                                                                                           90% CI                          90% CI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −.5
                                                               −1




                                                                             −1−0         1−5           6−10           11−15            16−20        21−25       26−30                                                                                      −1−0           1−5           6−10           11−15            16−20           21−25      26−30
                                                                                                      Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups                                                                                                                                       Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups




                                                                                    (c) Self-reported health, ECHP                                                                                                                                             (d) Mental health, Eurobarometer
                                                                                      Relationship between Early Life Economic Shocks and Self−reported Health                                                                                                 Relationship between Early Life Economic Shocks and Mental Health Score (Eurobarometer)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                           Effects of GDP fluc. on logarithm of mental health score
      Effects of GDP fluc. on Self−reported Health (1−5)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                               −.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                               −.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −1
                                                               −.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −2




                                                                                                         High Gov. Exp.                  Low Gov. Exp.                                                                                                                                    High Gov. Exp.                  Low Gov. Exp.
                                                                                                         90% CI                          90% CI                                                                                                                                           90% CI                          90% CI
                                                               −.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −3




                                                                             −1−0         1−5           6−10           11−15            16−20        21−25       26−30                                                                                      −1−0           1−5           6−10           11−15            16−20           21−25      26−30
                                                                                                      Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups                                                                                                                                       Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups




                                                                                           (e) Cognition, SHARE                                                                                                                                                           (f) Education, SHARE
                                                                                        Relationship between Early Life Economic Shocks and cognition, SHARE                                                                                                          Relationship between Early Life Economic Shocks and education, SHARE
                                                                       3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                       2.5




                                                                                                                                                                         Effects of GDP fluc. on education, SHARE
                             Effects of GDP fluc. on cogation, SHARE
                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                       1.5
                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                       .5
                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                       −.5




                                                                                                          High Gov. Exp.                  Low Gov. Exp.                                                                                                                                  High Gov. Exp.                  Low Gov. Exp.
                                                                                                          90% CI                          90% CI                                                                                                                                         90% CI                          90% CI
                                                                       −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −4




                                                                             −1−0          1−5          6−10           11−15            16−20            21−25   26−30                                                                                      −1−0          1−5           6−10           11−15            16−20         21−25        26−30
                                                                                                      Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups                                                                                                                                      Coef. on GDP fluc. at different age groups




Note: Results in Panels a - c are from the European Community Household Panel. Data used in Panel
d are from the Eurobarometer. Results in Panels e and f are from the SHARE. The coefficients and
corresponding 90% confidential intervals are shown.




                                                                                                                                                                    45
Table 1: Effects of Contemporary GDP fluctuations and GDP fluctuations in early
life on Middle age and Late Life Mortality

                    (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)          (6)              (7)
                                                     ln(Mortality rate)
                          Country             Country      With            Pre-          Post-       Selection
                Basic     -cohort              -year     selection         1945          1945         & Pre-
 Settings   regression       FE                 FE        controls         Years         Years         1945
 Mean            0.70       0.70               0.700        0.70           1.09          0.59          1.09
 Contemporary Economic Conditions
 Contemp.     0.170**     0.109**                 –          0.163**      -0.104       0.221***          -0.100
 GDP fluc.    (0.070)     (0.053)                            (0.071)      (0.102)       (0.070)          (0.097)
 Big boom    0.030*** 0.031***                    –         0.030***       0.014       0.040***           0.014
              (0.007)     (0.007)                            (0.007)      (0.011)       (0.009)          (0.010)
 Boom*      -0.559*** -0.536***                   –        -0.549***       0.048      -0.756***           0.058
 fluc.        (0.133)     (0.134)                            (0.133)      (0.124)       (0.140)          (0.122)
 Big bust       0.003     -0.017*                 –           0.003       -0.017         0.013           -0.017
              (0.009)     (0.010)                            (0.009)      (0.018)       (0.011)          (0.018)
 Bust*      -0.326*** -0.275***                   –        -0.311***      -0.148      -0.351***          -0.141
 fluc.        (0.090)     (0.100)                            (0.088)      (0.156)       (0.113)          (0.155)
 Economic Conditions in Earlier Life
 GDP fluc.   -0.034**         –              -0.033***      -0.031**       0.052      -0.043***         0.048
 -1-0         (0.014)                          (0.012)       (0.015)      (0.053)       (0.013)        (0.049)
 GDP fluc.   -0.050**         –              -0.057***      -0.040**     -0.104**     -0.056***      -0.105***
 1-5          (0.018)                          (0.016)       (0.017)      (0.043)       (0.017)        (0.028)
 GDP fluc.   -0.060**         –              -0.070***        -0.033       0.104      -0.076***         0.044
 6-10         (0.026)                          (0.023)       (0.025)      (0.091)       (0.028)        (0.071)
 GDP fluc. -0.089***          –              -0.095***      -0.059**       0.056      -0.100***         0.006
 11-15        (0.029)                          (0.028)       (0.025)      (0.070)       (0.031)        (0.049)
 GDP fluc. -0.085***          –              -0.091***       -0.054*       0.108      -0.096***         0.116
 16-20        (0.030)                          (0.030)       (0.027)      (0.095)       (0.031)        (0.090)
 GDP fluc. -0.066***          –              -0.072***      -0.047**       0.032       -0.071**         0.038
 21-25        (0.024)                          (0.020)       (0.022)      (0.060)       (0.027)        (0.061)
 GDP fluc.     -0.008         –                -0.011         0.008       -0.028        -0.011         -0.011
 26-30        (0.013)                          (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.031)       (0.015)        (0.043)
 Pr(Living         –          –                   –           -0.145         –             –         -0.463***
 up to 45)                                                   (0.097)                                   (0.148)
 N            245,512     245,512             245,512        245,512      75,052       170,460         75,052
 R 2            0.995      0.996               0.996           0.995       0.993        0.997           0.993
Notes: All the regressions are weighted by the square root of the population size in the corresponding
observation. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the country level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                 46
                          Table 2: Proportion Surviving to Age 45


                                    (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)               (5)
                                                 Proportion Living to Age 45
                             Full                                     Pre-1910         Post-1910
     Sample                 sample               Men       Women      cohorts           Cohorts
     Mean                     0.77               0.75       0.80        0.58             0.87
     Economic Conditions in Earlier Life
     GDP fluc. Age -1-0      0.024        0.024              0.024         0.039         0.021
                            (0.016)      (0.018)            (0.016)       (0.032)       (0.015)
     GDP fluc. Age 1-5       0.054        0.054              0.053        0.188**       -0.004
                            (0.034)      (0.035)            (0.033)       (0.071)       (0.022)
     GDP fluc. Age 6-10    0.150*** 0.150***               0.151***       0.249*         0.028
                            (0.050)      (0.053)            (0.047)       (0.118)       (0.030)
     GDP fluc. Age 11-15 0.125**         0.115**           0.134***       0.242**       -0.016
                            (0.046)      (0.049)            (0.044)       (0.105)       (0.030)
     GDP fluc. Age 16-20 0.131**         0.117**            0.146**       0.226**       -0.021
                            (0.053)      (0.053)            (0.054)       (0.087)       (0.045)
     GDP fluc. Age 21-25 0.106*** 0.094**                  0.117***       0.123*        -0.022
                            (0.032)      (0.037)            (0.031)       (0.066)       (0.032)
     GDP fluc. Age 26-30     0.046        0.035              0.057        0.116**       -0.037
                            (0.048)      (0.052)            (0.047)       (0.048)       (0.069)

     N                            3,680         1,840         1,840        1,476         2,204
     R2                           0.977         0.971         0.983        0.960         0.971

Notes: The table includes all cohorts for which survival from age ≤ 10 to age 45 is known. Robust
standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the country level. The F-test for the difference between
the coefficients in columns 2 and 3 is 1.92 (p = 0.10). The F-test for the difference between columns
4 and 5 is 4.24 (p = 0.002).
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  47
                                                Table 3: Pollution, economic activity and mortality


                                               (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)              (5)          (6)        (7)       (8)
                                             Ln(CO2 emission per          Ln(Pop-weighted                            Ln(Mortality)
          Variables                          capita) (1960-2008)         PM2.5) (2000-2008)                  Age > 45              Age 6 5

          Contemporary GDP fluc.            0.856***      1.121*** 0.801*** 0.860**                   0.078      0.200** -0.180             0.368
                                             (0.162)       (0.396)  (0.138) (0.342)                  (0.070)      (0.090) (0.230)          (0.232)
          Contemporary GDP fluc. *              —           -1.825     —     -1.085                     —        -0.966**    —            -3.628**
48




          Agriculture share                                (4.319)          (6.941)                               (0.373)                  (1.553)
          Observations
          Total                               1,049          1,049          194           194       175,352       175,352      23,842      23,842
          Countries                             23             23            23            23          23            23          23          23
          Country-year cells                  1,049          1,049          194           194        1,995         1,995        1,995      1,995

     Notes: The CO2 emission data are from the WDI. Agriculture share in GDP is from the IHS. The PM2.5 data are from the Atmospheric Composition
     Analysis Group. For the the first two columns, covariates include country and year fixed effects as well as country specific linear and quadratic
     time trends. For the PM2.5 results, we only control for the country and year fixed effects due to the short time period. For the last four columns, we
     use the regression in column 2 of Table 1. The standard errors are clustered at the country level.
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                           Table 4: Explaining effects of economic conditions on mortality in the short run


                                                                  (1)      (2)                (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
          Dependent variable: ln(mortality rate)               Contempt. GDP fluc.              Mediator             Observations
                                                                 beta       se               beta         se       Total   Countries
          Panel A: Pollution and mortality after age 45
          Baseline in sample with Co2 (1960-2008)            0.184***       (0.063)           ---         ---
           add Co2 emission                                     0.076       (0.084)         0.105*     (0.055)   117,320        32
           add Co2 emission and LFP                             0.007       (0.084)         0.0757     (0.052)
          Panel B: Pollution and mortality under age 5
          Baseline in sample with Co2 (1960-2008)             0.359**       (0.164)           ---         ---     15,530        32
           add Co2 emission                                     0.149       (0.179)        0.263***    (0.095)
49




           add Co2 emission and LFP                             0.149       (0.179)        0.274***    (0.097)
          Panel C: Other mediators of adult mortality after age 45
          Baseline in sample with alcohol (1960-2008)         0.190**       (0.081)           ---         ---    125,684        32
           add alcohol                                          0.114       (0.099)       0.0101**     (0.004)
          Baseline in sample with tobacco (1960-2008)        0.238***       (0.073)           ---         ---     73,024        23
           add tobacco                                       0.222***       (0.074)         0.0175     (0.010)
          Baseline in sample with work hours (1981-2008)       0.190*       (0.096)           ---         ---     54,422        29
           add work hours                                     0.156**       (0.072)       -0.358***    (0.087)
          Baseline in sample with miles driven (1970-2008)     0.0169       (0.103)           ---         ---     76,654        27
           add vehicle miles driven                            0.0230       (0.119)         -0.006     (0.025)

     Notes: The Co2 emission data are from the WDI. Alcohol and tobacco consumption data are from WHO. Work hours and vehicle miles data are
     from the ECHP website. The regressions follow that in column 2 of Table 1. All the standard errors are clustered at the country level.
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                     Table 5: Early Life Economic Conditions and Middle and Late Life Outcomes

                          (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)           (9)         (10)          (11)        (12)           (13)
      Data                                                                  ECHP sample                                                                 EB                       SHARE
                        Health       Income                   Satisfaction                 Health behaviors           Social relations        Mental     Drinking      Cognition     Education
                      Self-rated     Ln(Ind.       Life in     Financial       Leisure                             Talking       Meeting      Mental                   Cognition      Years of
      Variables         health       income)       general      situation       time      Smoker      Obese       with others     friends      health        Drinker     score       education
      Mean               2.42          11.4         4.18          3.62          4.20       0.32        0.13          4.18          4.00        0.00           0.12       0.00          10.49
      Economic Conditions in Earlier Life
      GDP fluc          -0.024      0.121***      0.093**        0.060          0.030     0.050**     -0.002        0.043         0.009       -0.007         -0.113     0.0233        0.354*
      age -1-0          (0.026)      (0.046)       (0.044)      (0.043)        (0.042)    (0.023)     (0.030)       (0.039)       (0.030)     (0.193)        (0.082)   (0.0434)       (0.197)
      GDP fluc         -0.087*       0.192**      0.278***     0.366***        0.148*      0.001      -0.053      0.185***       0.124**      -0.086          0.023      0.105         0.339
      age 1-5           (0.052)      (0.085)       (0.087)      (0.085)        (0.080)    (0.054)     (0.059)       (0.062)       (0.054)     (0.377)        (0.156)   (0.0893)       (0.331)
      GDP fluc          -0.125       0.329**      0.277**       0.244**        -0.009      0.091       0.097       0.172**       0.178**       0.357         0.557*     0.267*       1.685***
      age 6-10          (0.084)      (0.134)       (0.128)      (0.120)        (0.123)    (0.087)     (0.083)       (0.087)       (0.081)     (0.784)        (0.291)    (0.145)       (0.558)
      GDP fluc         -0.235**       0.188       0.591***     0.533***         0.029      0.157      -0.061        0.196*        0.154        1.009          0.319    0.572***      3.013***
50




      age 11-15         (0.106)      (0.170)       (0.149)      (0.145)        (0.143)    (0.108)     (0.100)       (0.105)       (0.101)     (0.871)        (0.193)    (0.198)       (0.723)
      GDP fluc         -0.226*      0.929***      0.542***     0.437***         0.013     0.216**      0.009       0.226**        0.188*      1.631*          0.319    0.625***      3.771***
      age 16-20         (0.122)      (0.252)       (0.160)      (0.163)        (0.153)    (0.106)     (0.109)       (0.115)       (0.113)     (0.869)        (0.219)    (0.233)       (0.772)
      GDP fluc          -0.077        0.196       0.415***     0.547***         0.032      0.075      -0.000        0.205*        -0.006       1.340         0.416**   0.711***      3.434***
      age 21-25         (0.124)      (0.245)       (0.155)      (0.154)        (0.146)    (0.096)     (0.096)       (0.113)       (0.120)     (0.837)        (0.155)    (0.236)       (0.744)
      GDP fluc          -0.157        -0.231        0.216       0.355**        -0.007      0.084      -0.133        0.074         -0.182       0.591         0.353**    0.534**        1.230
      age 26-30         (0.147)      (0.203)       (0.153)      (0.159)        (0.147)    (0.092)     (0.083)       (0.116)       (0.111)     (0.771)        (0.137)    (0.240)       (0.877)
      Obs.
      Total            746,706       529,375      637,841       670,223        637,381    241,123    212,098       658,755       729,160      45,650         17,831     117,651       104,082
      Ind.             149,126       120,115      132,517       136,291        134,537    79,768      65,423       136,160       148,519      45,650         17,831     98,443        104,082
      Cty-cohorts        849           585           831          831            830       671          549          831           847         1,401          1,107       923            936
      R2                0.257         0.796       0.143         3.623         4.190     0.190        0.035         0.173          0.199        0.176        0.127         0.323        0.215
     Notes: The data in the first nine columns are from the ECHP 1994-2001. The data used in the columns 10 and 11 are from Eurobarometer. The data for the last two columns are
     from SHARE. The sample is people aged over 30 with the exception of individual income, which is for people aged 30-64. The regressions in the first 12 columns control for country-
     gender-year, country-age-gender, and gender-birth cohort fixed effects. Because education is time-invariant for a particular person, the regression in the last column keeps the particular
     persons in the SHARE data and only controls for country-gender and gender-birth cohort fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by country-cohort cells are in parentheses.
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
