NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOAN PRODUCT STEERING IN MORTGAGE MARKETS
Sumit Agarwal
Gene Amromin
Itzhak Ben-David
Douglas D. Evanoff
Working Paper 22696
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22696

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

The authors thank Caitlin Kearns, Mike Mei, and Michael Murto for outstanding research
assistance and Han Choi for editorial assistance. They also thank Viral Acharya, Gadi Barlevy,
Mike Berry, Jason Keller, Steve Kuehl, Elizabeth Laderman, Geng Li, Leonard Nakamura,
Mitchell Petersen, Amit Seru, Greg Udell, Lena Vanterpool, Alicia Williams and Marva Williams
for constructive input. All errors are those of the authors. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22696.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, and Douglas D. Evanoff. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Loan Product Steering in Mortgage Markets
Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, and Douglas D. Evanoff
NBER Working Paper No. 22696
September 2016
JEL No. D12,D18,G18,G21,K2
ABSTRACT
We present evidence of a particular type of loan steering in which lenders lead borrowers to take
out high margin mortgage products. We identify this activity by comparing borrowers who were
rejected by lenders but were subsequently approved by their affiliates (steered borrowers) to other
initially rejected borrowers who obtained loans elsewhere. Although steered borrowers default
less, they pay significantly higher interest rates and are more likely to borrow through contracts
with unconventional features, such as negative amortization or prepayment penalties. Female
borrowers, single borrowers with no co-signers, and borrowers in low-income locations are more
likely to be steered.
Sumit Agarwal
McDonough School of Business
Room 427
Georgetown University
3700 O Street NW
Washington, DC 20057
ushakri@yahoo.com
Gene Amromin
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604-1413
gamromin@frbchi.org

Itzhak Ben-David
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
Douglas D. Evanoff
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604-1413
devanoff@frbchi.org

1

Introduction
At the height of the housing market boom of the 2000s, accusations of unscrupulous

lender behavior abounded. Examples included excessive fees, high interest rates, obscured
prepayment penalties, and clauses barring borrowers from seeking judicial redress for predatory
behavior by lenders (Engel and McCoy, 2002). Yet, the vast majority of the evidence to date has
been anecdotal in nature or came from select examples of regulatory enforcement actions or
isolated lawsuits. Some research was undertaken to evaluate whether particular groups were
targeted with predatory loan terms (Goldstein, 2002; Staten and Elliehausen, 2001; Immergluck
and Smith, 2003; Bocian, Ernst, and Li, 2008). However, there has not been a comprehensive,
methodical evaluation of whether lenders engaged in business practices—broadly referred to as
steering—that led households to mortgage products that were too expensive or contained hidden
risks. Conducting such evaluations is difficult since identifying instances of steering in the data
requires overcoming two major hurdles. First, one needs to separate cases in which lenders
steered borrowers into a product from cases in which borrowers themselves expressed demand
for the product. Second, assessing the optimality of a selected product is problematic in itself as
the econometrician does not observe the full set of borrower characteristics and constraints. An
ideal empirical setting to detect steering activity would be to observe borrowers demanding one
product, and measure whether lenders concur or try to market a different product, with features
that are unambiguously inferior to the borrower.
In the absence of transaction-level negotiation data, we develop a methodology to
identify steered loans. We do this by contrasting the outcomes of two observationally equivalent
groups of borrowers whose mortgage applications were rejected by one lender, but subsequently
approved by another. Borrowers in one group had their applications approved by an affiliate of
the original lender, while others were approved by unaffiliated entities. We contend that
borrowers in the former group are more likely to have been steered.
The identification strategy behind this approach can be illustrated with the following
thought experiment, summarized in Figure 1. A borrower enters a lending institution seeking a
mortgage and their loan application is evaluated. If they are judged to be a poor credit risk, their
application is rejected outright. However, if their credit risk is acceptable they might still be told
that they do not qualify for the specific loan applied for, but would qualify for another mortgage
product from an affiliate of the organization. The applicant is thus ‘steered’ to an affiliate, which
1

approves the new loan product. In making this decision, the original lender takes the risk that the
rejected applicant will apply for a loan with a competitor. To lessen this risk, the lender may
choose to deploy this strategy with borrowers more likely to follow the referral, i.e., those that
are perceived to be less financially sophisticated. All rejected applicants retain the option of
pursuing their loan applications elsewhere, i.e., with a lender unaffiliated with the original entity,
and some of them will be successful in obtaining mortgage credit. These are the applicants that
we consider to be ‘non-steered’.1 If the initial rejection of the ‘steered’ applicants was based on
reasons largely unrelated to credit quality, we would expect the ‘steered’ group to be
systematically different from the ‘non-steered’ group in terms of their subsequent loan
performance. Moreover, if the initial rejection was motivated by the possibility of guiding the
applicants towards a different set of mortgage products (possibly those that are more profitable to
the lender), we would also expect the two groups to differ in terms of eventual contract
outcomes. Finally, if the likelihood of successful steering was a function of borrower financial
sophistication, we would expect the ‘steered’ group to contain a higher share of individuals with
characteristics associated with lower levels of financial literacy.
The focus on borrowers whose original applications were rejected allows us to deal with
the first empirical hurdle of not observing the borrower’s demand function. All borrowers in our
sample are rejected on their original attempt, whose latent parameters presumably reflect the
borrowers’ most desired outcome. The eventual contract captures the differences that lender
paths have on observed outcomes (e.g., mortgage characteristics) rather than borrower’s own
demand for these features. Closely matching borrower characteristics in the two groups further
allows us to ascribe the difference in outcomes to lender behavior rather than differences in the
underlying borrower preferences. Put differently, the sample is designed in a way that makes it
plausible to assume that desired (and rejected) contract choices are similar between the steered
and non-steered groups. Lender actions then become the focal point for analyzing differences in
the actual observed outcomes.
To implement this strategy, we focus on a subset of lenders who are organized under
bank holding companies (BHCs), and thus are likely to be more closely affiliated with each
1

Strictly speaking, observing a loan being originated by an affiliate of the lender that rejected the original
application only implies the possibility of steering. For ease of exposition, we will be using the term “steered
borrowers” rather than “potentially steered borrowers” throughout the paper.

2

other. For these lenders we can observe the original borrower demand in the form of a mortgage
application. Since we cannot identify the steered borrowers directly in the data, we develop an
algorithm to detect steering. To do this, we consider mortgage loan applications that are denied
by one lender only to be approved within a relatively short time period by a different lender.2
Instances in which the approving lender and the rejecting lender are affiliates of the same bank
holding company are tagged as ‘steered’. These borrowers form our treatment group. The
borrowers that were originally rejected but later approved by an unaffiliated lender fall into the
group of potential controls. To make these two groups comparable, we use several approaches to
construct matched samples that achieve tight covariate balance in terms of a wide array of
observable borrower characteristics.3
Steering potential borrowers is not necessarily nefarious. In fact, this lending behavior
could enhance welfare if it enabled borrowers with somewhat blemished credentials to access
credit that would otherwise be unavailable to them.4 However, it could have adverse effects if the
borrowers are steered toward loan products for which they are overqualified—a practice
consistent with predatory lending behavior. We test for evidence of such practices.
We use data from several sources using the sample period that covers loans originated
during calendar years 1998 through 2006. We primarily rely on the Home Mortgage Disclosure
Act (HMDA) database to identify applications and their outcomes. We use BHC Structure files
from Call Reports to link lenders that are affiliated with the same bank holding company. We
also use McDash Analytics mortgage servicing database for detailed information on mortgage
contract features and performance.
Our study has three parts. We begin by exploring the credit quality of steered borrowers
relative to the control group. We find that although the two groups are closely matched in terms
of their FICO scores at origination, the steered customers perform better on their mortgages—
consistent with them being lower-risk, better-qualified borrowers than those normally associated

2

As described in Section 3.3, we attempt to ensure that these pairs of applications are by the same applicants and are
backed by the same property by requiring very tight matches on a set of applicant, loan, and property characteristics.
3

The comparability of these two groups is further enhanced by the requirement that both of them are comprised of
rejected applications that are approved within a short time period thereafter.

4

In some of the mortgage literature, ‘steering’ by definition means that the customer is inappropriately guided
toward a particular loan product. We are taking a broader view at the outset and evaluate whether the form of
steering described here can somehow be viewed as inappropriate.

3

with their eventual loan products. Specifically, we find that the probability of steered loans being
delinquent is 1.2–3.0 percentage points lower than that of non-steered loans. Again, given the
average delinquency rate of 7.0% in our sample, this differential is also an economically
significant result.
In the second part, we explore the characteristics of mortgages that steered borrowers
take. We document that steered loans have an annual percentage rate (APR) that is 35–72 basis
points higher than that of non-steered loans after controlling for various borrower and loan
characteristics. Given the sample average APR of 6.8%, a rate differential of 35–72 basis points
is economically significant.5
Furthermore, steered borrowers take products that are considered to have high profit
margins in the mortgage industry. We document that relative to the overall sample mean, steered
borrowers are 58% more likely to take interest only (IO) mortgages, 81% more likely to take
option ARM mortgages, 88% more likely to take mortgages with prepayment penalty, and 17%
more likely to take low or no documentation mortgages. Consistent with the idea that lenders
capitalize on the high margin offered for these products in the secondary market, we report that
mortgages of steered borrowers are more likely to be sold to private securitizers. These pieces of
evidence are consistent with steered borrowers being exploited in the lending process.
In the final part of the study, we explore characteristics of the borrowers that make them
susceptible to steering. Our analysis shows that in our sample steered borrowers are more likely
to be female (primary borrower), have no co-signers, and reside in low-to-moderate income
areas. These groups of borrowers have been shown to have lower levels of financial literacy (see
e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell, 2014) and are thus potentially prone to manipulation by unscrupulous
lenders.6 The effects are well-identified and are economically large. Each of the demographic
characteristics listed above is associated with a 5 to 10 percentage points higher likelihood of
being steered.
Overall, our study presents evidence that steering took place in the mortgage market
during the boom period of the early 2000s. We show that despite little difference in observable

5

For example, Agarwal, Rosen and Yao (2012) find that a significant fraction of consumers refinance their
mortgage at an interest rate differential of 40 basis points.
6

Indeed, Berndt, Hollifield, and Sandas (2014) show that such borrowers paid higher fees for the same loans than
their better-educated counterparts.

4

credit quality relative to the control group, steered borrowers paid higher interest rates and were
more likely to end up with complex and more expensive mortgages, while experiencing lower
default rates. Steering was more prevalent among demographic groups with potentially lower
financial literacy.
Our paper directly contributes to the growing literature that finds evidence linking the
real estate bubble in the early 2000s to misaligned incentives of intermediaries—e.g., Keys,
Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2010, 2012), Ben-David (2011, 2012), Berndt, Hollifield, and Sandas
(2014), Agarwal, Ben-David, and Yao (2015), Agarwal and Ben-David (2012), and Jiang,
Nelson, and Vytlacil (2014).
The paper also contributes to the broader literature on the mortgage crisis that addresses a
number of issues. One group of studies explores factors explaining potential causes of the
mortgage crisis—e.g., Mian and Sufi (2009), Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund (2009), and Agarwal,
Chang and Yavas (2012). Also included in this group are studies of predatory lending and
concerns that mortgage activity may have become excessive during the run-up to the crisis—e.g.,
Engel and McCoy (2002), Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2006), Garver (2001),
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2010) and Gilreath (1999), and Agarwal et al. (2014). 7

2

Hypothesis Development and Empirical Design

2.1

What is Mortgage Steering?
Steering is a well-known term in the real estate world. Market steering typically involves

realtors restricting the neighborhoods shown to certain potential home buyers. Such behavior can
result in taste-based discrimination or statistical discrimination and distort the spatial patterns of
housing demand by white and minority homebuyers in such a way as to perpetuate neighborhood
segregation—see Ondrich, Ross, and Yinger (2003). Such practices are illegal based on the Fair
Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and numerous state laws.

7

Related studies evaluate the role of the Community Reinvestment Act (Dahl, Evanoff, and Spivey, 2010; Litan,
Retsinas, Belsky and Haag, 2000), redlining on credit access (Cohen-Cole 2011; Brevoort 2011), less traditional
means of accessing credit (Morgan, Strain, and Seblani, 2012; Morse, 2011), and political influence in mortgage
markets (Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi, 2010a, 2013; Igan, Mishra, and Tressel, 2009; and Agarwal, Amromin, Ben-David,
and Dinc, 2012).

5

Leading up to the recent housing bust, a different form of steering in housing markets—
namely, credit steering—emerged. Here, the real estate professional encourages the home buyer
to access credit from a particular lender. Such behavior may be helpful for borrowers because
they may have limited knowledge of credit alternatives and could be steered toward viable
alternative credit options. In fact, we impose no ex ante value judgment on customer steering. It
could be beneficial if borrowers are able to access credit they may not have otherwise received
and if that credit is accurately priced based on their credentials. Additionally, lenders could be
“carrying” customers in a manner consistent with the Petersen and Rajan (1994) relationship
banking model.8
However, credit steering could also be associated with predatory lending. The concern is
that the lender may not have the borrower’s best interest in mind and may “gouge” them—
whether through higher interest rates, excess fees, or contract features that increase the value of
the loan to the originator but that may be unnecessary or non-transparent to the borrower.9 While
there were significant claims about credit steering during the run-up to the financial crisis, little
empirical analysis of such behavior has been completed.10 The research most closely associated
with credit steering analyzes qualifications of subprime borrowers and finds evidence suggesting
that between 10%–35% of these borrowers had credentials that should have qualified them for
prime loans (Freddie Mac 1996). Barr (2005) argues that some of these borrowers “may have
been steered to higher cost lenders.”

8

However, we typically think that mortgage finance is more of a production process that emphasizes “hard”
information (i.e., quantitative information that is easy to store and transmit in impersonal ways such as credit model
scores based on income and other verifiable factors) rather than “soft” information (i.e., information accessible to
loan originators, but difficult to completely summarize in a numeric score) to determine if the applicant qualifies for
the loan. Soft information, however, has been found to play a large role in small business loans as opposed to
mortgage loans—see Agarwal and Hauswald (2010) and Berger and Udell (2002).

9

Renuart (2004) argues that steering may have played a larger role in mortgage rate determination than did
borrower risk. For examples of excessive terms see www.justice.gov/opa/pr/2012/May/12-crt-695.html and
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/enforcement/20110720a.htm. Restrictions on mortgage compensation
schemes to address the steering of customers into higher-priced loans (yield spread premiums) were introduced in
2011 through new Federal Reserve rules instituted under its authority to enforce the Truth in Lending Act.
Restrictions were also imposed in the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
10

Predatory lending practices figured prominently in a number of high-profile analyses both before and after the
financial crisis. See, for instance, FDIC (2006) and the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission Report (2010).

6

2.2

Steering to an Affiliate Lender
Mortgage steering is likely to take place at the first application that a potential borrower

makes. Yet, without a complete information set about the financial situation of the applicant it is
impossible to determine whether the mortgage product was demanded by the applicant or the
lender steered the borrower into a suboptimal product. Our identification strategy is based on the
idea that some mortgage lenders are affiliated under the same bank holding company. In these
cases, steering can occur between affiliated companies.
The steering process that we consider can be summarized by Figure 1. The mortgage
applicant files the requested loan documentation and the lender evaluates their credentials to
determine if the applicant satisfies the risk criteria established for a particular loan product. That
is, the lender (say, Bank A) determines whether the applicant is an ‘acceptable’ or ‘unacceptable’
credit risk. This is the standard process for any loan application and the lender would typically
either accept the loan application and originate the loan, or deny the loan application. If steering
is to occur, it would be initiated once the lender has determined that the loan applicant is an
acceptable credit risk.
For illustrative purposes, imagine that borrower’s creditworthiness has been determined
and the loan officer is sitting at a table with the applicant and discussing loan options. The loan
officer realizes that the applicant qualifies for a plain vanilla loan, but may evaluate the applicant
to determine if they can be convinced to take an alternative loan product—one that either
enhances the loan officer’s compensation and/or the risk-adjusted profitability of the
organization. Thus the loan officer has two options: they can approve the loan that the applicant
qualified for or they can consider steering the applicant toward an alternative loan product with
less desirable characteristics—higher APR, prepayment penalties, higher up-front fees, etc. If the
loan officer decides to steer the applicant they would inform them that they are not qualified for
the original mortgage applied for, but that there were alternative products within the organization
for which they would be qualified; a loan which would be generated by Bank B, an affiliate firm
within the same holding company organization as Bank A. Again, this would be providing the
relatively high qualified applicant with an inferior mortgage product for which they are overqualified. Note that the applicant is not tied to this particular lender (Bank A) or the affiliate they
are steered toward (Bank B). If they are told they do not qualify for the product they initially
applied for, they can turn down the offer of an alternative mortgage through the affiliate and
7

simply look elsewhere. This is the worst-case scenario for the lending officer; they lose a
qualified customer. Hence, the loan officer evaluates potential benefits from steering the
applicant—additional compensation, profitability—relative to potential cost of losing the
applicant. Thus, the decision would likely be based on the perceived financial sophistication of
the loan applicant.11
The above description can be used to develop our hypotheses. First, we anticipate that
borrowers who are rejected from Bank A and approved by affiliate Bank B (steered loans) have
better performance than similar rejected borrowers who took out loans from unaffiliated
lenders.12 Second, if the steering was inappropriate, the steered loans can be expected to carry
higher interest rate than non-steered loans. Third, steered borrowers end up taking loan products
that are considered to have high-profit margins for mortgage lenders (e.g., prepayment penalty,
option ARM). Fourth, steered loans are sold to private originators, who pay a premium for
structured loan products with said features. Finally, steered borrowers are likely to be less
financially sophisticated, e.g., lack financial education.
One may question why lenders would steer a mortgage customer to an affiliate instead of
independently acting on the application. The originally approached lender (Bank A in the above
description) could simply steer them toward in-house products. This could certainly happen, but
will be unobservable to the econometrician unless Bank A took the effort to formally reject the
application first. Still, there may be a number of reasons to steer these applications to an affiliate.
First, management may believe that there are efficiencies involved with concentrating certain
mortgage contracts (e.g., option ARMs) into one subsidiary firm. For example, there could be
efficiencies from expertise in analyzing non-traditional applicants with irregular income streams.
Second, isolating non-traditional loans with a particular affiliate could insulate other affiliates
from reputational risk associated with such lending. Indeed, use of a holding company affiliate
(instead of the bank) for non-prime lending appears to have been relatively commonplace; see

11

For most mortgage loans, not just steered loans, there would be asymmetric information advantages for the lender.
The lender operates daily in the mortgage markets and is closely aware of the matching of customer credit
qualifications and the alternative mortgage products. Many borrowers do not follow the mortgage markets nearly as
closely, nor understand the credit-qualification-to-product matches. However, the lending officer who intends to
inappropriately steer the applicant would be looking for applicants with a below average level of financial
sophistication.
12

In additional tests, we also compare the performance of steered borrowers to those whose original applications
were approved by Bank A, and to those whose original applications were approved by Bank B.

8

Stein and Libby (2001), Litan, Retsinas, Belsky, and Haag (2000).13 Finally, individual loan
officer reluctance to send an applicant elsewhere in the organization can be overcome by
modifying organization-level compensation structure.14

2.3

Empirical Design
To analyze the potential for, as well as the impact of, steering mortgage applicants, we

take a three-step approach. We first identify loan applicants for which there is evidence
consistent with them being steered. Since we do not have the identity of borrowers in the loan
data, we develop a methodology to indirectly identify them. We do this by finding mortgage
applicants that were denied credit at one lending institution and matching them (using rather
strict criteria) to a mortgage applicant with similar characteristics who soon thereafter received a
loan at another lending institution. Based on the similarities for borrowers, loan, and property
characteristics, we assume these are the same applicants successfully obtaining a loan for the
same property. We consider them to be in our steered (treatment) sample if the approving
institution is affiliated with the lending institution that originally denied their loan application. It
is this cross-organizational steering that we are trying to capture. Our second step is to use all
other rejected but not steered loans to generate a control sample with similar characteristics to
those of the steered sample for purposes of comparison.15 Finally, we analyze the resulting
sample to see if there is are meaningful differences in outcomes between the two groups; these
include APR on the mortgage, the type of mortgage and various mortgage characteristics
granted, as well as the performance of the mortgage captured by the delinquency rate.

13

For a discussion of how mortgage company subsidiaries may have been used to avoid regulatory burden during
the run up in the housing market see Demyanyk and Loutskina (2012). Evanoff and Moeller (2014) discuss the
regulatory and legislative response to these practices.
14

If the objective of the firm is to increase the volume of highest profit margin loans, adjustments may be made to
commission schemes that preclude some/all of the lost commissions by loan officers evaluating the original
application (Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission Report (2010), Chapter 7, offers some example of product-focused
compensation practices). Conversations with bank examiners suggest that during the run up to the housing crisis,
certain banking organizations had procedures in place to encourage loan officers to keep loans in the organization if
applicants were over/under qualified for their array of mortgage products.
15

We elaborate on mechanics of constructing matched control samples in Section 3.2. In Section 4.5, we also study
comparisons between the loans successfully steered by a lender to its affiliate and loans approved by that lender
itself.

9

It is important to emphasize that we are not attempting to identify all instances of credit
steering. Steering could take numerous forms—including in-house steering, where the lender
would recommend inappropriate mortgage products—beyond what we evaluate. Rather, we test
for the presence of one form where the applicant is steered within a banking organization, and
we then test for evidence that the affiliate provides inferior loan terms relative to what the
applicant appears to qualify for. Next, we describe our data and methodology in more detail.

3

Data, Coverage across Data Sets, and Descriptive Statistics

3.1

Data Sources
We identify steered loans, and develop some of our control samples, based on the Home

Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data. This source provides the loan application date, the date
that a decision is made on the application, and the kind of decision made (e.g., deny or accept the
loan application). However, the HMDA data provide limited information on affiliation structure,
the qualifications of the borrower or (if a loan is originated) the characteristics of the loan. We
obtain this additional information from mortgage servicing sources, the Bank Holding Company
Structure files and Bank Call Reports.
McDash Analytics (McDash) provides loan-level information collected from residential
mortgage servicers on loans packaged into government agency and non-agency mortgage-backed
securities as well as loans held in portfolio. The McDash data provides extensive information
about the loan, property, and borrower characteristics at the time of mortgage origination.
Property-related variables include appraisal amount, geographic location, and property type
(single-family residence, condo, or other type of property). Loan characteristics include
origination amount, term to maturity, lien position, loan type (i.e., whether or not the loan is
conventional), loan purpose (purchase or refinance), and the coupon rate on the mortgage.
Credit-risk-related variables include the borrower’s debt-to-income ratio, FICO credit score,
loan-to-value (LTV) ratio at origination, and the level of documentation provided. The McDash
data coverage has grown over time, including 9 of the top 10 mortgage servicers by 2003. Since
servicers only provide information on loans that are active at the time they start reporting data to
McDash, the McDash database includes relatively few loans originated in the late 1990s and the
early 2000s.

10

Beyond the McDash information available at origination, the dataset also contains
dynamically updated loan information, enabling one to monitor loan performance. Variables of
interest include coupon rates (which change for adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs), and have the
potential to change with loan modifications), delinquency status (current, 31–60 days delinquent,
61–90 days delinquent, over 91 days delinquent, foreclosure, real estate owned by the lender
(REO), or paid off), investor type (held in portfolio, private securitization, or “public”
securitization via the housing GSEs),16 and the actual unpaid principal balance as well as the
scheduled principal balance if the borrower pays according to the original terms of the loan.

3.2

Sample Construction
To identify the steered loans (which form our treatment sample), we start with HMDA

loan application data for the 1998–2006 period. The HMDA data encompass nearly all mortgage
lending activity in each year, with some exceptions for small and rural institutions that do not fall
under the mandatory filing requirements. Since the HMDA data include the exact action taken
and the date of that action for each application, we can determine whether a withdrawal or denial
precedes the origination of a nearly identical loan by a different, but affiliated lender in the same
U.S. Census tract. To develop our steered group, we impose rather strict criteria on pairs of
applications. These applications are allowed a difference in action date of no more than 60 days
and are required to match on applicant race, applicant sex, loan type (conventional or backed by
the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) or administered by the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA)), loan purpose, Census tract, and occupancy type.17 We also match iteratively on
loan amount and applicant income—by first identifying and removing the sample pairs with no
difference in amount or income and then increasing the window by $1,000 and matching again.
We continue this process up to a maximum differential of $5,000.18 This matching process
produces approximately 3.4 million unique pairs of loan applications. In order to determine
whether a relationship exists between the two lenders, we match the HMDA lender identifier for

16

The public securitizations can be through Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae), Federal
National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae), Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac), Ginnie
Mae via buyout loans, Local Housing Authority, or Federal Home Loan Banks).
17
Results were robust when a slightly shorter or longer timeframe was used.
18

The thought is that the borrower may receive a slightly different loan amount or report a marginally different
income based on the interaction with the initial lender.

11

each application to its highest holder (i.e., the highest bank holding company) in the BHC
Structure data and Call Reports. Following this merge, the sample size declines to 1.35 million
records of which 244,621 are loans originated by lenders affiliated with the original rejecting
institution (i.e., ‘steered’).
Since HMDA data do not include information on key risk characteristics of the borrower
(such as the FICO score), loan terms, or loan performance, we match the originated loan in each
pair of applications to mortgage-level data from McDash, which collect loan characteristics at
origination from mortgage servicers and track the performance of these loans over time. The
approved HMDA loan applications in our sample are matched to the mortgage-level data on the
origination date, zip code, loan amount, loan type, loan purpose, occupancy type, and lien. This
step substantially reduces the sample size, as McDash data do not have universal coverage and
mortgage servicer data (particularly, information on loan origination dates) may not coincide
with the regulator-collected data. Moreover, as the servicer data are concentrated in the latter part
of our HMDA sample, the merged dataset becomes heavily weighted towards the 2003-2006
period. We end up with 303,368 unique loan originations, of which 90,349 fit the definition of a
‘steered’ transaction.19
Next, we create two control samples. Both control groups consist of borrowers whose
applications were also initially denied, but then approved within a short time period by another
lender not affiliated with the holding company that originally denied the loan. The samples differ
from each other in the technique used to match them to the treatment sample.
The first control sample (labeled Design 1) is based on a propensity score matching
procedure. Specifically, we perform a nearest neighbor propensity score match (PSM), with each
loan in the steered sample cutoff matched with replacement to a similar non-steered loan. The
match criterion is the conditional treatment probability from a logit model, where the
independent variables include the log income, the log home value, FICO score at origination, and
loan-to-value (LTV) at origination. We require the potential control loans to be in the same state,
originated within 90 days, be issued for the same purpose (purchase or refi), have the same
occupancy status (owner or investor), and be of the same type (conventional or FHA) as a given

19

Due to proprietary data restrictions, the process of merging HMDA and mortgage servicer data requires replacing
lender identifiers with randomly generated numbers. Thus, while the resulting analysis is able to incorporate lender
fixed effects, including lender-specific characteristics is not feasible.

12

steered loan. From the resulting sample of potential controls, we choose a loan with the smallest
difference in the propensity score, subject to an absolute threshold of 0.05. The resulting
propensity-matched sample contains 71,682 steered loans and an equivalent number of control
loans.
The second control group (labeled Design 2) is based on strict matching of each
characteristic. That is, for each steered loan we find a non-steered counterpart that is very close
in each of the following: applicant income, loan amount, FICO score, LTV ratio, and origination
date, while matching exactly on loan purpose, loan type, occupancy type, and state. We require
that applicant income and loan amount be within 25%, FICO score within 25 points, LTV ratio within 5
percentage points and origination date within 90 days. Not surprisingly, this approach results in a

smaller final sample of 13,252 steered loans and 13,252 non-steered loans. 20
In addition to the data sources discussed above, we use the CoreLogic Home Price Index
(HPI) to compute local changes in home prices. HPI data are available at the zip code level for
57.3% of the U.S. population. For observations for which zip-code-level data are not available,
we use data at the Core Based Statistical Area (CBSA) level, which are available for 83.9% of
the U.S. population. Finally, we use the 2000 Census to identify census tracts that fall in the lowto-moderate income (LMI) category and to obtain the share of area population with at least some
college education.21

3.3

Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the resulting pair of treatment and control

samples. The left-hand panel presents characteristics of the propensity score matching approach
(Design 1), and the right-hand panel is based on the strict matching approach (Design 2).
Note that by construction, the propensity-matched sample minimizes the joint differences
on key observable characteristics. Yet, the summary statistics for the propensity-matched sample
displayed in the upper left-hand panel of Table 1 suggest that the means and standard deviations
of each continuous variable used in PSM are very similar for the treatment and control samples.

20

The more lenient PSM approach generates a larger sample but also increases the possibility of pairwise
mismatches in treated and control loans.

21

LMI areas are defined as those census tracts in which the median family income is less than 80 percent of the area
median income.

13

It is worth noting that the average FICO scores in our sample are around 710 and the average
first-lien LTV ratios at origination are under 70 percent. In other words, the borrowers in our
sample do not match the profile of a subprime borrower purchasing (or refinancing) their house
with the minimum amount of equity possible. More than 80 percent of loans in the PSM sample
are owner-occupied, and most (59 percent) are used for home purchases.
In addition to means summarized in Table 1, Figure 2 displays kernel densities for the
main continuous variables: loan applicant income, loan amount, FICO score, and the LTV ratio
for each of the sample designs. The figure shows that in both designs, the distribution of key
covariates in control and treatment samples is very close to each other.
However, achieving tight covariate balance in observables through matching still
produces a considerable amount of variation in the means of the outcome variables, listed in the
lower panel of Table 1. The steering hypothesis suggests that the ‘steered’ group is charged
higher interest rate and has better ex post credit quality than the control group. Indeed, we see
that borrowers in this group have higher average interest rates (6.96% vs. 6.59%), while
experiencing lower unconditional average rates of default (6.3% vs. 7.7%).22 These differences
are statistically as well as economically significant. Furthermore, we also observe sizable
differences in propensities to originate loans with certain contract features between the two
groups. A much higher fraction of the steered group loans are option ARM (38% vs. 16%) or
interest only mortgages (32% vs. 16%), and carry prepayment penalties (41% vs. 20%).
For the strict-matching sample (Design 2), the results are fairly similar, although the
resulting sample is much smaller. As with Design 1, the key covariates are closely matched
between the treatment and control samples. This is true both for the means and the entire
distribution (Figure 2). The comparison of outcome variables between the groups is also similar
to that in Design 1. The treatment group has higher average interest rate, lower realized
delinquency rates, and higher rates of incidence of high-margin mortgage products (option
ARMs, IO loans, and loans with pre-payment penalties). It is worth noting that relying on the
strict-matching procedure generates a sample that contains a smaller fraction of non-amortizing
mortgage contracts, such as IOs or option ARMs. Amromin et al. (2015) show that such

22

The initial or first observed APR is the interest rate reported six months after the loan was originated. This allows
us to avoid capturing initial teaser rates that were commonly offered on certain loan contracts but typically lasted
only for one month.

14

contracts were common among relatively high-income borrowers purchasing more expensive
homes that ended up defaulting at high rates. The difference in relative preponderance of such
contracts between the two sample design approaches accounts for relative differences in income,
loan amount and default rates in the left and right panels of Table 1.
While these comparisons of unconditional means are generally consistent with our
hypothesis, the subsequent analysis investigates these differences in a fully specified regression
framework. The propensity-score matched sample forms the basis for our regression analysis.
However, for completeness, we also report all of the regression results for the strict matching
approach in the Appendix.

4

Empirical Results

4.1

Regression Specification
Once we develop a sample of borrowers who were steered toward affiliated lenders, we

conduct cross-sectional regression analysis evaluating borrower and loan contract characteristics
to determine whether that group of borrowers is indeed different from other borrowers. In doing
so, we control for an array of factors, including various fixed effects. The regressions used in
most tables use the following specification:
0/1
,

(1)

where Responsei is the loan-level response variable, such as the interest rate on mortgages,
default status of loans, etc.; Steeredi is a dummy variable that receives the value of one if the
loan is identified as a steered loan and zero otherwise; BorrowerControlsi are a set of borrower
characteristics including: logged borrower income, and the FICO credit score of the borrower
(splined into the ranges: 621-660, 661-720, 721-760, and >760). MortgageControlsi are a set of
loan-specific characteristics, which include the following variables: logged loan amount, LTV
ratio at origination (splined into 80%-89%, 90%-99%, and ≥ 100%), binary indicators of various
contract types (amortizing ARM, option ARM, IO), refi flag, pre-payment penalty flag, owneroccupier flag, conventional mortgage flag, and low documentation flag.. In addition, we control
for the 12-month change in the zip-level house price index. Appendix A provides detailed
variable descriptions. FixedEffectsi account for one of the following: fixed effects for the state
interacted with calendar quarter, fixed effects for the state interacted with calendar quarter of
15

origination and with originating bank dummy, and fixed effects for each pair of matched
treatment and control loans. In all regressions we double-cluster standard errors at the state and
calendar quarter level.

4.2

Performance of Steered Borrowers
We begin by testing for difference between the ex post credit quality of steered borrowers

to borrowers in the control group. Recall that borrowers in both groups were rejected by one
lender and were accepted by another, and that the credit quality of borrowers at origination is
very similar in both groups by construction. The only difference between the groups is that
steered borrowers were approved by an affiliated lender, while borrowers in the control group
were approved by an unrelated lender.
The test is presented in Table 2. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the
borrower defaulted (experienced 90-day delinquency) within the following two years. The
variable of interest is whether the borrower was flagged as steered. We present several
specifications. Columns (1) and (2) include fixed effects for state interacted with calendar
quarter. Columns (3) and (4) include fixed effects for state interacted with bank and calendar
quarter, while columns (5) and (6) include fixed effects for matched loan pairs. Even columns
include borrower and mortgage controls, as discussed in Section 4.1, while odd columns include
only the steered indicator and the corresponding fixed effects.
The results in most specifications show that borrowers who were steered are less likely to
experience default. The most parsimonious specification in column (1) suggests that after
removing the origination date and location effects, steered loans experienced default rates of 1.2
percentage points lower than their non-steered counterparts. For sizing up the economic
significance of this effect, recall that the unconditional default rate in the control group is 7.7%.
Adding controls for borrower and loan characteristics substantially amplifies the difference in
default rates, as the coefficient on the steered loan indicator increases to -2.8 percent. Further
soaking up bank-specific effects in columns (3) and (4) largely preserves these estimates,
although statistical significance weakens substantially in specification with additional controls.
In the tightest specification (column (6)), where we include matched loan pair fixed effects, the
estimated coefficient on steered loans is -3.0 percentage points. Put differently, the default rate of
steered borrowers is nearly 40% lower than in the control group. It appears, therefore, that the ex
16

post credit quality of steered borrowers as measured by loan performance is substantially better
than that of the borrowers who obtained their loans from unaffiliated lenders.

4.3

Characteristics of Steered Mortgages

4.3.1

Interest Rate
A central part of the steering hypothesis is that steered borrowers are led to taking

mortgage products that are profitable to the originator. The most direct measure of loan
profitability is risk-adjusted interest rate. Having established in the previous section that steered
borrowers are of better ex post credit quality, the null hypothesis of higher profitability of steered
loans can be evaluated by whether such borrowers pay interest that is equal or lower than that of
the non-steered borrowers. Hence, we first turn to measures of mortgage interest rates.
In Table 3, we report the results of regressing the mortgage APR on the variable of
interest—steered flag—as well the other control variables and fixed effects as described in
Section 4.1. The regressions show that steered borrowers pay interest rates that are up to 72 basis
points higher relative to those by similar but non-steered borrowers.
The most parsimonious specification presented in column (1) indicates an estimated
interest rate differential of 39 basis points after soaking up the effects of loan origination date
and property location (state). Since mortgages of different contractual forms have substantial
variation in their interest rate – owing to the term premium and the frequency of interest rate
resets – it is especially important to account for loan characteristics. When we add such controls
in column (2), the estimated interest rate differential nearly doubles to 72 basis points .The
magnitude of the effect is large both in absolute terms and relative to the mean interest rate of
6.59% in the control group. Augmenting the set of time-and-state fixed effects with bankspecific indicators in column (4) compresses the estimated differential for steered loans to 35
basis points. The tightest specification that accounts for pairwise fixed effects in column (6)
produces an estimated differential of 69 basis points.
These differentials, especially when coupled with favorable performance, generate large
gains for the lender. One way to approximate profits generated by higher interest rates is to use
industry multipliers for converting interest flows into capitalized dollar values. The magnitude of
the conversion factor depends on expected prepayment probabilities, ability to earn float income,
and other technical factors, but it generally varies between 4 and 7 (Fuster et al, 2013). Taking
17

the lower end of the multiplier range, our estimated interest rate differential for steered loans
suggest increased profitability to lender of between $2,800 and $5,700 on a $200,000 loan
(4*34.8bp*$200,000 and 4*72.1bp*$200,000). Note that the historical profitability of mortgage
originations during the 2000-2010 period has averaged between 1 and 2 percentage points, or
between $2,000 and $4,000 on a $200,000 loan (Goodman, 2012).

4.3.2

Product Type
Next, we examine the type of mortgages and mortgage characteristics taken by borrowers

who are flagged as steered, compared to similar borrowers in the control group. In Table 4, we
select several mortgage types that are considered to have high-profit margin in the residential
mortgage industry. The mortgage types that we study are: interest only mortgages, option ARMs
(adjustable rate mortgages), mortgages with prepayment penalty, and low documentation
mortgages. Except for interest only mortgages and option ARMs, these features are not mutually
exclusive. Interest only loans are loans in which the borrower does not repay any of the principal
amount, for a number of years, thus lowering the monthly payment for a certain period. Option
ARM mortgages are mortgages in which the borrower can decide about the monthly payment, as
long as it is equal or above the minimum payment. The minimum payment is typically set below
the interest servicing requirements, leading to negative amortization, i.e., borrowers accruing
principal instead of repaying it. Lenders usually discontinue the optionality of the mortgage
when the principal reaches a certain level, e.g., 125% of the original loan amount.23 Mortgages
with prepayment penalty are mortgages in which borrowers pay a penalty if they refinance the
loan (repay the principal) earlier than scheduled. Prepayment penalties, when they exist, are
typically set between 1 and 5 years. Low documentation mortgages (also called stated-income
mortgages) are mortgages in which borrowers need either none or limited documentation for
their income.
We learn about the profitability of loan products from conversations with lenders in the
industry. The information that these loan types are profitable also appears in written sources. In a
practical guide about the mortgage market, Baxi (2015) reports that interest only mortgages are
the most profitable for the bank (p. 98). Kennedy (2008) cites the comments of the CEO of

23

See detailed explanation of the mortgage types at https://www.fdic.gov/consumers/consumer/interest-only/.

18

Washington Mutual (the largest mortgage originator at the time) from the 2004/Q3 conference
call, where he says that the company focuses on high margin mortgage products such as option
ARM mortgages. Similar message is echoed in an article about the competition in the mortgage
market.24 Mortgages with prepayment penalties were Countrywide’s favorite product since
“…investors who bought securities backed by the mortgages were willing to pay more for loans
with prepayment penalties…”.25 Steven Krystofiak, President of the Mortgage Brokers
Association for Responsible Lending (MBARL), an advocacy group protecting consumers and
the loan industry from outlandish and counterproductive loan programs, testified in 2006 in front
of the Federal Reserve Board. He argued that banks originated increasing amounts of statedincome (i.e., low doc) mortgages because the strong demand from were selling them to
securitizers at profit.26
The tests for the mortgage types are provided in Table 4. There are 12 regressions, where
the dependent variables are indicators to whether the type of the mortgage is interest only
(columns (1)-(3)), option ARM (columns (4)-(6)), have a prepayment penalty (columns (7)-(9)),
or low documentation (columns (10)-(12)). As in the previous tables, the specifications vary in
their configuration of fixed effects. All specifications include controls for borrower and
mortgage characteristics.
The results uniformly show that steered borrowers are more likely to take mortgages that
have the features that are considered highly profitable in the mortgage industry. The magnitudes
of the effect are very large. When considering the first column in each column triplet, the results
show that steered borrowers are 85% more likely to take interest only loans (0.141/0.165) than
borrowers in the control group, 136% (0.219/0.161) more likely to take an option ARM
mortgage, 134% (0.266/0.198) more likely to take a prepayment penalty mortgage, and 19%
(0.129/0.671) more likely to take a low documentation loan.

24

Ruth Simon and James R. Hagerty, Countrywide’s New Scare, Wall Street Journal, October 24, 2007. Available
at: http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB119318489086669202
25

Gretchen Morgenson, Inside the Countrywide Lending Spree, New York Times, August 26, 2007. Available at:
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/26/business/yourmoney/26country.html
26

Available at: http://www.federalreserve.gov/secrs/2006/august/20060801/op-1253/op-1253_3_1.pdf

19

4.3.3

Securitization
Most of the mortgage loans in our sample were originated between 2003 and 2006.

During this period, lenders increasingly originated mortgages to sell them to investment banks
which, in turns, packaged them into private-label mortgage-backed securities (PLS MBS) for
capital-market investors (Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund, 2009; Nadauld and Sherlund, 2013).
According to the sources cited in Section 4.3.2, lenders originated mortgages with exotic features
in order to satisfy the demand from Wall Street: both the investment banks and the ultimate
investors. In this section, we explore whether steered mortgages were indeed more likely to be
sold to private market securitizers.
In Table 5, we regress indicators for whether a mortgage was kept as a portfolio loan,
securitized by a private market organization or securitized by one of the government-sponsored
entities (GSEs). Our results strongly indicate that the steered loans were much more likely to be
funded through private-label securitizations, as opposed to being held on bank portfolios. The
point estimates in columns (1) to (3) show that steered loans are 52% (0.231 / 0.44) more likely
to be sold into private-label MBS pool. Columns (7) to (9) suggest that steered loans were
equally likely to be sold to GSEs as mortgages in the control sample. (Note that the three funding
outlets are mutually-exclusive alternatives, and hence sum up to 1.)
These results demonstrate the motivation for the steering activity. Lenders benefit from
steering through originating exotic mortgages to borrowers and selling them to securitizers and
investors.

4.4

Characteristics of Steered Borrowers
Our final analysis examines the demographic characteristics of steered borrowers. To

answer the question of which borrowers were more likely to be steered, we rely on (partial)
demographic information and precise geographic location captured in HMDA. In particular, we
are able to make use of data on borrower's gender, identification as African-American or
Hispanic, indicator of not having a co-applicant, and indicator of a loan being secured by a
property in a low or moderate-income census tract, as well as zip-code share of households with

20

at least some college education.27 Since steering means that borrowers are taking an inferior
product relative to what they can get otherwise, we expect that steered borrowers share
characteristics that have been linked to lower levels of financial sophistication.
We start with a set of steered and PSM-matched control loans. By construction, this set is
evenly split between steered and non-steered loans. More importantly, its construction ensures
that each loan pair is closely matched on a set of key loan and borrower characteristics.28 For this
set of loans, we estimate the likelihood of being steered as a function of HMDA variables,
absorbing a set of fixed effects as in the earlier tables. Our preferred method employs the linear
probability model, given the large number of fixed effects in some specifications.
The OLS results are shown in Table 6 (logit models produce similar estimates and are
available on request). Starting with the first column, we find that all else equal, AfricanAmerican applicants had a similar likelihood of being steered while Hispanic applicants had a
somewhat higher propensity. Female applicants and applicants that did not have a co-borrower
were much more likely to be steered towards more expensive loans. We also found applicants
residing in LMI census tracts to be considerably more likely to be steered. The magnitudes of the
estimated coefficients are in the order of 0.05 – 0.10, suggesting, for instance, that borrowers
with no cosigners are about 20% more likely to be steered. Somewhat counterintuitively, higher
shares of educated borrowers in a given zip code are associated with a higher probability of
steering. However, in contrast with the other regressors, the education share is much less precise
as it is a geographic (not an individual) measure and is time-invariant (set at the 2000 Census
level).
These results are closely aligned with existing empirical evidence on which population
subgroups display lowest levels of financial literacy. An extensive recent literature survey by

27

Prior to 2004, HMDA required respondents to choose among six racial or ethnic classifications. In 2004, the
reporting rules separated questions on ethnicity (Hispanic or non-Hispanic) and race (white, black, Asian, American
Indian and Alaska native, Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander). This creates potential problems with making race and
ethnicity classifications consistent over the two periods. A related problem arises with determining race and
ethnicity in records where either of the two fields is missing. We follow the Avery, Brevoort, and Canner (2007, pp.
361-62) approach to addressing this issue.
28

Recall that the PSM algorithm conditions on borrower income, loan amount, FICO score, and LTV at origination.
It also requires an exact match loan purpose and type, occupancy status, and state in which the property is located, as
well as an application date within 90 days of that of the treated loan.

21

Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) highlights substantial shortfalls in financial literacy among certain
groups. In particular, the young and the old households, women, minorities, those who are least
educated and those with lower incomes all display markedly lower levels of financial
sophistication. By and large, these also happen to be the groups identified as more likely to be
steered by their mortgage lender.
Column (2) presents the specification in which state-quarter fixed effects are further
interacted with dummy variables for rejecting Bank Holding Companies (BHCs). Recall that
each of the loans in this sample had been rejected initially by some bank. Adding bank fixed
effects to the set of controls allows us to check whether demographic factors retain their
predictive power within rejecting BHCs in a given state and calendar quarter. The results in
column (2) suggest that they largely do, albeit with somewhat lower magnitudes. In the final
column, we introduce a dummy variable for each matched pair. All of the demographic variables
appear as strong predictors of the likelihood of being steered.
Overall, the results suggest that female borrowers, borrowers with no co-signers and
borrowers residing in low- and moderate-income areas were the ones most likely to have gotten
steered towards more expensive loans. This result feeds back and supports the mechanism we
proposed earlier in Section 2.2. Specifically, lenders are more likely to steer applicants with
lower levels of financial sophistication to minimize the risk that rejected but qualified borrowers
shop around and end up with a different lender. Furthermore, existing research suggests that
these populations might be less informed about credit markets in general and thus might be more
likely to be vulnerable to lender steering practices (Berndt, Hollifield, Sandas, 2014).

4.5

Alternative control samples
Throughout our analysis, we have been comparing two groups of borrowers whose initial

mortgage applications were rejected. The steered group obtained a loan from an affiliate of the
original rejecting lender, while the control group was successful in securing a mortgage through
a lender unaffiliated with the original one. These are the two borrower groups at the bottom of
Figure 1.
However, the study can also benefit from analyzing differences between steered
borrowers and borrowers whose mortgage applications were approved on the first attempt. Since
each of the steered loans has a record with the rejecting lender (Bank A) and the lender that
22

approved the subsequent application (Bank B), the alternative control samples can be drawn
from two sources: borrowers approved by Bank A and borrowers approved by Bank B. In the
former case, we compare borrowers who were approved by the original lender with those that
were successfully steered to an affiliate. In terms of Figure 1, the control group is that on the far
right branch of the diagram and captures borrowers that the lender might have considered to be
too risky to steer for fear of losing them to competitors. In the latter case, we compare borrowers
who went directly to an affiliate with those who found their way there after being turned down
by the original lender. This control group may be expected to consist of riskier borrowers who
would find the product mix offered by Bank B appealing (see results in 4.3.2, as well as
Amromin et al., 2014).
These alternative control groups can be used to analyze each of the outcomes studied in
Tables 2 through 6. We choose to focus on realized performance as it encapsulates the
underlying credit quality of the applicants. As done elsewhere in the paper, each of the control
groups is constructed to make it have the same covariate balance as the treated group (the steered
borrowers). That is, we use propensity-matched scoring to create a control group of Bank Aapproved (or Bank B-approved) borrowers that are observationally equivalent to the steered
borrowers. For example, for a steered borrower rejected at Bank A and later approved by Bank
A’s affiliate, we choose a similar borrower that was approved right away by Bank A. The
restriction of only looking for similar borrowers approved by a given institution produces smaller
control and treatment samples. The Bank A control group consists of 9,374 borrowers (matched
to 9,374 steered borrowers) and Bank B control group consists of 11,111 borrowers (matched to
the same number of steered borrowers).
Based on our discussion of the potential steering process, one can hypothesize that the
steered borrowers would have comparable performance with the successful Bank A borrowers –
they could have been approved by the original lender but ended up with the affiliate’s more
expensive products. We would also expect that the borrowers steered to Bank B would perform
better than the borrowers who went to Bank B’s product mix directly. The results presented in
Table 7 are consistent with these hypotheses.
We find that borrowers rejected by Bank A and steered towards its affiliate have
effectively the same realized default rates as borrowers that were approved by Bank A (Panel A,
column (1)). This result survives the addition of lagged HPI growth, and borrower and loan
23

characteristics (column (2)), as well as the addition of bank holding company fixed effects
interacted with the state and calendar quarter of origination (columns (3)-(4)). In contrast, the
results in Panel B suggest that borrowers steered to Bank B performed better than borrowers
whose original application to Bank B was approved immediately. The performance differential
among the steered borrowers is sizable as their realized default rates are nearly 30 percent lower.
This result is also consistent with the notion that borrowers steered to costlier products at Bank B
were overqualified compared to Bank B’s clientele, but could have been approved (and
benefitted from) Bank A’s product offerings.

5

Conclusion
During the housing boom of the 2000s, there were frequent accusations of unscrupulous

lender behavior. However, there has been little research that has methodically evaluated the
housing market data to find systematic evidence of such behavior. We attempt to fill some of this
research void. We look for evidence that some lenders may have steered borrowers to an affiliate
that charged higher rates and provided more expensive mortgage products than what the
borrower could have obtained had they gone to an unaffiliated lender instead.
Our evidence shows that borrowers who are flagged as steered are performing at least as
well, if not better, compared with borrowers in the control group. Nevertheless, steered
borrowers pay significantly higher interest rates and are more likely to take mortgages that are
considered high-profit margin products. These loans are also more likely to be securitized by
lenders through private-label mortgage pools. We conduct analysis on the determinants of being
steered and find the applicants most likely to be steered are single, female borrowers residing in
low- and moderate-income areas.
Thus, in general, the findings are consistent with a particular form of loan product
steering during the formative years of the housing bubble. While lending terms have tightened
significantly following the collapse of the housing market, once markets recover, there may be a
tendency for such practices to creep back into the lending mix. Improvements in financial
literacy of the borrowers as well as monitoring of lender practices could be effective approaches
to remedying the problem.

24

References
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas
Evanoff, 2014, Predatory Lending and the Subprime Crisis, Journal of Financial Economics
113(1), 29-52.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, and Sedar Dinc, 2012, The Politics of
Foreclosures, Paper presented at the NBER Summer Institute - Political Economy, July.
Agarwal, Sumit and Itzhak Ben-David, 2012, Loan Prospecting and the Loss of Soft
Information, Working Paper, Fisher College of Business, No. 2012-03-007, October.
Agarwal, Sumit, Itzhak Ben-David, and Vincent Yao, 2015, Appraisal Bias: Evidence from the
Residential Real-Estate Market, Management Science 61(9), 2220-2240.
Agarwal, Sumit, Yan Chang, and Abdullah Yavas, 2012, Securitization and Adverse Selection in
Mortgage Lending, Journal of Financial Economics 105(3), 640-660.
Agarwal, Sumit, and Robert Hauswald, 2010, Distance and Private Information in Lending,
Review of Financial Studies, 23(7), 2757-2788.
Agarwal, Sumit, Richard Rosen, and Vincent Yao, 2012, Why do Borrowers Make Mortgage
Refinancing Mistakes, Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Amromin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Edward Zhong, 2013, Complex
Mortgages, Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Avery, Robert B., Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner, 2007, Opportunities and Issues in
Using HMDA Data, Journal of Real Estate Research 29(4), 351-79.
Barr, Michael S., 2005, Credit Where it Counts: The Community Reinvestment Act and Its
Critics, New York University Law Review 80 (2), 513, May 2005.
Baxi, Nishant, 2015, All about Mortgage, CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
Ben-David, Itzhak, 2011, Financial Constraints and Inflated Home Prices during the Real-Estate
Boom, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 102(3), 559-578.
Ben-David, Itzhak, 2012, High Leverage and Willingness to Pay: Evidence from the Residential
Housing Market, Working Paper, The Ohio State University.
Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell, 2002, Small Business Credit Availability and
Relationship Lending: The Importance of Bank Organizational Structure, Economic Journal 112,
32-53.
Berndt, Antje, Burton Hollifield, and Patrik Sandas, 2014, The Role of Mortgage Brokers in the
Subprime Crisis, Working paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Bocian, Debbie Gruenstein, Keith Ernst, and Wei Li, 2008, Race, Ethnicity and Subprime Home
Loan Pricing, Journal of Economics & Business 60 (1-2), 110-124.
Bostic, Raphael W., K. Engel, P. McCoy, A. Pennington-Cross, and Susan Wachter, 2008, State
and Local Anti-Predatory Lending Laws: The Effect of Legal Enforcement Mechanisms, Journal
25

of Economics and Business, 60 (1-2), 47-66.
Brevoort, Kenneth P., 2011, Credit Card Redlining Revisited, Review of Economics and
Statistics 93(2), 714-724.
Brown, George, 2003, Protecting Homeowners: Preventing Abusive Lending While Preserving
Access to Credit. Testimony before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer
Credit of the Committee on Financial Services, and the Subcommittee on Housing and
Community Opportunity of the Committee on Financial Services, November 5. Washington DC:
Government Printing Office.
Cohen-Cole, Ethan, 2011, Credit Card Redlining, Review of Economics and Statistics 93(2), 700713.
Dahl, Drew, Douglas Evanoff and Michael Spivey, 2010, The Community Reinvestment Act and
Targeted Mortgage Lending. Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 42(7), 1351-1372.
Demyanyk, Yulia and Elena Loutskina, 2012, Mortgage Companies and Regulatory Arbitrage,
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, #12-20, November.
Eakes, Martin, 2000, Predatory Lending Practices. Testimony before the Committee on Banking
and Financial Services, May 24. Washington DC: Government Printing Office.
Engel, Kathleen, and Patricia McCoy, 2002, A Tale of Three Markets: The Law and Economics
of Predatory Lending, Texas Law Review 80(6), May.
Evanoff, Douglas D. and William F, Moeller, 2014. Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act: Purpose, Critique, Implementation Status and Policy Issues, Editors,
NOW Publishers, Inc.: Boston, MA.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 2006, Challenges and FDIC Efforts Related to
Predatory Lending, Report by the Office of Inspector General,
http://www.fdicoig.gov/reports06/06-011.pdf
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC), 2010, Final Report of the National Commission on
the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States, Internal Report.
Freddie Mac, 1996, Automated Underwriting: Making Mortgages Lending Simpler and Fairer
for America’s Families, Washington DC.
Garver, Rob, 2001, Citi Corroborates Two Allegations, American Banker, July 30, page 4.
Gilreath, Evan M. 1999 The Entrance of Banks into Subprime Lending: First Union and The
Money Store, University of North Carolina Banking Institute Journal 3, April.
Goldstein, Ira, 2002, Predatory Lending: An Approach to Identify and Understand Predatory
Lending, Philadelphia Investment Fund.
Kennedy, Jane Jollineau, 2008, WaMu’s Option-ARM Strategy, Foster School of Business,
University of Washington, Case study.
Igan, Deniz, Mishra Prachi, and Thierry Tressel, 2009, A Fistful of Dollars: Lobbying and the
Financial Crisis, IMF Working Paper No. 09/287.
Immergluck, Dan, and Geoff Smith, 2003, Risky Business: An Econometric Analysis of the
26

Relationship Between Subprime Lending and Foreclosures. Chicago: Woodstock Institute.
Jiang, Wei, Ashlyn Aiko Nelson, and Edward Vytlacil, 2014, Liar’s Loan? Effects of Origination
Channel and Information Falsification on Mortgage Delinquency, The Review of Economics and
Statistics, vol. 96(1), 1-18.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy K. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Did Securitization
Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics
125(1), 307-362.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy K. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2012, Lender Screening
and the Role of Securitization: Evidence from Prime and Subprime Mortgage Markets, Review of
Financial Studies, 25(7), 2071-2108.
Litan, Robert E., Nicolas P. Retsinas, Eric S. Belsky, and Susan White Haag, 2000, The
Community Reinvestment Act After Financial Modernization: A Baseline Report. The U.S.
Department of the Treasury, Washington, DC.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2014. "The Economic Importance of Financial
Literacy: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 52(1), 5-44.
Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane Sherlund, 2009, The Rise in Mortgage Defaults,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), 27-50.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2009, The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1449-1496.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi, 2010a, The Political Economy of the U.S.
Mortgage Default Crisis, American Economic Review, 100(5), 1967-1998.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi, 2013. The Political Economy of the Subprime
Mortgage Credit Expansion, Quarterly Journal of Political Science, vol. 8(4), 373-408.
Morgan, Donald, Michael R. Strain, and Ihab Seblani, 2012, How Payday Credit Access Affects
Overdrafts and Other Outcomes, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, forthcoming.
Morse, Adair, 2011, Payday Lenders: Heroes or Villains? Journal of Financial Economics,
102(1), 28-44.
Nadauld, Taylor D., and Shane M. Sherlund, 2013, The Impact of Securitization on the
Expansion of Subprime Credit, Journal of Financial Economics 107(2), 454–476.
Ondrich, Jan, Stephen Ross, and John Yinger, 2003, Now You See It, Now You Don’t: Why Do
Real Estate Agents Withhold Available Houses from Black Customers? Review of Economics
and Statistics, 85(4), 854-873.
Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1994, The Benefits of Lending Relationships:
Evidence from Small Business Data, Journal of Finance 49(1), 3-37.
Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Securitization and Distressed Loan
Renegotiation: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Crisis, Journal of Financial Economics
97(3), 369–397.
Renuart, Elizabeth, 2004, An Overview of the Predatory Mortgage Lending Process, Housing
27

Policy Debate 15(3), 467-502.
Saunders, Margot, 2003, Protecting Homeowners: Preventing Abusive Lending While Preserving
Access to Credit. Testimony before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer
Credit of the Committee on Financial Services, and the Subcommittee on Housing and
Community Opportunity of the Committee on Financial Services, November 5. Washington DC:
Government Printing Office
Somplatsky-Jarman, William, 2003, Protecting Homeowners: Preventing Abusive Lending While
Preserving Access to Credit. Testimony before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and
Consumer Credit, of the Committee on Financial Services, November 5. Washington DC:
Government Printing Office.
Staten, Michael, and Gregory Elliehausen, 2001, The Impact of the Federal Reserve Board's
Proposed Revisions to HOEPA on the Number and Characteristics of HOEPA Loans, Working
Paper, Georgetown University Credit Research Center.
Stein, Kevin, and Margret Libby, 2001, Stolen Wealth: Inequalities in California’s Subprime
Mortgage Market. San Francisco: California Reinvestment Committee:
http://www.calreinvest.org/predatorylending/studyonweb7.24.01.html
Stock, Richard D., 2001, Predation in the Subprime Lending Market: Montgomery County.
Dayton, Ohio, Center for Business and Economic Research, University of Dayton. Project 1097.
October.

28

Table 1. Summary Statistics
The table provides summary statistics for the analysis used in the study. The first sample (Design 1) is based on
propensity matching algorithm of loans that were rejected from one lender and was eventually approved by an
affiliate. The second sample (Design 2) is based on exact matching criteria. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in text for
details on data sources and sample construction.

Variables
N
Match quality
FICO at origination
LTV Ratio
Income, $1000s
Loan amount, $1000s
Refi flag
Owner-occupied flag
Conventional flag

Design 1 (Propensity Score Matching)
Steered
Control
71,682
71,682
Mean
StDev
Mean
StDev
711.2
49.0
708.7
59.6
68.8
21.6
65.8
22.2
124.5
97.2
124.8
100.7
277.2
205.1
262.7
199.9
0.41
0.49
0.41
0.49
0.81
0.39
0.81
0.39
1.00
0.07
1.00
0.07

Design 2 (Strict Matching)
Steered
Control
13,252
13,252
Mean
StDev
Mean
StDev
709.2
51.8
709.0
52.5
70.7
20.4
70.8
20.3
83.5
74.3
74.7
51.5
185.1
139.8
177.5
132.2
0.58
0.49
0.58
0.49
0.95
0.22
0.95
0.22
0.99
0.08
0.99
0.08

Outcome variables of interest
First observed interest rate (percent)
90-day delinquency within 2 years

6.96
0.063

1.32
0.243

6.59
0.077

1.98
0.266

6.73
0.043

1.35
0.202

6.44
0.048

1.58
0.213

Amortizing ARM
Interest Only
Option ARM
Pre-payment penalty
Low documentation

0.11
0.32
0.38
0.41
0.82

0.31
0.47
0.49
0.49
0.39

0.12
0.16
0.16
0.20
0.67

0.32
0.37
0.37
0.40
0.47

0.15
0.27
0.27
0.28
0.80

0.36
0.45
0.44
0.45
0.40

0.13
0.09
0.08
0.15
0.72

0.33
0.29
0.27
0.36
0.45

Fixed rate term, months
Loan amortization period, months

75.7
340.1

99.9
66.4

204.0
339.8

149.9
68.9

112.5
333.2

126.5
68.4

241.6
328.8

138.7
72.9

Portfolio loan
GSE securitization
Private-label securitization

0.01
0.29
0.70

0.11
0.45
0.46

0.17
0.38
0.44

0.38
0.48
0.50

0.04
0.44
0.52

0.20
0.50
0.50

0.16
0.54
0.30

0.36
0.50
0.46

Change in HPI 12-mo prior to orig. (%)
Change in HPI 12-mo after to orig. (%)

0.140
0.045

0.104
0.112

0.139
0.045

0.106
0.113

0.109
0.059

0.096
0.110

0.107
0.059

0.095
0.111

Share African-American
Share Hispanic
Share Female
Share with no co-signer
Share in Low-Moderate Income tracts
Share with some college education

0.06
0.17
0.32
0.68
0.30
0.59

0.23
0.38
0.47
0.47
0.46
0.18

0.06
0.15
0.25
0.57
0.27
0.59

0.23
0.36
0.43
0.50
0.44
0.18

0.06
0.12
0.34
0.69
0.31
0.58

0.24
0.33
0.47
0.46
0.46
0.17

0.06
0.13
0.26
0.57
0.30
0.56

0.25
0.33
0.44
0.50
0.46
0.17

Other covariates

Data sources: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), 1998-2006; McDash Analytics; CoreLogic.

29

Table 2. Credit Quality of Steered Borrowers
The table presents regressions of a 90-day delinquency indicator on steered mortgage flag, as well as a variety of
fixed effects and borrower and mortgage characteristics. Borrower and mortgage controls include: logged borrower
income, FICO credit score of the borrower (splined into the ranges: 621-660, 661-720, 721-760, and >760), logged
loan amount, LTV ratio at origination (splined into 80%-89%, 90%-99%, and ≥ 100%), amortizing ARM flag,
interest only flag, refi flag, pre-payment penalty flag, owner-occupier flag, conventional mortgage flag, low
documentation flag, and the 12-month lagged change in the house price index. All regressions are OLS regressions.
Standard errors are double- clustered by calendar month and state. t-statistics are reported in brackets. ***, **, and *
denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in text for
details on data sources and sample construction.

Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

(1)
-0.012*
[-1.89]

HPI growth, lagged 12 mo

Fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characteristics
Observations
2

Adjusted R

90-day delinquency within 2 years
0.077
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.028*** -0.016**
-0.014
-0.014
[-3.58]
[-2.20]
[-1.26]
[-1.41]
0.018
[0.55]

State x Qtr
No
Yes

0.007
[0.21]
State x BHC X Qtr
No
Yes

(6)
-0.030**
[-2.45]
-0.027
[-0.79]

Matched pair
No
Yes

143364

136484

143364

136484

143364

136484

0.054

0.102

0.147

0.178

0.055

0.099

Data sources: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), 1998-2006; McDash Analytics; CoreLogic.

30

Table 3. Interest Rate Paid by Steered Borrowers
The table presents regressions of the initial interest rate on mortgages on steered mortgage flag, as well as a variety
of fixed effects and borrower and mortgage characteristics. Borrower and mortgage controls include: logged
borrower income, FICO credit score of the borrower (splined into the ranges: 621-660, 661-720, 721-760, and
>760), logged loan amount, LTV ratio at origination (splined into 80%-89%, 90%-99%, and ≥ 100%), amortizing
ARM flag, interest only flag, refi flag, pre-payment penalty flag, owner-occupier flag, conventional mortgage flag,
and low documentation flag. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are double-clustered by calendar
month and state of origination. t-statistics are reported in brackets. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in text for details on data sources and sample
construction.

Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

Borrower characteristics
Mortgage characteristics
State*Qtr fixed effects
State*BHC*Qtr fixed effects
Matched pair fixed effects
Observations
2

Adjusted R

Initial interest rate
6.59
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.387*** 0.721*** -0.060 0.348***
[2.60]
[5.07]
[-0.68]
[8.43]

(5)
0.376*
[1.84]

(6)
0.692***
[3.47]

No
No
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

No
No
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

143364

140072

143364

140072

143364

140072

0.165

0.460

0.384

0.591

0.152

0.447

Data sources: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), 1998-2006; McDash Analytics.

31

Table 4. Mortgage Types Taken by Steered Borrowers
The table presents regressions of indicators of mortgage type (interest only, option ARM, prepayment penalty, and
low documentation) on steered mortgage flag, as well as a variety of fixed effects and borrower and mortgage
characteristics. Borrower and mortgage controls are as in the previous table. All regressions are OLS regressions.
Standard errors are double-clustered by calendar month and state of origination. t-statistics are reported in brackets.
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2
in text for details on data sources and sample construction.

Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

State*Qtr fixed effects
State*Bank*Qtr fixed effects
Matched pair fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characteristic
Observations
2

Adjusted R

Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

State*Qtr fixed effects
State*BHC*Qtr fixed effects
Matched pair fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characteristic
Observations
2

Adjusted R

Interest Only
0.165
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.266*** 0.186*** 0.262***
[5.60]
[8.80]
[4.03]
Yes
No
No

No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

Option ARM
0.161
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.129*** 0.046*** 0.125***
[8.70]
[2.98]
[6.15]
Yes
No
No

No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

143364

143364

143364

143364

143364

143364

0.158

0.254

0.144

0.241

0.404

0.204

Prepayment Penalty
0.198
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.141*** 0.102*** 0.136***
[6.13]
[2.92]
[4.11]
Yes
No
No

No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

Low documentation
0.671
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.219*** 0.180*** 0.221***
[5.30]
[4.88]
[3.99]
Yes
No
No

No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

143364

143364

143364

143364

143364

143364

0.158

0.254

0.144

0.241

0.404

0.204

Data sources: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), 1998-2006; McDash Analytics.

32

Table 5. Allocation of Steered Mortgages
The table presents regressions of indicators for the allocations of mortgage to banks’ portfolios, private
securitizations, and public (GSE) securitizations on steered mortgage flag, as well as a variety of fixed effects and
borrower and mortgage characteristics. Borrower and mortgage controls are defined as in tables above. All
regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are double-clustered by calendar month and state of origination. tstatistics are reported in brackets. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in text for details on data sources and sample construction.

Dependent variable:
Mean in the control sample:
Steered flag

State*Qtr fixed effects
State*BHC*Qtr fixed effects
Matched pair fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characteris
Observations
2

Adjusted R

Portfolio
0.17
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.231*** -0.200*** -0.230***
[-12.32] [-4.25]
[-8.12]

Private (PLS) securitization
0.44
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.207*** 0.204*** 0.203***
[6.13]
[4.57]
[4.16]

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

Yes
No
No

No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

Public (GSE) securitization
0.38
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.025
-0.005
0.028
[0.91]
[-0.22]
[0.76]
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

134083

134083

134083

134083

134083

134083

134083

134083

134083

0.172

0.418

0.139

0.314

0.439

0.300

0.372

0.471

0.376

Data sources: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), 1998-2006; McDash Analytics.

33

Table 6. Characteristics of Steered Borrowers
The table presents regressions of whether mortgages were steered on borrower personal characteristics and area
characteristics, as well as well as a variety of fixed effects as described in text. The regression sample is constructed
using propensity-score matching on a number of borrower and mortgage characteristics in McDash Analytics data
mortgage servicing data. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are double-clustered by calendar
month and state of origination. t-statistics are reported in brackets. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in text for details on data sources and sample
construction.

(1)
-0.013
[-0.77]

Borower Steered (0/1)
(2)
0.001
[0.12]

(3)
-0.020
[-0.43]

Hispanic

0.036***
[3.04]

0.001
[0.38]

0.073**
[2.08]

Female

0.062***
[14.43]

0.019***
[3.43]

0.121***
[7.11]

No cosigner

0.101***
[9.33]

0.034***
[4.19]

0.205***
[6.38]

Low/Moderate Income

0.048***
[4.77]

0.027***
[3.56]

0.104***
[3.60]

Share with some college education or above

0.115***
[3.06]

0.060***
[2.80]

0.207*
[1.80]

Yes
No
No

No
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

133011

133011

133011

0.026

0.708

-0.928

Dependent variable:
African-American

State*Qtr fixed effects
State*Rejecting Bank*Qtr fixed effects
Matched pair fixed effects
Observations
2

Adjusted R

Data sources: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), 1998-2006; U.S. Census.

34

Table 7. Credit Quality of Steered Borrowers – Alternative control samples
The table presents regressions of a 90-day delinquency indicator on steered mortgage flag, as well as a variety of
fixed effects and borrower and mortgage characteristics. Borrower and mortgage controls include: logged borrower
income, FICO credit score of the borrower (splined into the ranges: 621-660, 661-720, 721-760, and >760), logged
loan amount, LTV ratio at origination (splined into 80%-89%, 90%-99%, and ≥ 100%), amortizing ARM flag,
interest only flag, refi flag, pre-payment penalty flag, owner-occupier flag, conventional mortgage flag, low
documentation flag, and the 12-month change in the house price index. All regressions are OLS regressions.
Standard errors are double- clustered by calendar month and state. t-statistics are reported in brackets. ***, **, and *
denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Section 4.5 in text for details on
sample construction.

Panel A. Relative to similar loans approved on the first try by Bank A
Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

(1)
0.006
[1.40]

HPI growth, lagged 12 mo

Fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characteristics
Observations
2

Adjusted R

90-day delinquency within 2 years
0.041
(2)
(3)
-0.004
-0.016
[-1.14]
[-0.88]
-0.036
[-0.82]

State x Qtr

(4)
-0.021
[-0.90]
-0.050
[-1.29]

State x BHC X Qtr
No
Yes

No

Yes

18748

17510

18748

17510

0.032

0.054

0.025

0.046

Panel B. Relative to similar loans approved on the first try by Bank B
Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

90-day delinquency within 2 years
0.062
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.017***
-0.019***
-0.018***
-0.020***
[-6.86]
[-5.56]
[-6.65]
[-5.48]

HPI growth, lagged 12 mo

Fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characteristics
Observations

-0.010
[-0.23]
State x Qtr
No

Yes

22222

20700

2

-0.014
[-0.32]
State x BHC X Qtr
No
Yes
22222

20700

0.020
0.058
0.020
0.058
Adjusted R
Data sources: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), 1998-2006; McDash Analytics; CoreLogic.

35

Figure 1. Steering Process

Mortgage
Applicant
Good risk

Bad risk

Reject;
not approved
soon thereafter
Reject, attempt to steer

Steered succeeded:
approved by an
affiliate

Steering failed:
approved by a
new lender

Reasons for steering
Higher fees
Better pricing in PLS pools
More profitable servicing

Approve right
away

Figure 2. Kernel Densities – Propensity matched sample
This figure shows the kernel density distributions of income, loan amount, FICO score, and LTV ratio at origination of HMDAMcDash loans originated between 1998 and 2006. All originated loans in this sample have been matched to a previous loan
application in HMDA that was denied by the lender or withdrawn by the applicant. Steered flag is equal to one if the lender that
denied the first loan application is affiliated with the lender that ultimately originated the loan. Each loan with Steered=1 has
been propensity-matched on loan and borrower characteristics to a similar loan with Steered=0.

37

Figure 2 (continued). Kernel Densities – Strictly-matched sample
This figure shows the kernel density distributions of income, loan amount, FICO score, and LTV ratio at origination of HMDAMcDash loans originated between 1998 and 2006. All originated loans in this sample have been matched to a previous loan
application in HMDA that was denied by the lender or withdrawn by the applicant. Steered flag is equal to one if the lender that
denied the first loan application is affiliated with the lender that ultimately originated the loan. Each loan with Steered=1 has
been strictly matched on each of the loan and borrower characteristics depicted here to a similar loan with Steered=0.

38

Appendix A. Regressions results for Tables 2-6 estimated on the strict-matched sample.
Table A.2. Credit Quality of Steered Borrowers. Strict-matched sample.
The table presents regressions of a 90-day delinquency indicator on steered mortgage flag, as well as a variety of
fixed effects and borrower and mortgage characteristics. Borrower and mortgage controls include: logged borrower
income, FICO credit score of the borrower (splined into the ranges: 621-660, 661-720, 721-760, and >760), logged
loan amount, LTV ratio at origination (splined into 80%-89%, 90%-99%, and ≥ 100%), amortizing ARM flag,
interest only flag, refi flag, pre-payment penalty flag, owner-occupier flag, conventional mortgage flag, low
documentation flag, and the 12-month change in the house price index. All regressions are OLS regressions.
Standard errors are double- clustered by calendar month and state. t-statistics are reported in brackets. ***, **, and *
denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in text for
details on data sources and sample construction.

Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

(1)
-0.005
[-0.95]

HPI growth, lagged 12 mo

Fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characteri
Observations
2

Adjusted R

90-day delinquency within 2 years
0.048
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.027*** -0.025*** -0.037**
-0.005
[-2.71]
[-2.73]
[-2.50]
[-0.70]

(6)
-0.031*
[-1.76]

-0.032***
[-3.04]

-0.083
[-0.67]

State x Qtr
No
Yes

-0.060
[.]
State x BHC X Qtr
No
Yes

Matched pair
No
Yes

26504

19047

26504

19047

26504

19047

0.029

0.056

-0.016

0.035

0.095

0.045

39

Table A.3. Interest Rate Paid by Steered Borrowers. Strict-matched sample.
The table presents regressions of the initial interest rate on mortgages on steered mortgage flag, as well as a variety
of fixed effects and borrower and mortgage characteristics. Borrower and mortgage controls include: logged
borrower income, FICO credit score of the borrower (splined into the ranges: 621-660, 661-720, 721-760, and
>760), logged loan amount, LTV ratio at origination (splined into 80%-89%, 90%-99%, and ≥ 100%), amortizing
ARM flag, interest only flag, refi flag, pre-payment penalty flag, owner-occupier flag, conventional mortgage flag,
and low documentation flag. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are double-clustered by calendar
month and state of origination. t-statistics are reported in brackets. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in text for details on data sources and sample
construction.

Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

Borrower characteristics
Mortgage characteristics
State*Qtr fixed effects
State*BHC*Qtr fixed effects
Matched pair fixed effects
Observations
2

Adjusted R

(1)
(2)
0.288*** 0.540***
[2.89]
[4.29]

Initial interest rate
6.44
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.052 0.221*** 0.288**
[0.90]
[2.81]
[2.17]

(6)
0.496**
[2.32]

No
No
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

No
No
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

26503

19758

26503

19758

26503

19758

0.198

0.428

0.317

0.495

0.405

0.452

40

Table A.4. Mortgage Types Taken by Steered Borrowers. Strict-matched sample.
The table presents regressions of indicators of mortgage type (interest only, option ARM, prepayment penalty, and
low documentation) on steered mortgage flag, as well as a variety of fixed effects and borrower and mortgage
characteristics. Borrower and mortgage controls are as in the previous table. All regressions are OLS regressions.
Standard errors are double-clustered by calendar month and state of origination. t-statistics are reported in brackets.
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2
in text for details on data sources and sample construction.
Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

State*Qtr fixed effects
State*Bank*Qtr fixed effects
Matched pair fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characteristics
Observations
2

Adjusted R

Dependent variable:
Mean of control sample:
Steered flag

Interest Only
0.09
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.190*** 0.127*** 0.197***
[8.14]
[6.20]
[6.05]

Option ARM
0.08
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.195*** 0.168*** 0.195***
[4.36]
[3.97]
[2.87]

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

20164

20164

20164

20164

20164

20164

0.163

0.129

0.150

0.208

0.246

0.170

Prepayment Penalty
0.15
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.174*** 0.152*** 0.184**
[3.82]
[4.26]
[2.55]

State*Qtr fixed effects
State*BHC*Qtr fixed effects

Yes
No

Matched pair fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characteristics

No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

Observations
2

Adjusted R

No
Yes

No
No

Low documentation
0.72
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.135*** 0.047*** 0.139***
[7.41]
[3.09]
[5.39]
Yes
No

No
Yes

No
No

No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

20164

20164

20164

20164

20164

20164

0.235

0.295

0.182

0.068

0.280

0.037

41

Table A.5. Allocation of Steered Mortgages. Strict-matched sample.
The table presents regressions of indicators for the allocations of mortgage to banks’ portfolios, private
securitizations, and public (GSE) securitizations on steered mortgage flag, as well as a variety of fixed effects and
borrower and mortgage characteristics. Borrower and mortgage controls are defined as in tables above. All
regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are double-clustered by calendar month and state of origination. tstatistics are reported in brackets. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in text for details on data sources and sample construction.

Dependent variable:
Mean in the control sample:
Steered flag

Portfolio
0.16
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.161*** -0.099*** -0.177***
[-13.77] [-6.29]
[-7.60]

State*Qtr fixed effects
State*BHC*Qtr fixed effects

Yes
No

Matched pair fixed effects
Borrower and mortgage characte

No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

Observations
Adjusted R

2

No
Yes

Private (PLS) securitization
0.54
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.123*** 0.101*** 0.117**
[4.02]
[3.44]
[2.44]

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

No
No

No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

Public (GSE) securitization
0.30
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.040
-0.001
0.063
[1.36]
[-0.04]
[1.39]
Yes
No

No
Yes

No
No

No
No
Yes
-------- Yes --------

19199

19199

19199

19199

19199

19199

19199

19199

19199

0.140

0.456

0.031

0.322

0.373

0.320

0.350

0.400

0.386

42

Table A.6. Characteristics of Steered Borrowers. Strict-matched sample.
The table presents regressions of whether mortgages were steered on borrower personal characteristics and area
characteristics, as well as well as a variety of fixed effects as described in text. The regression sample is constructed
using propensity-score matching on a number of borrower and mortgage characteristics in McDash Analytics data
mortgage servicing data. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are double-clustered by calendar
month and state of origination. t-statistics are reported in brackets. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. See Sections 3.1 and 3.2 in text for details on data sources and sample
construction.

Borower Steered (0/1)
(1)
(2)
-0.054**
-0.010
[-2.22]
[-0.63]

Dependent variable:
African-American

Hispanic

(3)
-0.117*
[-1.76]

-0.011
[-0.60]

0.002
[0.26]

-0.016
[-0.33]

Female

0.051***
[14.49]

0.023***
[5.15]

0.114***
[11.37]

No cosigner

0.122***
[8.86]

0.001
[0.10]

0.251***
[6.49]

Low/Moderate Income

0.043***
[4.27]

0.011
[1.27]

0.094***
[2.98]

Share with some college education or above

0.209***
[7.42]

0.095***
[3.72]

0.407***
[4.40]

Yes
No
No

No
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

24047

24047

24047

0.021

0.625

-0.904

State*Qtr fixed effects
State*Rejecting BHC*Qtr fixed effects
Matched pair fixed effects
Observations
2

Adjusted R

43

Appendix B. Variable Definition
Variable

Description

Source

Steered flag

1 if rejected mortgage application is approved soon after
by an affiliated lender; 0 if unaffiliated

HMDA, authors’
calculations

Log borrower
income

Borrower income at origination, as reported

HMDA

FICO

FICO score at origination

McDash

Log loan amount

First-lien mortgage amount at origination

McDash

LTV

First-lien loan-to-value ratio at origination

McDash

FRM flag

1 if a mortgage is identified as having a fixed interest rate

McDash

Amortizing ARM
flag

1 if a mortgage has an adjustable interest rate but
amortizes over a pre-determined period of time

McDash

Option ARM flag

Refi flag

1 if a mortgage has an adjustable interest rate but required McDash
payments may be less than interest charges subject to time
and LTV restrictions
1 if a mortgage calls for interest only payments for a preMcDash
specified number of years, fixed amortization schedule
thereafter
1 if a mortgage is identified as refinancing an existing loan McDash

Pre-payment
penalty flag

1 if a mortgage contract has a penalty for refinancing
before a pre-specified time

McDash

Owner-occupied
flag

1 if a property is reported to be owner-occupied

McDash

Conventional flag

1 for mortgages originated outside of FHA/VA

McDash

Jumbo flag

1 for mortgages that exceed GSE loan size limit

McDash

Low
documentation
flag

1 for mortgages that are listed as not being underwritten
on the basis of fully documented income and assets

McDash

HPI growth,
lagged 12 months

Annual change in ZIP or MSA home price index in the 12
months preceding mortgage origination

CoreLogic

Interest only flag

44

