                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          REGULATION AND THE PROVISION OF
                        QUALITY TO HETEROGENOUS CONSUMERS:
                              THE CASE OF PROSPECTIVE
                            PRICING OF MEDICAL SERVICES




                                    Robin Allen

                                   Paul   Gertler




                              Working Paper No. 2269




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 1987




This research was conducted while Robin Allen was on leave as a Victor H. Kramer
Fellow at the University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois. This paper
has benefited greatly from the comments of David Dranove, Kathleen Eyre, Mark
Satterthwaite, Ken Thorpe, and the participants in seminars at Harvard, Northwestern,
and the University of Chicago. Of course, the usual liability disclaimer applies.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Health Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2269
                                                  May 1987



       Regulation and the Provision of Quality to Heterogenous Consumers:

               The Case of Prospective Pricing of Medical Serivces




                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper analyzes the welfare implications of fixed price regulation in
a model in which consumers are heterogenous and a firm can endogenously quali-
ty discriminate. The motivation for this analysis is the current move of
third party payors (governmental and private insurors) toward prospective
pricing of medical services. Our major result is that prospective pricing
causes a distributional welfare loss. Specifically, in our model, prospective
pricing induces a profit maximizing medical care provider to simultaneously
provide a smaller than socially optimal level of quality to more severely ill
patients and, surprisingly, a greater than socially optimal amount of quality
to less severely ill patients. Further, the distributional welfare loss does
not disappear when ethically motivated deviation from profit maximization is
allowed.

    The inefficient distribution of quality occurs because prospective payment
regulation fixes the price across patients with different seventies of ill-
ness but allows providers to quality discriminate. More complicated DRG pric-
ing rules do not appear to be able to completely avoid this problem. Alterna-
tively, vertical integration of third party payors into the direct provision
of medical care is shown to be able to bypass the problem completely. This
implies that the recent proliferation of vertically integrated health care or-
ganizations such health maintenance organizations, preferred provider organi-
zations, and managed care plans by self—insuring employers are welfare improv-
ing.




Robin Allen                                      Paul Gertler
US Department of Justice                         Department of Health Policy
Anti—Trust Division                                and Management
Judiciary Center Building                        Harvard School of Public Health
555 4th Street, NW                               677 Huntington Avenue
Washington, DC 20001                             Boston, MA 02115
                                I. INTRODUCTION

      This paper analyzes the welfare implications of fixed price regulation in

 a model in which consumers are heterogenous and a firm can
                                                              endogenously quali-
 ty discriminate. The motivation for this analysis is the current rapid move

 to prospective pricing of medical services. In 1987 the Medicare program,

which is the largest purchaser of health care services in the United States,

began paying hospitals a completely prospectively determined fixed fee per

patient.1 In addition, many state Medicaid programs and private insurors have

instituted comparable payment systems, and many of the others are actively

considering implementing one. Also, several state Medicaid programs, such as

New York's, are using a similar method to pay for nursing home care, and ex-

tension of the system to physician services is actively being considered by

Medicare and many state Medicaid programs.

     The move to prospective pricing is in response to the enormous growth in

health care (and in particular, hospital) expenditures as a result of

retrospective reimbursement of "reasonable costs" and the accompanying high

costs of administration.2 Cost based reimbursement provided little incentive

for health care providers to efficiently produce medical care as costs could

usually be passed on to the third party payor. In contrast,
                                                               prospective pay-
ment provides incentive for the efficient (minimum cost) production of medical

services by allowing providers to keep the difference between the price and


1   See Vladeck (1984) for a complete description of Medicare's prospective
payment program.

2    See Schweiker (1982) for a discussion of the rationale used by U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services to push for prospective
                                                              pricing.
                                       2

variable costs.3 Further, prospective pricing substantially reduces adminis-

trative costs by removing the necessity of annual audits of each hospital's

financial statement, and the monitoring of the reasonableness of each

patient's bill.

     Medicare's prospective payment system pays hospitals a fixed fee per

patient depending upon which of the approximately 470 "diagnosis related

groups" (DRCs) the patient is placed. Once placed in a DRG, the fee is inde-

pendent of the services (e.g. number of hospitalized days, number of tests,

etc.) provided the patient. The services provided each patient are the qual-

ity characteristics of hospital care. Hospital services (quality) are typi-

cally tailored to the medical needs of the individual patient (Harris, 1977).

Empirical work in Berki (1984), Horn et. al. (1983,1985), and Stern and Ep-

stein (1985) show great variation in severity of illness within DRC

categories, implying substantial patient heterogeneity and potential for qual-

ity discrimination. In suirilnary, the DRG payment structure fixes the price

across patient severity of illness types within DRGs, while allowing medical

care providers to quality discriminate (i.e. provide different levels of qual-

ity to different patients).

     The concern voiced most often about prospective pricing is that it may

have an adverse effect on health (i.e. patients will leave hospitals "quicker

and sicker"). In models with heterogenous consumers and exogenous quality,

Dranove (1986) and Newhouse (1983) argue that prospective payment is an incen—


3   Shleifer (1985) also shows that setting prices based on the average cost
of a pool of comparable firms is incentive to choose the cost minimizing level
of capital stock.
                                       3

 tive for providers not to admit (transfer) severely ill patients that are

 likely to be very costly to treat. In a model with endogenous quality and a

 fixed number of patients (i.e. exogenous quantity), Ellis and McGuire (1986)

argue that prospective payment improves efficiency incentives but may also in-

duce providers to reduce quality.

    All of these models place strong restrictions on the demand function.        Be-

cause providers cannot adjust quality in Dranove's and Newhouse's models, the

choice set of providers is limited to refusing to treat (i.e. transfer)

patients. In essence, quality becomes a binary variable; treating the patient

in a high quality hospital or transferring to a low quality hospital.     Even

though Ellis and McGuire consider endogenous quality, by making quantity ex

ogenous they do not allow quality choices to affect the number of patients a

provider attracts and thus eliminate any role for a market for patients.

     This paper extends previous analysis by combining consumer heterogeneity,

endogenous quality, and endogenous quantity into one model. We show that a

DRG pricing structure induces a distributional welfare loss.   Specifically, in

our model, a profit maximizing provider simultaneously supplies a smaller than

socially optimal amount of quality to more severely ill patients, and sur-

prisingly, a greater than socially optimal quality to less severely ill

patients. The ratio of patients who are over—supplied quality to those who

are under—supplied increases with the price.

      In addition, these results do not disappear when we allow ethically

motivated deviation from profit maximization. We show that such deviation

induces providers to reduce the degree of under—provision of quality to more

severely ill patients without reducing the over—provision of quality to less
                                      4

severely ill patients. Indeed, even if providers are perfect agents for

patients, they still over—provide quality to the less severely ill patients

while providing the optimal amount of quality to the more severely ill. In

most cases, ethically motivated providers are able to supply the ethical

amount of quality to the more severely ill patients only by cross—subsidizing

their care with the profits from the treatment of the less severely ill.

     Finally, we discuss several possible solutions to this distributional

welfare problem. The most promising one appears to be vertical integration of

medical care providers with third party payors and insurors. This implies

that recent innovations in the health care market such as health maintenance

organizations, preferred provider organizations, and managed care plans by

self—insuring employers are welfare improving.



                   II. BEHAVIORAL ASSTJNPTIONS AND NOTATION

     Individuals seek medical care in response to an illness or accident and

for preventive (investment) purposes. The quality of medical care is its ex-

pected efficacy (marginal product) in terms of health. The greater the flow

of medical services provided to an individual, the higher is quality. The

consumption of medical services is assumed to improve an individual's stock of

health, but at a diminishing rate (i.e. a positive and diminishing marginal

productivity of medical care services).

     The productivity of medical services depends on the complexity and

severity of the medical problem. The more severe and complex the problem, the

greater the marginal productivity of medical services. Let 8 measure the com-

plexity and severity of illness.
                                           5

      A provider's demand from the group of individuals with illness type 0 is



                      X —   X(P,Q;9),                                  (1)




where X is the number of patients, P is the price charged each patient, and Q

is the quality (flow of medical services) provided each patient. The demand

function is assumed to be decreasing in price (X        0),   increasing in quality

(XQ    0), and due to a diminishing marginal productivity of medical care, con-

cave in quality (X        0).   We also assume that individuals are less sensitive

to price changes for higher quality medical care (X 0).

       Since the value of medical care rises with severity of illness, the pro-

portion of potential patients within a 6 group that purchase care rises with

the severity and complexity of illness, holding price and quality constant.

On the other hand, the density of potential patients in an 6 group declines

rapidly with severity and complexity of illness. The decline in density is

likely to offset the increase in the proportion of potential patients seeking

care, so that demand is likely to be approximately constant over 9 types,

holding price and quality constant. Therefore, the demand functions are as-

sumed to be constant in 9 (X8 =     0).   In addition, more severely ill individu-

als are assumed to have higher marginal values of quality, so that the demand

function is more quality elastic (X 0) and less price elastic (X9             0) for

more severe illness types.

      Finally,   the cost of supplying quality level Q to X patients is



                      C     cXQ,                                       (2)
                                               6

where c is the marginal cost of a unit of quality. The cost function, as

specified in (2), exhibits constant returns to scale. The constant returns to

scale assumption is consistent with hospital cost function estimates reported

in Friedman and Pauly (1981). This assumption is extremely useful in that it

implies that the profit and welfare maximization problems are separable in 6,

and therefore can be considered separately for each 0 type. This makes the

problem amenable to standard calculus and bypasses the necessity of solving

the more complicated optimal control problem.



                                   III. THE FIRST—BEST

   The social optimum is found by choosing price and quality to maximize the

sum of consumer surplus and profits. Price and quality are allowed to vary by

illness   type. Since the cost function exhibits constant returns to scale, the

social welfare function is separable by illness type. The social welfare

function for illness type 0 is



           W 5X(v,Q;O)dv + PX(P,Q;0) — cX(P,Q;9)Q,                 (3)




The first—order conditions for each 9 are




           W(P—cQ)X—O                                             (4)

                               —           — cX —
           WQ —   JXQdv + (P       cQ)XQ            0,            (5)
                                                             7

which reduce to the more familiar conditions,



                                         PcQ                                 (6)

                           (jXQdv)/X — c.                                    (7)


Condition       (6) requires price to be equal to the marginal cost of an additional

patient, and condition (7) requires the marginal contribution of quality to

average consumer surplus to equal the unit marginal cost of quality.

       One implication of this model is that the welfare maximizing quality pro-

vided each patient monotonically increases for more severely ill patient

types. Formally, by applying Cramer's rule to the first—order conditions in

(4) and (5)




                    —dQ*
                           =
                                     —
                                         f   —
                                              X8dv
                                                        —
                                                                    0,      (8)
                     dG         5   Xdv          2cXQ       c2X

where Q* is the welfare maximizing level of quality.4 The denominator of (8)
is the determinant of the hessian of the welfare maximization problem, divided

by X. Since the determinant of the hessian is positive at the maximum and X,


4      Equation (8) is derived by applying Cramer's rule to (4) and (5) to get

       dQ*/d8   —
                    — [WPPWQ9
                                —
                                    wP9wQP]
                                                 +
                                                     [ww —       WPQWQP].

From (4), and recalling that (4) requires P — cQ, W — 0 and       —
                                                                    X,. 0.
From (5), and recalling that P — cQ and X9 —0, WQ9 —       dv,  w
           —                                         SXQ8
                 — — cXi, 0. Substitution of these expressions
dv, and                                                        into dQ*/dO
and distributing out a X, in both the denominator and the numerator yields
(8).
                                        8


is negative, the denominator of (8) is negative. The numerator is also nega-

tive as result of        0, implying that (8) is positive.

    This result follows from patients' marginal value of quality (and hence

marginal consumers' surplus) increasing with severity of illness. Individuals

with greater seventies of illness are willing to pay more for higher quality.

As a result, the welfare maximizing amount of quality is larger for more

severely ill patients.



                            IV. DR.G PRICE REGULATION

     Under DRG price regulation, one fixed price is set for a range of illness

types, and by law must accept the DRG price as payment in full. The provider

is assumed to take the price as given, but is allowed to supply a different

level of quality to individuals of different illness types. No matter how the

price is chosen, the provider chooses quality so as to maximize profits.

Therefore, the following results are valid for the second—best policy, where

the DRG price is chosen to maximize welfare subject to the provider choosing

quality to maximize profits.

     Let P be the price for the DRG comprised of illness types 0 through &.

Since the cost function exhibits constant returns to scale, the profit func-
tion is separable by illness type, and for illness type 8 is



              11    PX(P,Q;6) — cX(P,Q;9)Q,                     (9)
                                                 9


The profit maximizing quality for patients of type 9 is given by the condition



               l•I —   (P — cQ)XQ — cX —    0,                        (10)




which requires the marginal revenue from quality to equal marginal cost.

     As in the first—best case, the profit maximizing level of quality

monotonically increases with severity of illness. Formally, by applying

Cramer's rule to (10) and a little manipulation



                       — (P —
          dQ
                  ___—— cQ)XQ9  ——                                    (11)
          dO        (P —
                         cQ)X — 2CXQ

where Q is the profit maximizing level of quality. The denominator is fl

and, by the second order conditions, must be negative at the maximum. The

numerator is also negative as XQ6 > 0, implying that (11)   is   positive.

     This result is obtained because consumers' marginal value of quality, and

therefore the marginal revenue from quality is greater for higher more severe-

ly ill patient types. As a result, a profit maximizing provider supplies more

quality to patients in the higher 9 markets than in the smaller 9 markets.

     The profit maximizing level of quality for each 9 type also increases

with price. By applying Cramer's rule to (10) and a little manipulation




         —— — [(P — cQ)XQ —
          dQ

                                     —
                                         cXPJ
                                                 0.                  (12)
          dP           (P —
                              cQ)X       2cXQ
                                     10

The denominator of (12) is the same as the denominator of (11), and is there-

fore negative. The numerator is also negative as a result of      0 and X,

0, implying that (12) is positive. This result occurs because a higher price

implies a higher marginal revenue from quality, and therefore profit maximiz-

ing providers supply more quality to each 0 market as the DRC price rises.



          V. DEVIATION FROM THE FIRST—BEST FOR A GIVEN SEVERITY TYPE

     A profit maximizing provider facing DRO price regulation may supply

patients of a given illness group a level of quality higher or lower than the

first—best depending on the value of the DRC price. Further, by paying a

premium, the regulator can induce a provider to supply the first—best quality

to a particular 9 group, but not to all 9 groups. Another way to state this

result is that for a particular price, there exists a 9 group to which the

profit maximizing provider supplies the first—best quality and the associated

first—best price is less than the DRG price.

     These results are easily demonstrated in figure 1 where the first order

welfare maximizing and first—order profit maximizing conditions are pictured

for a given 9 group. The WQ=O and W0 lines represent all the combinations

of price and quality that satisfy the welfare maximizing conditions (4) and

(5) for a given 9 group. These lines are upward sloping with WQ'O being

steeper than W=0.5 Their intersection gives the welfare maximizing price and


5   By the implicit function theorer the slopes of          and WQO are
dP/dQ — WQ/W     and dP/dQ — — W/WQp, respectively. The second order condi-
tions require W 0 and           0. From (4) and (5) and recalling that (4) re-
quires P — cQ, W —      — —cXi,    0. Therefore, W—0 and WQ=O are both upward
sloping, and the second order condition, WW — WWc       0, implies that WQO
is steeper than W=0.
                                       11

quality, {p*(9),Q*(9)], for individuals with severity of illness type 8.

     The TI-.O line in figure 1 represents all the combinations of price and

quality that satisfy the profit maximizing condition (11) for a given 8 group.

It is upward sloping and everywhere to the left of the WQ=O line.6 Being

everywhere to the left of WQO follows from fl-O being satisfied at a lower

quality for each price.7 Given the DRG price, the profit maximizing quality

Q(6) supplied individuals with severity type 9 is read off the IIO line.

     The relationship between the profit maximizing and welfare maximizing

levels of quality depends on the value of the DRG price. If the DRG price

equals P in figure 1, then the profit maximizing quality level equals the

welfare maximizing quality level. Notice that a preiniun-i of P —   P   must be

paid in order to induce the profit maximizing provider to supply the welfare

maximizing level of quality. If the DRG price is larger than P (say P' in

figure 1), then the profit maximizing level of quality is larger than the

welfare maximizing level. If the DRG price is set below P (say P° in figure

1), then the profit maximizing level of quality is lower the welfare maximiz-

ing level.

     As shown in figure 1, the members of illness group 8 receive the welfare

maximizing level of quality from a profit maximizing provider if the DRG price


6   By the implicit function theorem the slope of fl-.O is dP/dQ —  — fl/fl.
The second order conditions require fl 0, and from (10) flQ — (P —
                                                                   CQ)XQp
cX 0, both of which imply that II—O is upward sloping.

7   This easily demonstrated by comparing the profit maximizing II — 0 condi-
tion in (10) with the welfare maximizing condition WQ — 0 in (5) and noting
that (5) can be expressed as WQ —
                                  jXQdv + UQ — 0. The expression j.Qdv is
positive, implying that (5) is satisfied at a higher Q than is (10) for the
same values of P and 8.
                                       12

is set at P.   It does not necessarily follow that other illness types will

also receive the welfare maximizing quality when the DRG price is set at P.

Specifically, the WQO, W—O, and IL,—O lines are located in different posi-

tions for different 8 types so that Q(8) ' Q*(8) for other U types. This

point is explored in detail in the next section.



               VI. DEVIATION FRO14 THE FIRST BEST BY SEVERITY TYPE

    Under DRC price regulation, profit maximizing providers supply a level of

quality lower than the first—best to more severely ill patients, and a level

of quality higher than the first—best to less severely ill patients.8 This

result is presented in figure 2a where the first best quality function Q*(9)

and the profit maximizing quality function Q(9) are pictured. The functions

are pictured for one DRG which spans the range [6',]. Both functions have

already been shown to be monotonically increasing in e. The Q*(9) function is

steeper than the Q(8) function, and intersects Q(9) at   .   A profit maximizing

provider supplies patients with severity of illness less than with a greater

than socially optimal level of quality, and supplies patients with severity of

illness greater than with a less than socially optimal amount of quality.9

The difference between Q(6) and Q*(9) is the amount of quality that is over-

supplied (or under—supplied) to patients of illness type 8. Note that the

difference is decreasing in 8.


8   Proof of this result is proved in the appendix

9   There is no guarantee that the Q*(6) line will intersect the Q(6) line in
he [O,6J range as is pictured in figure 2a. This depend on the value of
P. As we argue later, the way in which Medicare chooses P makes it likely
that the two functions will cross in the relevant range.
                                       13

     The under— and over—provision of quality is a result of DRC regulation

restricting the price to be the same across severity types. Under—provision

occurs because, unlike the first—best where more severely ill patients pay

more for greater quality, providers cannot by law receive higher payments for

higher quality. The relatively low regulated price induces providers to supp-

ly a lower than first—best quality to more severely ill types, when in fact,

these patients would prefer a higher quality at a higher price. Over—

provision occurs because providers find the DRG payment very lucrative for

less severely ill patients. The relatively high regulated price induces pro-

viders to supply a higher than first—best level of quality to attract more of

these patients, even though these patients would prefer a lower quality at a

lower price.

     A related result is that proportion of patients being over—supplied

quality increases with price (i.e. the 0 at which Q*(9) equals Q(9) is in-

creasing in F). In (12) we demonstrated that the profit maximizing level of

quality for each 6 is increasing in price. Therefore, an increase in F, to

say F', shifts the Q(9) line upwards to Q'(9) as is pictured in figure 2b. At

the new price Q*(9) equals Q'(8) at 9' >   . Consequently,   patients types be-
tween 6 and 6' switch from being under—supplied quality to being over-

supplied.

    Further, there exists a price above which all patients within the DRC

(i.e. BE[#,J) are over—supplied quality, and another below which all

patients are under—supplied quality. It is probable that current DRC prices

are within the range in which the Q*(9) line crosses the Q(9) line in the

range [9,6], so that some patients are always under—supplied quality and
                                      14

other are always over—supplied quality. The reason for this is that the DRC

prices are set based on the average costs of a large pooi of comparable hospi-

tals.10 The prices reflect the (inefficient) costs associated with the quali-

ty provided to the average 9 under the old cost based payment system.   Since

the prices are greater than the cost of efficiently providing quality to the

average 9, the prices are high enough so that some less severely ill patients

are being over—supplied quality. In addition, some patients will be under—

supplied quality as there are always a few very severely ill patients who are

outliers in the illness distribution within each DRG.



             VII. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND CROSS—SUBSIDIZATION

     Even though proprietary hospital chains are rapidly expanding their

market shares, it is not clear that all medical care providers can be modeled

strictly as profit maximizers. Indeed Pauly (1980) and Ellis and McGuire

(1986) stress the role of the physician as a patient's agent, and the conflict

between ethical considerations for the patients' welfare and their own profit

(income) maximization. In this section we show that ethically motivated

deviation from profit maximization causes medical care providers to use prof-

its from the care of less severely ill patients to cross—subsidize the care of

more severely ill patients. This cross—subsidization nioves the quality of

care closer to the first—best for more severely ill patients but does not af-

fect the over—provision of quality to less severely ill patients.


10 The pool is constructed to be large enough so that no hospital's actions
can significantly influence the pool average costs.
                                        15

       Ethical considerations are introduced by means of a minimum quality con-

straint. The provider is ethically bound to provide patients at least some

percentage of the first—best quality, where this percentage is assumed to be

constant over all 0 types. This is represented in figure 3a by the Qe(9)

line, which is parallel to Q*(0), the first—best quality function. Patients

with severity of illness types greater then r    in   figure 3a receive an in-

crease in quality from the Q(9) line to the Q(0) line. Patients with

severity less than 0e are unaffected by the constraint as the profit maximiz-

ing quality for them is higher the ethical minimum.

       If the minimum quality constraint introduces negative profits for the

patients with severity greater than 0e, then their care must be cross—

subsidized with profits from the patients with severity less than ge      This

notion of cross—subsidization is consistent with the industry complaint that

the actual costs incurred by hospitals in caring for very severely ill

patients are substantially greater than the DRG price.

       If the provider is a perfect agent for patients, then the minimum quality

constraint Qe(0) is equal to the first—best quality function Q*(0), as is

pictured in figure 3b. In this case, patients with severity of illness

greater than     receive the first—best quality, and patients with severity less

than     receive the profit maximizing level of quality given by the Q(0) line.

Hence, even when providers are perfect agents, they still over—supply quality

to the less severely ill.
                                      16

                              VIII. DRG REFOR}!

    As long as there is severity of illness heterogeneity and endogenous

quality discrimination within DRG categories, it will be difficult to find a

pricing rule that provides the socially optimal quality and promotes ef-

ficiency. One obvious means of reducing the within DRG severity of illness

variation is to create more DRG categories. A prominent proposal, suggested

by Horn et. al. (1985), would effectively increase in the number of DRGs five

fold. The creation of more categories would seriously aggravate the already

costly problem of monitoring hospitals to prevent the spurious reclassifica—

tion of patients into more lucrative DRGs (DRG creep). Alternatively, Dranove

(1986) and Shleifer (1985) suggest letting the price depend on exogenous

sources of cost variation across providers such as severity of illness. Of

course, the validity of this approach requires quality to be exogenous.

    Another approach, suggested in Ellis and McGuire (1986), is to let the

DRG price be a linear function of the cost of the individual patient's care.

As long as the slope parameter is less than one, this structure maintains the

efficiency incentives of the fixed rate prospective payment while allowing the

price to vary by patient type. Although not perfect, this type of pricing

rule may induce providers to supply a quality schedule closer to the first—

best. The proposal is problematic in that the informational requirements

necessary to implement it are huge as it doubles the number of DRG parameters

that must be chosen. The choice of optimal parameters is even more difficult

than in the usual principle—agent setting, as ethical deviation from profit

maximization and moral hazard incentives introduced by the existence of medi-

cal care insurance must be incorporated into the problem. In addition, an in—
                                      17

centive scheme which is a linear function of costs puts Medicare back in the

costly business of auditing hospital financial statements and monitoring

patient bills, and there is still the issue of preventing DRC creep.

    In sum, these methods of "fine tuning" the DRG payment scheme will proba-

bly improve economic efficiency somewhat, but at the expense of reintroducing

substantial administrative burden to regulatory agencies. This seems to

defeat one of the major reasons for switching from retrospective cost based

reimbursement to DRC style prospective payment. Therefore, rather than devot-

ing further work to analyzing the relative merits of these fine tuning

proposals, we consider in the next section how recent invovations in the in-

dustry have the potential for the efficient distribution of quality with litle

adminstrative cost.



                           IX. VERTICAL INTEGRATION

     There are two fundenniental incentive problems for third party payors (go—

verrirnental and private insurors)in the health care industry: (1) the optimal

design of medical care insurance for consumers which is comnplicated by the

familiar problems of moral hazard and advrese selection and (2) the optimal

design of provider payment schemes which is the focus of this paper. On the

provider side, an inefficient distribution of quality arises from the in-

ability of third party payors to use price incentives to induce medical care

providers to implement a first—best quality schedule. The difficulty arises

due to the conflicting incentives facing third party payors and medical care

providers. Insurors cannot ex ante offer prospective subscribers the first—

best quality schedule because they only imperfectly control providers' quality
                                         18

schedules, Q(9), through ex post incentives embedded in the methods they use

to pay providers. Therefore, competition in the insurance market could at

best induce insurors to offer the second—best quality schedule, Q(9).

    A natural reaction to a competitive insurance market is for insurors to

vertically integrate into the direct provision of health care. Vertically in-

tegrated insuror—providers who are able to offer the first—best quality sched-

ule Q*(9), have a competitive advantage. Indeed, vertically integrated

insuror—providers such as health maintenance organizations, preferred provider

organizations, and managed care plans by self—insuring employers are

proliferating throughout the health care industry. Unlike the uniritegrated

market, competition in a market of vertically integrated insuror—providers

could induce the first—best quality schedule. Indeed, the market for health

insurance is becoming substantially more competitive with the emergence of

health maintenance organizations, preferred provider organizations and managed

care plans by self—insuring employers.

     Vertical integration of third party payors and providers removes the

necessity of imperfect regulatory pricing of providers, and therefore, in com-

bination with a competitive market for insurance mitigates the type of dis-

tributional welfare losses discussed here. The familiar problems in designing

optimal insurance are still present, but are no longer complicated by the im-

perfect control of providers by third party payors.
                                         19

                                X. CONCLUSIONS

     The purpose of this paper is point out some of the difficulties and com-

plexities that patient severity of illness heterogeneity and endogenous quali-

ty discrimination add to the medical care provider pricing problem. Our major

result is that DRG style prospective pricing causes a distributional welfare

loss. Specifically, it induces medical care providers to simultaneously pro-

vide a smaller than socially optimal level of quality to more severely ill

patients and, surprisingly, a greater than socially optimal amount of quality

to less severely patients. This inefficient distribution of quality occurs

because DRG price regulation fixes the price across patients with different

seventies of illness. More complicated DRC pricing rules do not appear to be

able to completely avoid this problem.

     Vertical integration of third party payors into the direct provision of

medical care may be a solution to this problem. In an unintegrated market the

first—best quality schedule in unavailable to insurors. They can at best of-

fer potential subscribers the second—best quality schedule that results from

the imperfect control of providers through incentives embedded in payment me-

chanisms. With vertical integration the first—best quality schedule is avail-

able to insurors, and therefore, there is no longer a need to design second—

best provider payment schemes. Competition among vertically integrated

insuror—providers can induce the provision of the first—best quality to

patients in every illness group. Thus, the recent proliferation of vertically

integrated health care organizations such health maintenance organizations,

preferred provider and managed care plans by self insuring employers are wel-

fare improving.
                                                20

                                          APPENDIX

    This appendix provides proof of the proposition that a profit maximizing

provider supplies a lower than socially optimal level of quality to more

severely ill patients and a greater than socially optimal level of quality to

more severely ill patients. This proposition is illustrated in figure 2a.

Since both Q*(O) and Q(8) have already been shown to be monotonically increas-

ing in B (see sections III and IV respectively), this proposition is proven by

demonstrating that the slope of Q*(9) is everywhere greater than the slope of

Q(9) (i.e. showing that (8) is greater than (11)). In sections V and VI, we

established that, for a reasonable range of prices, there exists at least one

5e[O,] where Q*(9) equals Q(). Let any severity type at which the two

functions are equal be denoted by .             If   the slope of Q*(9) is greater than

the slope of Q(&) at each , then Q*(9) crosses Q(O) only once and is every-

where steeper than Q(9).

     Demonstrating that (8) is greater than (11) at any              is made easier by

rearranging (8). By (6), cQ can substituted into (8) for P. Then, assuming

that third order derivatives of the demand function are negligible, we can

write (8) as



                        — (cx — cQ)XQ9
          ——
          dQ*

          d9                   —          —
                                                     0.                      (13)
                (cx —
                        cQ)X       2cXQ       c2XP


where a is defined by X(a,Q;6)—0 for the Q and 6 at which (13) is evaluated.
     Now we show that (13) is larger than (11) at 0. We have already estab-

lished that at ,   Q*   equals Q and P is less than P. Since Q and 0 are
                                         21

identical and third order derivatives of the demand function are assumed to be

negligible, the values of cQ, X, and          are the same in (11) and (13). The

additional result that P is less than P along with our demand function as-

sumption X   0, implies that 2cXQ is smaller in (13) than in (11). Since

2cXQ is in the denominators of (11) and (13), this difference acts so as to

make (13) larger than (11).

    The denominators of (11) and (13) are both negative. The first two ternis

in the denominators of both expressions are identical expect that P in (11) is

replaced with a > P in (13). The third term in the denominator of (13) has no

counterpart in (11). This term, (—            is positive, and its addition to

the denominator of (13), the rest of which is negative, acts to increase (13)

relative to (11).

    The remaining difference between (11) and (13) is that P in (11) is r—

placed with a > P in (13). If P equalled a, then, based on our results so

far, (13) would be bigger than (11). Therefore, since (11) can be shown to be

increasing in P and (13) can be shown to be increasing in a, a larger than P

implies that (13) is larger than (11).
                                      22

                                  REFERENCES

Berki, S., M. Ashcraft, and W. Newbrander (1984) "Length of Stay Variations
    within ICDA—8 Diagnosis Related Groups." Medical Care, Vol.22, pp.126—142.

Dranove, D. (1987) "Rate Setting by Diagnosis Related Groups." Mimeo, Graduate
    School of Business, University of Chicago.

Friedman, B. and M. Pauly (1981) "Cost Functions for a Service Firm with
    Variable Quantity and Stochastic Demand." Review of Economics and
    Statistics, Vol. 53, pp.620—624.

Harris, J. (1977) "The Internal Organization of Hospitals." The Bell Journal
     of Economics pp. 467—482.

Horn, S. (1983) "Measuring Severity of Illness; Comparisons Across
    Institutions." American Journal of Public Health Vol. 72, pp. 25—31.

Horn, S. and P. Sharkey (1984) "Measuring Severity of Illness to Predict
    Patient Resource Use within DRGs." Inquiry, Vol. 20, pp. 314—321.

Horn, S. et. al. (1985) "Inter—hospital Differences in Severity of Illness."
    New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 313, pp. 325—333.

Ellis, R. and T. McCuire (1986) "Provider Behavior Under Prospective Payment:.
    Cost Sharing and Supply." Journal of Health Economics", Vol.5, pp.129—151.

Newhouse, J.(1983) "Two Prospective Difficulties with Prospective Payment, or,
    its Better to be a Resident than a Patient with a Complex Problem."
    Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 2, pp. 269—174.

Pauly, M. (1980) Doctors and Their Workshops (University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago, Illinois)

Schweiker, R. (1982) "Report to Congress: Hospital Prospective Payment for
     Medicare." U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Washington D.C.

Shleifer, A. (1985) "A Theory of Yardstick Competition." Rand Journal of
    Economics, Vol. 16, pp.319—327.

Viadeck, B. (1984) "Medicare Payments to Diagnosis Related Groups." Annals of
    Internal Medicine, Vol. 100, no. 4, pp.576—590.
                                 23

                              FIGURE 1


FIRST-BEST AND DRG PRICE REGULATED EQUILIBRIA FOR A GIVEN SEVERITY OF ILLNESS (C)




PRICE
                                                       'EQ = 0




                                                   WQ = 0



     P

                                                            = 0
                                                      wP
         *
     P




                                Q                      QUALITY
                                Q
                                  24

                               FIGURE 2

              FIRST-BEST AND DRG QUALITY BY SEVERITY OF ILLNESS


                              PANEL A


                                                     Q*()
QUALITY (Q)

                                                       (0)




                                                              SEVERITY OF ILLNESS




                              PANEL B




                                                       Q*(G)
QUALITY (Q)



                                                      Q (e)

                                                I
                                       t
                                       I       I




                  0                    0       0       SEVERITY OF ILLNESS
                               25
                             FIGURE 3


   ETHICALLY MOTIVATED DEVIATIONS FROM PROFIT MAXIMIZATION



                       PANEL A - IMPERFECT AGENCY


                                                        fl*(O)
QUALITY
  (Q)
                                                          (0)
                                                        Q(0)




                 0                  e
                                                               SEVERITY OF ILLNESS



                       PANEL B — PERFECT AGENCY


QUALITY
  (Q)

                                                         Q*(G) =    Qe()


                                                        (e)




                                    0               e            SEVERITY OF ILLNESS
