NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPEDIMENTS TO FINANCIAL TRADE:
THEORY AND APPLICATIONS
Nicolae Gârleanu
Stavros Panageas
Jianfeng Yu
Working Paper 22697
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22697

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Hengjie Ai, Daniel Andrei, Jonathan Berk,
Eugene Fama, John Heaton, Ralph Koijen, Motohiro Yogo and seminar participants at the Adam
Smith conference on Asset Pricing, AFA meetings, Berkeley-Haas, Chicago Booth, Minnesota
Macro-Finance Conference, NBER Asset Pricing, Northwestern University-Kellogg, NYU-Stern,
SFS-Cavalcade, Tsinghua University-PBCSF, University of Bocconi, University of British
Columbia-Sauder, University of Maryland-Smith, University of Rochester, USC-Marshall,
University of Virginia-McIntire, University of Winsconsin - Madison. Panageas acknowledges
research support from the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Nicolae Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Impediments to Financial Trade: Theory and Applications
Nicolae Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 22697
September 2016
JEL No. G11,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We propose a tractable model of an informationally inefficient market featuring non-revealing
prices, no noise traders, and general assumptions on preferences and payoff distributions. We
show the equivalence between our model and a substantially simpler model whereby investors
face distortionary investment taxes depending both on their identity and the asset class. This
equivalence allows us to account for such phenomena as under-diversification. We further
employ the model to assess approaches to performance evaluation, and find that it provides a
theoretical basis for some intuitive practices adopted by finance professionals, such as style
analysis.
Nicolae Gârleanu
Haas School of Business
F628
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
garleanu@haas.berkeley.edu
Stavros Panageas
University of California, Los Angeles
Anderson School of Management
and NBER
stavros.panageas@chicagobooth.edu

Jianfeng Yu
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South, Suite 3-122
Minneapolis MN 55455
jianfeng@umn.edu

1.

Introduction

We present a simple, tractable framework featuring informational asymmetries in a multiasset economy. By incorporating multiple assets and strategic behavior for a subset of
investors, our framework can dispense with the common assumption of “noise” traders, and
our results do not rely on a constant-abolute-risk-aversion (CARA)-normal setup. Moreover, the model is particularly tractable: We show that it is isomorphic to a symmetricinformation one featuring investor- and asset-class specific distortionary and re-distributive
taxes, reflecting investors’ abilities to distinguish between good- and bad-quality assets in
the original model. Conceptualizing the impact of asymmetric information in terms of this
tax equivalence makes it simpler to see how informational asymmetry can cause phenomena
such as non-participation by some investors in some markets and associated risk-sharing
imperfections.
To illustrate one possible application of this theoretical framework, we assess popular
approaches to performance evaluation. A distinctive feature of the model compared to the
literature is that it allows a natural and transparent modeling of pure selectivity skill, defined
as the ability to select the better yielding assets out of a class of seemingly identical assets. We
use this feature to show that Jensen’s alpha may fail to identify informational advantage even
though investors in our framework only have superior information about individual assets,
but do not possess superior information about the returns of the market portfolio. On the
positive side, we show how our model provides a theoretical basis for some simple, intuitive
approaches to performance evaluation that have proved popular with practitioners, such as
the “style” alpha methodology of W. Sharpe and the usage of fund-dependent benchmarks.
Specifically, we consider a model featuring different locations, or asset classes. A fraction
of investors in every location are regular investors and the complement are “swindlers.”
Regular investors are endowed with common stocks that pay random location-dependent
dividends at date one, while each swindler owns a “fraudulent” stock that pays nothing.
Investors obtain signals on the type of a given stock (regular or fraudulent) in every location.
Important, the quality of that signal depends on both the investor’s and the firm’s locations,
1

allowing for significant heterogeneity in information quality across investors. However, to
highlight the differences from prior literature, we assume that no investor possesses any
superior information with respect to the realization of regular-firm dividends in a given
location.
Swindlers have a strong incentive to trade so as to equalize the price of their stock
with the prices of other stocks in their location. Moreover, the swindler can manipulate
the earnings of her company, which deters short selling. A pooling equilibrium emerges
with all common and fraudulent stocks in a given location trading at the same price. The
failure rate f of an investor’s signal to identify fraudulent stocks in a given location can
be equivalently viewed as a tax rate when investing in that location: A proportion f of
the stocks identified by the investor’s signals as regular pay nothing. Indeed, we prove an
equivalence between our model and a much simpler dual (Walrasian) economy populated
only with competitive investors faced with investor- and asset-specific capital taxation. The
market-clearing conditions in such a dual economy need to be carefully formulated to reflect
that these taxes are redistributive rather than “iceberg” costs, since trading does not destroy
resources but only redistributes them from investors with inaccurate signals to swindlers.
Our setup does not require noise traders in order to avoid information revelation through
prices. This is due to three assumptions: 1) the assumption of multiple asset classes introduces a straightforward non-informational motivation to trade, namely the need to diversify
across locations; 2) the swindlers are not competitive, but rather take into account the effect
of their trade on the price of their company; and 3) there is no short selling in equilibrium,
due to an out-of-equilibrium threat of dividend manipulation by the swindlers. Taken together, these three assumptions allow us to dispense not only with noise traders, but also
with the restrictive preference and distributional assumptions of a CARA-normal setup.
The investors inside the model have an incentive to bias their portfolios towards the
locations where they enjoy an informational advantage, since those are the locations where
they perceive lower implicit taxes. In contrast to existing literature, which we summarize
below, these portfolio biases exist independently of the particular realization of the signals.

2

In addition, the portfolio of any given investor is “sparse,” i.e., it involves zero holdings in
several individual assets (even in the locations where the investor is actively investing), and
may even involve zero allocations to entire asset classes, consistent with some features of
real-world portfolios.1
The combination of non-revealing prices (which leaves room for the better informed investors to earn superior returns) and portfolio heterogeneity makes ours a natural framework
to study the validity of different performance evaluation approaches from the perspective of
an uninformed econometrician. There is an established literature that has addressed this
issue in noisy rational expectations models. Our framework, however, provides a novel way
to capture situations where superior performance is associated purely with selectivity rather
than market timing, since assets inside a location look identical to an outside econometrician,
and no agent has superior information about the return distribution of the asset class itself.
We arrive at the following conclusions. When markets are informationally inefficient,
Jensen’s alpha may fail to identify informational advantage: passive strategies (i.e., returns
obtained by simply buying the portfolio of all firms in a location ignoring any signals)
generically may have alpha, and informed strategies may have negative alpha. We link these
phenomena to the heterogeneity of informational inefficiency across markets.
We then address the question of how to appropriately perform performance evaluation
in our setup. We show that the key feature of successful performance evaluation is to use a
criterion that assigns zero alphas to linear combinations of passive investments in the asset
classes in which the informed investor participates actively. Intuitively, this ensures that the
return obtained by an informed investor could not have been replicated by a passive investor
investing in the same asset classes.
This is the reason why the “style-alpha” approach, which was proposed by Sharpe (1992)
and has proved very popular among practitioners, has several theoretical merits in our framework. Such an approach identifies skill with the alpha obtained from a regression of the
investor’s return on the passive returns obtained in the asset classes where the investor participates actively. We show that the alpha of such a regression provides a clear mapping to
1

See Koijen and Yogo (2016) for empirical evidence on portfolios held by institutional investors.

3

the investor’s informational advantage.
We also discuss the implications of market segmentation (and more broadly portfolio
specialization) for performance evaluation. We argue that when informational asymmetries
result in portfolios that invest in a limited set of asset classes, the performance evaluation
criterion should be investor-dependent, and focused on assigning zero alphas only to passive
returns in the asset classes where the investor is actively participating. We illustrate this
point with an example of a non-exploitable arbitrage, whereby it is impossible to us one pricing kernel to price all passive strategy returns, but it is still possible to evaluate performance
using investor-specific evaluation criteria.
The paper relates to various strands of the literature.
The literature on noisy rational expectations models is the most popular approach to
introduce informational asymmetries into finance models. This literature is too voluminous
to summarize, so we provide indicative examples only. Technically, our setup borrows elements from both Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Akerlof (1970). The extended version
of the model where all traders are strategic (analyzed in Appendix A) uses the same equilibrium concept as Kyle (1989).2 Admati (1985) extends the noisy REE framework to a
multi-asset framework. This literature typically utilizes random supply shocks (“noise”) to
avoid revelation3 and a CARA-normal framework to obtain tractability, assumptions that
we can avoid.
A popular application of multi-asset REE models is the explanation of portfolio biases.4
Portfolio biases (in particular, the home bias) are especially prevalent issues in international
finance, but the insights of this literature apply to understanding portfolio concentration
and under-diversification more broadly. The common thread of that literature is that locals
receive a signal about the aggregate performance of the local stock market. The superior
signal quality makes domestic agents face lower variance when investing in local stocks,
2

Strategic traders are considered by many other papers in the micro-structure literature, albeit in very
different contexts than the current paper. For an indicative example, see, e.g., Vayanos (2001).
3
It is known, however, that (privately known) endowment shocks can achieve a similar outcome to random
supply. See, e.g., Wang (1993).
4
Indicative examples are Gehrig (1993) and Brennan and Cao (1997). Related, Van Nieuwerburgh and
Veldkamp (2010) propose an approach relying on bounded information-processing capacity.

4

leading to an unconditional home bias. A counterfactual implication is that conditional on
a bad signal, locals should short domestic stocks. This seems at odds with the fact that the
home bias is present for any given year, any given country, and for any sample period that
one may consider. In our model the portfolio bias towards asset classes where one is better
informed applies independently of any specific realization of the signals. The reason is that
the portfolio bias is not driven by having superior information about a given location, but
rather because of superior asset selection ability within the location.5 This superior selection
ability acts as a redistributive tax with obvious deterrence effects on investors who are not
as well informed as locals.6 We note in passing that the international finance literature
has on occasion modeled informational advantages as taxes or transactions costs in reduced
form.7 Our paper provides the theoretical underpinning of doing so, and draws attention to
the proper specification of market clearing condition to ensure the correct mapping between
redistributive taxes and asymmetric information frictions.
The paper also contributes to the literature that critiques CAPM alpha, estimated from
the perspective of an uninformed investor, as a measure of skill — see, e.g., Admati and Ross
(1985), Dybvig and Ross (1985), and Mayers and Rice (1979), Grinblatt and Titman (1989)
among many others. Our results in this vein are most closely related to those of Mayers and
Rice (1979) and Dybvig and Ross (1985), and we highlight two important differences. First,
these authors only evaluate portfolios that are ex-ante optimal for the informed investor in
the entire universe of assets. In contrast, we are interested in ascertaining whether a market
participant exhibits skill when investing in a given subset of asset classes and for any weights
that she may choose to assign to these asset classes. We are motivated by the real-world fact
that portfolio choice is routinely delegated to managers with mandates to pick good assets
within a narrow set of asset classes.8 Second, unlike in these papers, in our setting optimal
5
Hatchondo (2008) is closer to the setup of the current model. An important difference to his model is
that we do not rely on noise trading, assuming instead the existence of strategic “swindlers.” Furthermore,
we can obtain the no-shorting outcome endogenously, although in the main body of the paper we impose
short selling restrictions directly for simplicity.
6
See also Kurlat (2013) for the role of information asymmetry as taxation in a different example. Li et al.
(2012) discuss fraudulent assets but in a different context.
7
See, e.g., Okawa and van Wincoop (2012) for a recent example.
8
A voluminous literature studies how delegated portfolio choice may lead to portfolio weighting distor-

5

informed portfolios are not interior with respect to the effective shorting constraints, and we
show that they may have negative alpha even when the information does not help predict
the market return (or reference return, more generally).
Sharpe (1992) proposed style analysis as a performance evaluation criterion. In some
ways our paper provides an explicit micro foundation for this criterion in an equilibrium
framework. We note, though, that the specific equilibrium return properties obtaining in
our model are not identical to the ones assumed by the statistical model of Sharpe (1992).
We also relate to a literature that analyzes general properties of evaluation criteria and
the use of stochastic discount factors for performance evaluation.9 We differ in focus from
that literature: Rather then considering any possible information structure, we make specific
assumptions, which in particular allow a conceptual separation between diversifiable assetselection risk (with agents being asymmetrically informed about it) and non-diversifiable
asset-class risk (with agents being symmetrically informed about it). Our framework results
in a tighter theoretical characterization of valid performance measures — indeed, in an
essentially unique performance evaluation criterion. With our assumptions, an essentially
sufficient condition for a valid performance evaluation criterion is to assign a zero value to
any linear combination of passive strategy returns in the asset classes where the investor is
actively participating.
We conclude with two caveats about our conclusions on performance evaluation: First,
we abstract from timing ability, i.e., superior information about the behavior of asset classes
as a whole. There is an extensive literature on timing ability, so we concentrate on the
stronger results that obtain when information pertains exclusively to the relative quality of
individual securities. Second, our focus is exclusively on identifying a market participant’s
stock-selection ability from the perspective of an econometrician. We therefore do not address how an individual investor would allocate her investment among various (potentially
informed) managers, which is the central issue in the study of fund flows.10
tions. We do not attempt to summarize this literature, and simply refer to Bhattacharya and Pfleiderer
(1985) for an early and important contribution.
9
See, e.g., Chen and Knez (1996), Glosten and Jagannathan (1994), for two indicative examples.
10
For a discussion of these issues, see Berk and Green (2004), Ferson and Lin (2014), and Berk and van

6

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains the model and the tax equivalence
result. Section 3 contains the application of the model to performance evaluation. Section 4
concludes. Proofs and extensions are contained in the appendix.

2.

Model

2.1.

Locations, preferences, and firm and investor types

Time is discrete and there are two dates, t = 0 and t = 1. All trading takes place at time
t = 0, while at t = 1 all payments are made and contracts are settled. There are K different
locations, and each investor is located in one of the K locations. There is a continuum of
investors in each location and we index a representative investor in a given location by i.
Investors maximize expected utility of period-1 wealth, E [U (W )] , for some increasing and
concave U .
Investors’ time-zero endowments consist of shares in firms that are domiciled in their
location. Investors in every location i are of two types, common investors and swindlers,
while firms are of two types, regular and fraudulent. The number of shares in each firm is
normalized to one, as are the measures of investors and firms at each location.
Common investors in location i are a fraction κ ∈ (0, 1) of the population in that location.
They are identically endowed with an equal-weighted portfolio of all regular firms in location
i. All regular firms in location i produce the same random output Di , and pay it out as a
dividend. (Adding a firm-specific, idiosyncratic risk would be simple, but would offer no
additional insights). The total measure of regular firms is κ in each location.
Swindlers are a fraction 1 − κ of the population in each location. Each swindler is
endowed with the share of one fraudulent firm. Fraudulent firms produce no output or
dividend (Di = 0).
For every firm in every location, there is a market for shares where any investor can
submit a demand. Moreover, there exists a market for a riskless bond, available in zero net
Binsbergen (2015) among others.

7

Location j

Location i
Firms identified as fraudulent
to investor in location i.

Fraudulent
firms (1−κ)

fij
κ
1 − fij
An investor
in location i

Regular
firms (κ)

κ

Firms identified as regular
to investor in location i.
A proportion fij are mis-identified.

All firms
in location j

Figure 1: The figure offers a schematic representation of the information structure of the
model. In location j, a fraction κ of the firms are regular and the complement 1 − κ are
fraudulent. A given investor in location i receives signals about the type of each of these
firms. A proportion fij of the firms identified as regular are actually fraudulent. All firms
identified as fraudulent are indeed fraudulent.
supply. The interest rate is denoted by r.

2.2.

Signals

Each investor obtains a binary signal of the type — regular or fraudulent — of every firm in
every location. The precision of these signals depends on the locations of the investor and
the firm.
Specifically, an investor in location i obtains a signal ιijk ∈ {0, 1} about every firm k
in location j. (All investors in location i obtain the same signal about any given firm,
for simplicity.) This signal characterizes the firm as either regular (ιijk = 1) or fraudulent
(ιijk = 0). The signal is imperfect. It correctly identifies every regular firm as such. However,

8

j

j0

fij
fij 0

f i0 j

f i0 j 0

i

i0
Figure 2: The figure illustrates the nature of the information network. In particular, information quality, captured by the failure rate fij , depends both on the firms’ and investor’s
location. Agents in i and i0 may have signals of different qualities about location j. Similarly,
agents in i may have signals of different qualities about locations j and j 0 .
it fails to identify all fraudulent firms: it correctly identifies a fraudulent firm with probability
πij and misclassifies it as regular with probability 1 − πij . For simplicity, we assume πii = 1,
so that investors are fully informed about their local markets. This assumption can be easily
relaxed.
Given this setup, Bayes’ rule implies that the probability that a firm in location j is
fraudulent given that investor i’s signal identifies it as regular is given by
fij ≡

(1 − πij )(1 − κ)
.
κ + (1 − πij )(1 − κ)

(1)

The law of large numbers implies then that fij can also be interpreted as the fraction of
fraudulent firms among all firms in location j identified by the signal of investor i as regular.
To summarize the information structure, Figure 1 illustrates the nature of the information provided to a given agent in location i about all the firms in location j. Figure 2
emphasizes the bilateral nature of the information structure: information quality, captured
9

by fij , depends on both the firms’ and investor’s locations.

2.3.

Budget constraints

Letting B ci denote the amount that a common investor in location i invests in riskless bonds
ci
a univariate signed measure capturing the number of shares of firm k in location
and dXjk

j that she buys, the time-one wealth of a common investor located in i is given by
W1ci

ci

≡ B (1 + r) +

K Z
X
j=1

ci
.
Djk dXjk

(2)

k∈[0,1]

The first term on the right-hand side of (2) is the amount that the investor receives from her
bond position in period 1, while the second term captures the portfolio-weighted dividends of
all the firms that the investor holds. The time-zero budget constraint of a common investor
in location i is given by
ci

B +

K Z
X
j=1

ci
Pjk dXjk

k∈[0,1]

1
=
κ

Z
Pi,k ρ(i,k) dk,

(3)

k∈[0,1]

where ρ(i,k) is an indicator function taking the value one if the firm k in location i is a regular
firm and zero otherwise, and Pjk refers to the price of security k in location j. The left-hand
side of (3) corresponds to the sum of the investor’s bond and risky-security spending, while
the right-hand side reflects the value of the (equal-weighted) portfolio of regular firms the
investor is endowed with.
The budget constraint of a swindler owning firm l in location i is similar to (3), except
that the value of the agent’s endowment is given by Pil :

B

sil

+

K Z
X
j=1

sil
Pjk dXjk
= Pil .

(4)

k∈[0,1]

Note that the notation dX allows investors’ portfolios to have atoms, which is actually
important here because, in equilibrium, swindlers optimally hold a non-infinitesimal quantity
of shares of their own firms. We denote the post-trade number of shares of fraudulent firm
l in location i retained by the original owner by S il = dXilsil .
10

Finally, the time-1 wealth of a swindler is
W1sil

≡B

sil

+

K Z
X
j=1

2.4.

sil
Djk dXjk
.

(5)

k∈[0,1]

Optimization problem

Common investors are price-takers. Taking a set of prices for risky assets as given for all
firms in all locations and an interest rate, a common investor maximizes


maxci E U (W1ci )|Fi , Pjk , r

(6)

B ci ,dXjk

ci
≥ 0. Here we impose the short-selling
subject to (3) and a short-selling constraint: dXjk

restriction exogenously, but in the appendix we consider a simple extension in which agents
endogenously refrain from selling short. Specifically, we allow the swindler to manipulate
earnings — in particular, to report higher earnings than actual — which exposes anyone
shorting a fraudulent firm to the risk of large losses. We relegate the details to Appendix A,
and for the rest of the paper we simply exclude short sales.
The investor conditions on her own information set Fi (i.e., on her signals about every
security), as well as on the prices of all securities in all markets.
The problem of the swindler is similar to the one of the common investor with the
exception that the swindler takes into account the impact of her trading on the price of her
stock.11 Similar to a common investor, the swindler who owns firm l in location i solves


max E U (W1sil )|Fil , Pjk , r

(7)

sil
B sil ,dXjk

sil
subject to the budget constraint (4) and dXjk
≥ 0.

2.5.

Equilibrium

An equilibrium is an interest rate r and a collection of prices Pi,k for all risky assets, asset
demands and bond holdings expressed by all investors in all locations, such that: 1) Markets
11

In the extension presented in Appendix A, the swindler also has the ability to manipulate the dividends
of her fraudulent stock.

11

 ci ci
for all securities clear; 2) Risky-asset and bond holdings, Xjk
, B , are optimal for regular
investors in all locations given prices and the investors’ expectations; 3) Bond holdings B sil
sil
(including a swindler’s own holdings of her own firm
and asset holdings for all securities Xjk

S il ) are optimal for swindlers given their expectations; 4) All investors update their beliefs
about the type of stock k in location j by using all available information to them — prices,
interest rate, and private signals — and Bayes’ rule, whenever possible.
Our equilibrium concept contains elements of both a rational expectations equilibrium
and a Bayes-Nash equilibrium. All investors make rational inferences about the type of
each security based on their signals, the equilibrium prices, and the interest rate, by using
Bayes’ rule and taking the optimal actions of all other investors (regular and swindlers) in
all locations as given. The continuum of regular investors are price takers in all markets.
Swindlers, however, are endowed with the shares of a fraudulent company and take into
account the impact of their trades on the share price. In formulating a demand for their
security, swindlers have to consider how different prices might affect the perceptions of other
investors about the type of their security. As is standard, Bayes’ rule disciplines investors’
beliefs only for demand realizations that are observed in equilibrium. As is usual in a BayesNash equilibrium, there is freedom in specifying how out-of-equilibrium prices affect investor
posterior distributions of security types.
We note that the distinction between regular investors who are price takers and swindlers
who are strategic about the impact of their actions on the price of their firm is helpful for
expediting the presentation of results, but not crucial. In Appendix A we show that our
equilibrium obtains in the limit (as the number of traders approaches infinity) of a sequence
of economies with finite numbers of traders — both regular and swindlers — who are strategic
about their price impact, as in Kyle (1989).
By Walras’ law, we need to normalize the price in one market. Since we abstract from
consumption at time zero for parsimony, we normalize the price of the bond to be unity
(r = 0).

12

2.6.

Tax equivalence

While our economy is seemingly complex, its equilibrium outcomes coincide with those of
a much simpler Walrasian economy featuring distortionary and redistributive taxes. The
intuition behind this result is quite straightforward: Conditional on investing in a location,
investors optimally invest equal amounts in all assets for which they have positive signals
and in no others (the only exception is the swindler investing in her firm), but the signal
is imperfect. The failure rate of the signal translates into a lower payoff relative to that
obtained by a local, perfectly informed investor; the proportional loss can be thought of as
a tax rate, which depends on both the investor and the target location of the investment. In
addition, swindlers have strict incentives to invest in their own firms so as to render them
indistinguishable from regular firms, by submitting elastic demands at the prevailing price of
all other assets in the location. This ensures a pooling equilibrium that justifies the behavior
of the other investors. We record this result formally:
Theorem 1 There exists an equilibrium of the original economy in which the prices of all
assets in each location are equal. Furthermore, the prices Pj and aggregate positions Xji taken
by investors located in market i when investing in market j, excluding swindlers’ positions
in their own firms, are given as a solution to the problem:12

X i ∈ arg max EU
X≥0

κ=

K
X

!
((1 − fij )Dj − Pj ) Xj +Pi

(8)

j=1

K
X

(1 − fij )Xji .

(9)

i=1

Equation (8) formalizes the decision problem of an investor facing taxes fij , as explained
above. Equation (9) is the market-clearing equation for regular firms. The left-hand side, κ,
equals the supply of firms: only κ of the firms are regular. The right-hand side represents the
demand for regular firms, and it depends on the tax rates: a proportion fij of the demand
Xji is directed to fraudulent firms, leaving only the remainder to acquire regular firms. (We
12

In the interest of concision, we plugged in the investor’s budget constraint in the objective.

13

0.14
ρ=0.10
ρ=0.50
ρ=0.90

Number of shares purchased

0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

0

5

10

15

20
Asset class

25

30

35

40

Figure 3: This figure illustrates the portfolio choice of a common investor in location i0 = 20
under three alternative correlation structures. We assume N = 39 locations in which a
proportion κ = 0.99 of assets are regular and pay normally distributed dividends with mean
1 and standard deviation 0.25; the pairwise correlation is the same for all pairs (j, j 0 ) with
j 6= j 0 , and given by the parameter ρ. Agents have CARA utilities with parameter γ = 2.
We set πij = 1−1⁄2(1 − cos(2πd(i, j))) with d(i, j) = min{|i − j|, N − |i − j|}/N , which yields
fij as a decreasing function of the circular distance d(i, j) between i and j. In the benchmark
case ρ = 0.5, the expected excess passive return on an asset is 6.08%, and the lowest tax
dissuading investor i from investing in location j is fij = 0.52%.
note that in a pooling equilibrium the swindler submits an elastic demand for her own firm,
i.e., absorbs the residual demand for her own firm at the price Pj , so that the market for
fraudulent firms clears by construction.)
An obvious implication of Theorem 1 is that investors have an incentive to place a
larger fraction of their wealth in locations where they are faced with lower taxes. Indeed,
if the effective taxes are sufficiently severe compared to the diversification benefit, then the
investors may choose to concentrate their portfolio in a subset of locations, placing zero
weights in the others. A distinctive feature of the model compared to noisy REE models is
that these biases apply for any realization of the signals about which firms in a location are

14

fraudulent and which are not. By contrast, in the typical noisy REE model a signal applies
to the level of an asset class, and hence the direction of the portfolio bias depends on the
realization of the signals.
Figure 3 provides an illustration of the tradeoff between diversification and informationtax avoidance. In a symmetric set-up, the higher the correlation between any two locations,
the lower the threshold for fij above which agent i does not wish to invest in market j, and
therefore the fewer markets the investor participates in. The precise model assumptions are
listed in the caption to the figure.
The market clearing condition (9) highlights that the implicit taxes in our setup are
redistributive, rather than “iceberg costs.” Indeed, if we multiply both sides of equation (9)
by Dj , we obtain
κDj =

K
X

(1 − fij )Dj Xji .

i=1

In words, the aggregate dividends κDj in location j are all paid to investors in proportion
to their holdings of regular firms in this location, and no dividend gets lost.
Proposition 1 provides a micro-foundation to the common practice (especially in international economics, but also more broadly) of using taxes (or “wedges”) as a reduced-form
way of modeling informational frictions, as long as these taxes are redistributive, rather than
iceberg costs.
For the purposes of the analysis that follows, Proposition 1 makes the description of
an equilibrium relatively easy, as we illustrate in the following section. In addition, it provides one with an intuitive language to talk about the degree to which any investor is at a
disadvantage when investing in any given market.

3.

Informationally Inefficient Markets: Implications

In this section we exploit the equivalence formalized in Proposition 1 between informational
frictions and taxes to study the ability of popular performance-evaluation approaches to

15

appropriately identify investors with “skill,” i.e., investors who select stocks based on informative signals. Throughout we envisage an econometrician, by definition uninformed, who
observes the return obtained by an investor on her portfolio and is trying to infer if that
investor had valuable signals in choosing her portfolio.
The first question we address (Section 3.1.–3.2.) is whether CAPM alphas provide an
appropriate measure of an investor’s informational advantage. Specifically, in Section 3.1.
we make assumptions to ensure that the CAPM would hold in the absence of informational
asymmetries, and we solve for equilibrium prices. Using these equilibrium prices, in Section
3.2. we obtain an explicit expression for equilibrium alphas inside the model and conclude
that they are problematic: investors with no skill may have positive alpha, while investors
with skill may have negative alpha. This shows that even though in our model the only
skill is a stock-selection skill, the CAPM alphas do not provide an appropriate measure of
this skill. Sections 3.3. and 3.4., on the other hand, analyze what is essentially the unique
meaningful such measure in our model, and discuss it in the context of the literature.

3.1.

Equilibrium prices

To ensure that the CAPM would hold in the absence of informational frictions, we assume in
sections 3.1. and 3.2. that the dividends Dj are jointly normal. For simplicity we also assume
that they have the same mean, which we normalize to unity. To obtain explicit expressions
for equilibrium prices, we endow investors with CARA utilities, U (W ) = −e−γW .
We let λij ≥ 0 denote the Lagrange multiplier associated with Xji ≥ 0, and pij := 1 − fij
be the effective payoff to investing in assets of location j. Note that pij is the probability
that security j is regular given that the signal of investor i identifies it as such. Clearly,
pij ≥ κ, with strict inequality if the investor’s signal is valuable. Given the CARA-normal
setup, the first-order condition of an investor in location i faced with problem (8) is

γcov pij Dj ,

K
X

!
pik Dk Xki

= pij − Pj + λij .

k=1

16

(10)

Dividing this equation by pij and summing over all agents i yields

γcov (Dj , κDa ) = 1 −

K
K
Pj X −1
1 X −1
pij +
p λij ,
K i=1
K i=1 ij

(11)

1
K

where we introduced the notation Da for the average dividend Da =

PK

j=1

Dj .

We note that, by (9) and exchanging the order of the summation,
K X
K
X

pik Dk Xki

=

i=1 k=1

K
X
k=1

Dk

K
X

pik Xki = κKDa .

(12)

i=1

The price Pj is consequently expressed as

Pj =

=

K
1 X −1
p
K i=1 ij
K
1 X
pij
K i=1

!−1
×

!
×

K
1 X
a
1 − γcov (Dj , κD ) +
λij p−1
ij
K i=1

K
1 X
a
1 − γcov (Dj , κD ) +
λij p−1
ij
K i=1

!

!
(13)


1
K

× 

−1
−1
p
i=1 ij
 ,
PK
p
ij
i=1

PK
1
K

which provides a natural formula. The first term captures the average post-tax payoff to
investors, the second the risk adjustment and the effect of the shorting constraint, while the
third measures dispersion in pij across agents. Equation (13) shows that two asset classes
may be priced differently even when containing the same amount of aggregate risk (i.e.,
cov(Dj , Da ) is the same for all j) and being held in positive amounts by all agents (λij = 0).
As long as pij 6= pij 0 for some i for two asset classes j and j 0 , it is possible that Pj 6= Pj 0 .
This observation will prove useful in the next section.

3.2.

Alpha does not measure skill

We next obtain some implications of the model for CAPM alphas. By CAPM alphas we
mean the estimates of the constant in a regression of the excess return obtained by an
investment strategy on the excess return of the market portfolio. Throughout the paper, we
do not concern ourselves with estimation issues. We focus exclusively on the implications of
17

our theory for the moments of such regressions.
To start, we define Rjp as the gross return of a passive (or index) return in location j.
This is the gross return obtained by simply buying all the firms in location j. (This would
be the return of an uninformed investor, who doesn’t have access to any private signals).
κD

Given the assumption of the model this return is given by Rjp = Pjj , with expectation Pκj .
P
Similarly, define average price P a = K1 K
k=1 Pk and the return on an index replicating the
market portfolio is Rp =

κDa
.
Pa

Using these observations, and recalling that the interest rate

is normalized to zero, the regression of the observed (passive) return of the index in location
j on the market portfolio return yields a constant (“alpha”) of


κDj
, (P a )−1
Pj

cov
κD
κ
−1−
Pj
(P a )−2 κ2 σa2



Pa
κ
= βjD
−1 +
1 − βjD ,
Pj
Pj

αj =

a


 κ

−
1
Pa
(14)

where βjD is the “cash-flow beta”
βjD =

cov(Dj , Da )
.
var(Da )

(15)

In the special case in which there is no asymmetric information (pij = κ) equations (13)
and (14) imply the usual CAPM relation (αj = 0).13
However, in the presence of informational asymmetries, αj 6= 0 in general, even for passive
strategies. To see this in the simplest possible case, consider a world with βjD = 1 for all j.
Accordingly, αj =

Pa
Pj

− 1. In addition, equation (13) implies that some asset classes may still

exhibit lower (or higher) than average prices, despite all assets having the same exposure
to aggregate risk and the same expected dividend. For instance, a lower overall quality of
information in asset class j (low values of pij compared to other asset classes) translates into
a lower than average price for that class; since αj =
13

Pa
Pj

− 1, even an index investment in

To see this, notice that equation (13) implies that Pj = κ − γκ2 βjD σa2 . Then it follows from (14) that


 κ−γκ2 βjD σa2
κ−γκ2 σ 2
α = βjD Pj a − 1 + Pκj 1 − βjD =
− 1 = 0.
Pj

18

such a class has positive alpha.14
If uninformed (passive) strategies command alphas, then alphas cannot be an accurate
measure of an investor’s skill. Indeed, continuing with the assumption that βjD = 1 for all j,
the alpha resulting from a regression of the return that an investor i obtains when investing
in location j on the return of the market portfolio is given by
αij =

pij P a
− 1.
κ Pj

(16)

Hence, even an investor who has an informational advantage pij > κ might exhibit a negative
alpha when that informational advantage happens to be in an asset class that is comparatively more expensive than the average asset class, i.e., P a < Pj .
The reason why the CAPM fails to assign zero alpha even to passive strategies is qualitatively different from the arguments that have been proposed so far. Unlike elsewhere in the
literature, in our setup investors don’t possess any signals on the realization of Dj , so they
are on equal footing about predicting the return of an asset class. It is tempting to attribute
the failure of the CAPM in our model to the fact that different investors hold different meanvariance efficient portfolios, so that the market portfolio is not mean-variance efficient for
any investor. This fact, however, is not sufficient to render CAPM alpha an inaccurate measure of skill: Suppose, for instance that all prices across all asset classes are equal (Pj = P ),
which would occur for instance if the informational advantages are symmetric (pij = p for
all i 6= j and some positive p < 1), and all betas are unity. In that case investors still choose
different mean-variance efficient portfolios, depending on their locations. Yet, equation (14)
shows that alphas are zero for passive strategies, while equation (16) shows that informed
investors have positive alphas.
What makes alpha a valid measure of performance in this special case? As we show in
more generality in Section 3.4., the key feature is that the market portfolio is mean-variance
14
An additional, less interesting observation is that mispricing is not related to the amount of risk. Consider
for instance the case pij = p. All indexes, including the market, earn negative excess returns κ − p (compared
to an informed strategy) before the risk adjustments, but a high βjD index is benchmarked against a leveraged
market index, thus one with even higher negative returns, and therefore has positive alpha. Conversely, low
βjD is associated with negative alpha. We shut down this channel by assuming βkD = 1 for all k.

19

efficient from the perspective of an uninformed investor. However, this property is special
to this example. In general the market portfolio is not mean-variance efficient even from the
perspective of an uninformed agent.
It is worth comparing our results to those of Mayers and Rice (1979) and Dybvig and Ross
(1985), who show that a mean-variance efficient portfolio utilizing private information has a
positive alpha as long as the moments of the market portfolio (more generally, of the reference
portfolio) do not depend on the information (they refer to this as “pure selectivity”). There
are two notable differences with our work. First, we place emphasis on the return obtained
by an investor when investing in a given asset class, rather than the return of an informed
investor’s mean-variance efficient portfolio. We are interested in the former return because
in real life investors routinely delegate portfolio choice to managers with the mandate to find
good investment opportunities within a pre-specfied set of asset classes, which may well be
a subset of the investment universe.
Second, even the returns obtained by an investor on her entire mean-variance efficient
portfolio may have negative alpha with respect to an uninformed reference portfolio in our
model;15 the reason is that the Dybvig and Ross (1985) result is predicated on an interior,
unconstrained choice of all assets, whereas in our model investors are effectively bound by
shorting constraints for the stocks that their signal identifies as fraudulent.

3.3.

General properties of evaluation measures and style alphas

The previous section shows that the CAPM fails to assign zero alpha to passive strategies.
We show here that assigning zero alpha to passive strategies is actually a sufficient condition
for a performance measure to be valid. As a practical illustration of the results, we show
that the style alpha measure proposed by W. Sharpe is a valid performance measure.
To start, we let g be a functional mapping random variables into the space of real numbers.
Let Rje,p the excess passive return in location j. We assume that g is a linear functional and
that g(Rje,p ) = 0 for all j. We also require g(1) > 0, that is, a riskless, positive excess return
15

Such examples are available from the authors upon request.

20

is assigned a positive value.
Assuming the existence of such a functional g, we next show that it is a valid performance
measure, in the sense that it correctly identifies an investor’s informational advantage. To
see this, note that the excess return of an informed investor i in our model can be written as
Re,i =

K
X

(qij Rj − 1) wji ,

j=1

where qij ≡

g R

pij
κ


e,i

≥ 1. Hence

=g

K
X

qij (Rj − 1) wji +

j=1

= 0 + g (1)

K
X

!
(qij − 1) wji

j=1
K
X

(qij − 1) wji

(17)

j=1

≥ 0.
We note that this derivation also shows that the measure g is essentially unique — any
two measures g and g 0 differ at most by a multiplicative constant.
One way to construct the measure g is the so-called style analysis, proposed by Sharpe
(1992). According to this approach, the return of each manager is regressed on the passive
returns of all possible asset classes. Moreover, to interpret the betas as portfolio weights,
one additionally requires that the betas on the passive strategies add up to one. (They are
also restricted to be positive, to satisfy the no-shorting constraints faced by mutual-fund
managers.) The constant (alpha) of such a regression is interpreted as a manager’s skill.
Viewing style analysis as mapping the (excess) return of a manager to a value of alpha, it
is straightforward to show that it satisfies all the aforementioned properties of the functional
g. We record the result formally:
Proposition 2 Let wji =

Pj Xji
W0ci

be the portfolio weight of the investment in location j by an

investor in location i. Consider the style regression of the gross return obtained by such an
investor on the passive returns, including the risk-free one. The constant αis in this regression
21

is the portfolio-weighted informational advantage of investor i across all markets in which
she invests:
αis

=

K 
X
pij
j=1

κ


− 1 wji .

(18)

An alternative way of formulating the functional g is as follows. Let Σ denote the
covariance matrix of passive excess returns Rje,p , E (Re,p ) the vector of expected excess passive
returns, w = Σ−1 E (Re,p ) a mean-variance efficient portfolio from the perspective of an
uninformed econometrician, and RM V E = w> Re,p the excess return of the portfolio. Then
the functional g(Re ) ≡ E(Re )−cov(Re , RM V E ) satisfies all the requirements of the functional
g, since it is linear, satisfies g(1) = 1, and most importantly assigns the value zero to all
passive excess returns. This observation formalizes the claim we made in Section 3.2.: The
reason for the inadequacy of CAPM alphas is that the market portfolio is not mean-variance
efficient even from the perspective of an uninformed econometrician.16
Our analysis in this section is related to Chen and Knez (1996), who characterize performance measures satisfying a reasonable minimal set of requirements in a general payoff-andinformation environment. Our special model structure implies a tighter characterization —
essentially, our performance measure is unique, assigns positive alpha to informed strategies,
and it can be thought of as a style alpha.

3.4.

Investor-specific performance evaluation

A key requirement for a valid functional g is that it assign zero alpha to passive strategies.
An issue that we did not address in the previous section is that the requirement need only
apply with respect to the locations in which a given investor i participates. Indeed, equation
(17) continues to hold even if the values g(Rje,p ) are set arbitrarily whenever the investor
chooses wji = 0.
16

See also Ferson and Siegel (2001) for the properties of unconditionally efficient portfolios for the purposes
of performance evaluation.

22

This observation is of practical importance because in the real world many portfolios
are concentrated in only a few asset classes, and virtually all shun some asset classes. It
also helps explain the widespread use of heterogeneous benchmarks. Thus, if the goal is
to evaluate the stock-picking skills of an asset manager who only invests in Finnish stocks,
then our analysis provides a justification for regressing her return only on the Finnish stock
market index rather than some global index, or a set of indices from several countries. We
also note that adding more classes not only does not help, but in fact hurts by deteriorating
the quality of inference with finite data.
The above discussion helps us illustrate an additional point of some theoretical interest:
One can find valid, investor-specific gi even when a functional g pricing all passive strategies
does not. The easiest way to illustrate this point is by using a minimal example whereby an
equilibrium features an unexploitable arbitrage. For instance, consider an economy in which
(i) the passive portfolios in two locations (say, locations j and j 0 ) have the same dividends
from the perspective of a passive investor (κDj = κDj 0 ) but different prices (Pj 6= Pj 0 );17 (ii)
investor j invests only in market j, because

pjj
Pj

>

pj 0
Pj 0

and similarly investor j 0 only invests in

market j 0 . The prohibitive risks of shorting make this arbitrage opportunity compatible with
does not exist,
equilibrium. A global measure g applying simultaneously to Rje,p and Rje,p
0
yet individual measures gj and gj 0 are easy to construct, e.g., by regressing each investor’s
return on the passive returns in the asset classes in which she invests.

3.5.

Summing up alphas

Here we take a closer look at the cross-section of portfolio performance in our model. The
starting point is the general observation that, relative to the market, the average alpha must
be zero by construction. However, in our model all the investors have some information,
which should allow them to improve on the market portfolio and consequently display into
positive alphas.
To discuss this issue, we revisit Section 3.2. and concentrate on an economy that is
This could occur in equilibrium, for instance, because the investors in a third location j 00 are better
informed about one of these two locations, resulting in a higher price for its securities.
17

23

symmetric with respect to the various locations. In this economy, Pj = P = P a , and equation
(16) gives αij =

pij
κ

− 1 > 0. Since all individual alphas are positive, it would appear that the

portfolio-weighted average of alphas (across investors) is strictly positive. This conclusion
is not correct, though, because the analysis so far has ignored the swindlers’ investment in
their own firms. Indeed, these agents invest a non-zero fraction of their portfolio in an asset
costing P > 0 and paying back zero, i.e., offering a net return of −100%.
One can see explicitly the negative return to the swindlers’ retained holdings in their
own firms in the market-clearing equation from Theorem 1. Focusing on a single market,
recalling that 1 − fij = pij , and summing across investors i expresses equation (9) as

0=

K 
X
pij
i=1

κ


− 1 Xji + (−1) ×

1−

K
X

!
Xji

.

(19)

i=1

The right-hand side of equation (19) contains two terms. The first term is positive and
captures the intuition of aggregate positive alphas. The second term, though, is negative,
PK
P
i
i
because K
i=1 Xj represents the swindlers’ position in their
i=1 Xj < 1: the difference 1 −
own firms in location j, and −1 is the associated net return.
The alphas realized by the swindlers combine the −100% on their own firms with the
positive values on the rest of their portfolios, but are negative in the aggregate. This is
despite the fact that the swindlers possess superior information. Given their endowment
of worthless stock, swindlers are actually better off retaining some of their shares in their
effort to pool with the regular stock. The reason for their negative alpha is not suboptimal
behavior, but rather the nature of their initial endowment.
This observation illustrates an additional caveat to using alpha, namely that it depends on
endowments, or initial positions. An investor’s return may appear inferior simply because
her initial position is overvalued, and disposing of it would deteriorate (mark-to-market)
wealth. In such situations, one would obtain a better measure of the investor’s information
from the return on the change in the investor’s portfolio, under the implicit assumption that
this change would have been zero absent any information. Implementing such a procedure,

24

though, requires knowledge of portfolios (trades), which is far harder to come by.

4.

Conclusion

We develop a multiple-market, multiple-investor model, whereby informational asymmetries
act as distortionary and redistributive capital taxes. By explicitly modeling the incentive
to diversify across asset classes, and introducing strategic-trading considerations for some
traders, we can dispense with noise trading, yet keep prices non-revealing. Moreover, the
duality between the model and a tax economy makes the model quite tractable to analyze,
without requiring CARA utilities and normal dividends.
By drawing a distinction between asset classes (sets of stocks that seem identical from
the perspective of an uninformed agent) and individual assets within asset classes, the model
can account for portfolio biases towards specific asset classes for any realization of the signals
about the quality of individual assets. Hence the model provides a simple and analytically
convenient framework to model persistent portfolio biases toward a set of asset classes,
under-diversification, and portfolios with non-interior (zero) holdings of individual assets.
To illustrate the analytical tractability of the model we revisit an established literature
that analyzes the properties of popular performance evaluation measures. Our framework
allows a particularly clean distinction between pure selection and timing abilities. Without
trivializing the possible importance of timing information, we show that the specific informational assumptions we adopt provide a simple and intuitive theoretical basis for portfolio
evaluation criteria such as style analysis and fund-dependent choice of benchmarks, which
have proved popular amongst practitioners.

25

References
Admati, A. R. (1985). A noisy rational expectations equilibrium for multi-asset securities
markets. Econometrica 53 (3), 629–658.
Admati, A. R. and S. A. Ross (1985). Measuring investment performance in a rational
expectations equilibrium model. Journal of Business 58 (1), 1–26.
Akerlof, G. (1970). The market for ”lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (3), 488–500.
Berk, J. B. and R. C. Green (2004). Mutual fund flows and performance in rational markets.
Journal of Political Economy 112 (6), 1269–1295.
Berk, J. B. and H. van Binsbergen, Jules (2015). Measuring skill in the mutual fund industry.
Journal of Financial Economics 118 (1), 1–20.
Bhattacharya, S. and P. Pfleiderer (1985). Delegated portfolio management. Journal of
Economic Theory 36 (1), 1–25.
Brennan, M. J. and H. Cao (1997). International portfolio investment flows. Journal of
Finance 52, 1851–1880.
Chen, Z. and P. J. Knez (1996). Portfolio Performance Measurement: Theory and Applications. Review of Financial Studies 9 (2), 511–55.
Dybvig, P. H. and S. A. Ross (1985). Differential information and performace measurement
using a security market line. Journal of Finance 40 (2), 383–399.
Ferson, W. and J. Lin (2014). Alpha and performance measurement: The effects of investor
disagreement and heterogeneity. Journal of Finance 69 (4), 1565–1596.
Ferson, W. E. and A. F. Siegel (2001). The efficient use of conditioning information in
portfolios. The Journal of Finance 56 (3), 967–982.

26

Gehrig, T. (1993). An information based explanation of the domestic bias in international
equity investment. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 95, 97–109.
Glosten, L. R. and R. Jagannathan (1994). A contingent claim approach to performance
evaluation. Journal of Empirical Finance 1, 133–160.
Grinblatt, M. and S. Titman (1989). Portfolio performance evaluation: Old issues and new
insights. The Review of Financial Studies.
Grossman, S. J. and J. E. Stiglitz (1980). On the impossibility of informationally efficient
markets. American Economic Review 70, 393–408.
Hatchondo, J. C. (2008). Asymmetric information and the lack of portfolio diversification.
International Economic Review 49 (4), 1297–1330.
Koijen, R. and M. Yogo (2016). An equilibrium model of institutional demand and asset
prices. Working paper, London Business School and Princeton.
Kurlat, P. (2013). Lemons markets and the transmission of aggregate shocks. American
Economic Review 103 (4), 1463–1489.
Kyle, A. S. (1989). Informed speculation with imperfect competition. The Review of Economic Studies 56 (3), 317–355.
Li, Y., G. Rocheteau, and P.-O. Weill (2012). Liquidity and the threat of fraudulent assets.
Journal of Political Economy 120 (5), 815–846.
Mayers, D. and E. Rice (1979). Measuring portfolio performance and the empirical content
of asset pricing models. Journal of Financial Economics 7, 3–28.
Okawa, Y. and E. van Wincoop (2012). Gravity in international finance. Journal of International Economics 87, 205–215.
Sharpe, W. F. (1992). Asset allocation: Management style and performance measurement.
Journal of Portfolio Management 18 (2), 7–19.
27

Van Nieuwerburgh, S. and L. Veldkamp (2010).

Information acquisition and under-

diversification. Review of Economic Studies 77 (2), 779 – 805.
Vayanos, D. (2001). Strategic trading in a dynamic noisy market. Journal of Finance 56 (1),
131–171.
Wang, J. (1993). A model of intertemporal asset prices under asymmetric information.
Review of Economic Studies 60, 249–282.

28

Appendix
A

Strategic Agents and Dividend Manipulation

Here we build a model extension designed to capture two desired phenomena. First, we model
a finite economy populated by agents who behave strategically and show that the equilibrium
approaches the one in the benchmark (continuum) economy as the number of agents grows
without bound. Second, we also obtain no shorting as an endogenous consequence of allowing
swindlers to manipulate the cash flows from their firms, in a sense made precise below.
In order to illustrate the point as quickly and easily to convey as possible, we make a
number of (dispensable) simplifying assumptions.
Consider two locations, L = {1, 2}, each populated by N agents and hosting N firms.
A number κN of the agents18 in each location are common, the others being swindlers.
Similarly, there are κN regular and N − κN fraudulent firms per location. Agents have
CARA preferences with risk-aversion parameter γN , and each regular firm in location j has
output and dividend Dj /N , where E[Dj ] = 1 and Var(Dj ) = σ 2 . Let Ω denote the variance
of (D1 , D2 ). Dividends in different locations are assumed to be independent. Fraudulent
firms have output equal to zero. All agents are endowed with an equal number of shares of
regular firms in their locations. Each swindler also owns entirely a fraudulent firm.
The information structure is as in the main text, with some simplifications. As in the
text, we maintain that pii = 1, and also impose symmetry, i.e., p12 = p21 ≡ p. We also
impose that some quantities, such as the proportion of fraudulent firms mis-identified as
regular equal their ex-ante averages. More precisely, agent 1 receives p−1 κN good signals
for the firms in location 2, of which exactly κN correspond to the regular firms and the
remainder to fraudulent firms. The set of (p−1 − 1)κN of mis-identified firms is chosen from
a uniform distribution on the set of cardinality-(p−1 − 1)κN subsets of the set of fraudulent
18
The number of agents must be an integer, of course. We therefore adopt the convention that all necessary
quantities are rounded in some reasonable fashion. Alternatively, we restrict κ to be rational and N to an
appropriate (unbounded) set. The same for p−1 κN .

29

firms.
The action space for common investors consists of demand functions X(P̄ ) that give the
numbers of shares in the 2N securities that a given investor is willing to purchase given
the 2N -dimensional price vector P̄ . Swindlers must take an additional action, which is the
amount L that they borrow and divert into the firm to increase its liquidation value.
Specifically, we assume that each swindler has the ability to borrow any amount L of her
choosing at time 0, divert these funds into the firm, and report earnings equal to L (1 + r) = L
in period 1. (Equivalently, we could assume that the swindler can take an action to produce
earnings L by incurring a personal non-pecuniary cost of effort, which would have a value
L in monetary terms.) Given the possibility of such a diversion, equation (5), giving the
swindler’s time-1 wealth, becomes
W1sil

≡B

sil

+

K Z
X
j=1


sil
Djk dXjk
+ Lil S il − 1 .

(A.1)

k∈[0,1]


We note that the difference to (5) is the term Lil S il − 1 , which is intuitive. If S il − 1 <
0, i.e., if the swindler reduces her ownership of shares by being a net seller, then she has
no incentive to perform earnings diversion, since she will recover only a fraction of the
funds she diverted into the company. If, however, the swindler is a net buyer of her own

security S il − 1 > 0 , then the ability to manipulate earnings becomes infinitely valuable,
since Lil can be chosen to be an arbitrarily large number. Intuitively, the swindler can report
arbitrarily large profits at the expense of outside investors who hold negative positions (short
sellers) in the fraudulent firm. This feature discourages any other agent from shorting: with
non-zero probability all other agents know that the firm is fraudulent and don’t buy any
shares, so that any shorting results in S il > 1.
Given that we are considering a sequential game — the swindler’s decision to manipulate
is taken after the asset market clears — of incomplete information, we are looking for a
perfect Bayesian Nash equilibrium. Loosely speaking, this concept requires that all actions
— demands and manipulation decisions — be optimal given beliefs, while beliefs be updated
according to Bayes’ rule wherever possible. Note that, unlike in the main body of the paper,

30

all agents take into account their potential impact on the price, and on the other agents’
beliefs, when submitting their demand functions.
We concentrate on the sub-class of symmetric equilibria, in which all agents in a given
market behave identically conditional on their type and signals, while the differences in
behavior between market-1 and market-2 agents come down to index permutations in the
natural way. Important, we are interested in the existence of pooling equilibria, in which all
securities in a given location, and therefore in the entire economy by symmetry, have the
same price.
Proposition 3 A perfect Bayesian Nash equilibrium exists with the following properties.
(i) The equilibrium is symmetric.
(ii) All security prices are equal.
(iii) Common investors and swindlers have the same portfolios in equilibrium, with the
exception of the swindler’s holding of her own firm.
(iv) There is no shorting.
(v) There is no dividend manipulation.
Furthermore, as N increases, equilibrium prices and aggregate holdings of agents in any location i of all assets in location j converge to the competitive-strategic equilibrium in Theorem
1.

B

Proofs

Proof of Theorem 1.

The proof proceeds in a number of steps. We start with an

equilibrium in the simplified competitive tax economy, and use it to construct demands in
the original economy. Second, we specify out-of-equilibrium beliefs in the original economy
that support the equilibrium. In a third step, we verify that all agents, regular as well as
swindlers, find it optimal to submit the demands specified given prices and their beliefs.
Finally, we verify that markets clear.
31

Consider a solution to the simplified problem (8)–(9). The demands in the original
economy are defined naturally based on this solution:
ci
dXjk
= (1 − fij ) κ−1 Xji 1ιijk 1(Pjk =Pj ) dk

(B.1)

sil
= (1 − fij ) κ−1 Xji 1ιijk 1(Pjk =Pj ) dk, (i, l) 6= (j, k)
dXjk

 [0, ∞) if P = P
il
i
sil
.
dXil =
 0
if P 6= P

(B.2)

il

(B.3)

i

sil
ci
are themselves
and dXjk
The conjectured prices are Pjk = Pj for all j and k. Note that dXjk

demand curves, i.e., functions of the prices {Pj }j .
In words, all investors buy the same number of shares in each market as in the tax
economy, but they split this position (equally) only among the firms about which they
receive a good signal — note that the multiplicative factor (1 − fij ) κ−1 equals the reciprocal
of the probability that a given signal is good. Another proviso is that the price equal the
pooling price Pj ; for any other price, the agents shun the asset. The only exception to this
behavior is provided by the insiders of fraudulent firms, who submit an elastic demand at
Pjl = Pj .
In equilibrium, only prices Pj are realized, and therefore prices are not informative. We
postulate that all agents believe that any firm k in market j that has price Pjk 6= Pj is
fraudulent with probability one.
ci
To see that Xjk
is optimal, start by writing the expected utility for the agent as

"
E U

K Z
X
j=1

!
ci
(Djk − Pj ) dXjk
+ Pi

#

"

|ιi = E U

k

K Z
X
j=1

#

!
ci
ρ(jk) Dj − Pj dXjk
+ Pi



|ιi

k

(B.4)
ci
and note that, by Jensen’s inequality, this utility is maximized by choosing dXjk
, for fixed

j, to be measurable with respect to ιijk — in words the agent invests identically in all assets
in market j in which she received the same signal. Furthermore, the portfolio of assets with

32

higher signals (ιijk = 1) strictly dominates the portfolio with low signals (ιijk = 0). Let
X̂jci =

ci
dXjk
dk

denote the mass of shares in each asset in market j in which the investor has a

positive signal. Consequently, (B.4) is equal to
"
E U

K Z
X
j=1

k

!
ρ(jk) Dj − Pj 1(ιi =1) dk X̂jci + Pi
jk


#
|ιi

(B.5)

h P
i
 ci
K
i
= E U
((1
−
f
)D
−
P
)
P
r
ι
=
1
X̂
+
P
.
ij
j
j
i
j
jk
j=1
It follows that the optimal position is
−1 i
X̂jci = P r ιijk = 1
Xj = (1 − fij )κ−1 Xji .

(B.6)

Equation (B.1) is immediate.
The same argument holds for the choice that a swindler makes with respect to all assets
but her own. When choosing the position in her own asset, the only consideration is the timezero revenue (1 − dXilsil )Pil , since the asset pays zero. Given the other investors’ demands,
the insider must ensure that Pil = Pi . To that end she submits a demand that fails to clear
the market at Pil 6= Pi , and is willing to take any position at Pil = Pi .
To see that markets clear at prices Pj , start from (9) and a consider a regular firm k in
market j. Since by assumption we have ιijk = 1, the total demand follows from adding (B.1)
and (B.2) over all i, which gives

κ

K
X
i=1

ci
dXjk

+ (1 − κ)

K
X
i=1

sil
dXjk

K
X
=
(1 − fij )κ−1 Xji dk = dk

(B.7)

i=1

by (9). The markets for fraudulent assets clear due to the elastic demands submitted by
insiders.
The final observation to make is that Xji is indeed equal to the aggregate positions taken
by investors located in market i when investing in market j, excluding swindlers’ positions

33

in their own firms, i.e.,
Xji

 Z

Z

ci
sil
= κ dXjk + (1 − κ) 1((i,l)6=(j,k)) dXjk P r ιijk = 1 .

(B.8)

Proof of Proposition 2. The result follows immediately from the fact that any informed
excess return is given by a linear combination of passive excess returns plus an additive
constant which is given by (18). Alternatively, one can also check directly that the style
alpha satisfies the properties required of a measure g, with g(1) = 1.

Proof of Proposition 3.
To construct an equilibrium, we proceed in a number of steps. We first construct demand
functions under the postulate, later verified, that all assets in the same location have the
same price, shorting is prohibited, and there is no dividend manipulation. In a second step we
extend the demand functions to cover all other price configurations, while in subsequent steps
we address out-of-equilibrium beliefs, dividend manipulation, and, in a final step, shorting.
We focus on a particular investor 1 and use symmetry throughout.
Step 1: Two-asset equilibrium. Suppose that Pj exists such that Pjk = Pj for all firms
jk. Consider the investment problem of any agent 1, common investor or swindler. We note
that, given her signals on any location j, the agent (i) excludes from consideration all firms
with bad signals — these have zero payoff — and (ii) invests equally in all the others, thus
minimizing idiosyncratic risk.19 At this stage, we also assume that the beliefs about the
asset qualities are given by the signals, and are not updated based on the price. We address
out-of-equilibrium beliefs in a later step.
This problem is a relatively standard, perfect-information one, featuring mean-variance
investors facing differential taxes who invest strategically in multiple assets in the presence
19

The agent is perfectly informed about location 1, and thus does not face any idiosyncratic risk, but equal
weighting is, of course, still optimal, albeit only weakly.

34

of shorting constraints. For the sake of completeness, we sketch proofs of both existence and
convergence towards the competitive outcome as the number of agents grows to infinity.
Given that the asset payoffs in the two locations are independent and preferences are
CARA, investments in the two assets do not interact. Market clearing, however, involves
the demands of both agents, so we choose to write the problem in matrix form, even if all
endogenous matrices are diagonal.
Let Π be diagonal with Πjj = p1j . Agent 1 faces a two-asset universe with expected
payoffs diag(Π) and variance-covariance matrix of payoffs ΠΩΠ. With X the portfolio choice
of the agent, it is convenient to focus on the quantity Y = ΠX . We are looking for an
equilibrium in which all demands, as functions of the two prices, are piece-wise linear —
in fact, linear truncated at zero. Relying on symmetry, we need to parameterize only the
demand of agent 1, as
Y = (A − BP )+ = Z (A − BP ) ,

(B.9)

where P ∈ R2 denotes the vector of prices per share in the two markets, and Z is a diagonal
matrix with Zjj = 1 if entry j of A − BP is positive and Zjj = 0 otherwise. Z is a function of
P . A requirement of the equilibrium is that, taking all other demand schedules as given, an
agent 1’s optimal portfolio choice, denoted X̂ (respectively Ŷ ), and therefore P , is optimal
subject to the restriction X̂ ≥ 0. The type of equilibrium we are looking for requires that
Ŷ = Z(A − BP ).
Consider price setting for a regular firm. We note that if an agent 1 demands X (∈ R2 )
total shares in each location, the total demand for regular-firm shares is only ΠX = Y . The
reason is that, in market j, a proportion 1 − p1j of the demand flows to fraudulent firms.
Given (B.9), it follows that the residual demand faced by an agent 1 for the aggregate
regular asset in each location is also linear, given as
Y (r) = A(r) − B (r) P,

(B.10)

35

with A(r) = (N − 1)ZA + N RZA and B (r) = (N − 1)ZB + N RZBR, where the matrix R
implements the permutation 1 ↔ 2 applied to all indices to capture the demand of agents
in location 2; that is,

R=

0 1
1 0


.

An agent 1 maximizes
 κ
γN >
Ŷ > 1 − Π−1 P + e>
Ŷ Ω Ŷ ,
1P −
N
2

(B.11)

where e1 = (1, 0)> is a vector that selects market 1, to capture the agent’s endowment,
and 1 = (1, 1)> . Note that the agent’s endowment represents a fraction 1/N of the total
endowment in market 1, and his risk tolerance a fraction 1/N of the aggregate risk tolerance
of agents in location 1. The agent takes into account that the price depends on her demand
through the market-clearing condition
Ŷ + Y (r) (P ) = κ1.

(B.12)

The logic of the argument is familiar. The agent can be thought of as choosing the
quantity Ŷ and via (B.12) the price vector P , taking the residual demand as given. Before
we compute the optimal demand, we remark, based on (B.11), that (i) if P1 < 1, then Ŷ1 > 0
, and (ii) Ŷ2 > 0 if and only if P2 < p. Since the market for asset 1 must clear, Y1 > 0 in
equilibrium, while Y2 may or not be positive.
The first-order condition for the Lagrangean associated with (B.11) is
0 = 1 − Π−1 P − (DŶ P )Π−1 Ŷ + (DŶ P )e1

κ
− γN ΩŶ + λ,
N

(B.13)

where λ is the Lagrange-multiplier vector attached to the no-shorting condition, while dif-

36

ferentiating (B.12) with respect to Ŷ gives
0 = 1 + DP Y (r) DŶ P
= 1 − B (r) DŶ P.

(B.14)

Note that, via Z, A(r) and B (r) are actually functions of P . Since they are step functions,
though, we may treat them as constants when evaluating first-order conditions. We verify
later that the first-order approach generates an equilibrium in our context.
Putting (B.13) and (B.14) together provides a candidate demand schedule for agent 1:
Ŷ = Ẑ



B


(r) −1

−1

Π

−1 

κ
−1
(r) −1
+ γN Ω
1−Π P + B
e1
.
N

(B.15)

We’ll define the coefficients of the linear demand of the agent 1 under consideration based
on (B.15), but we first determine the value that the matrix Z, and therefore Ẑ, takes in
equilibrium. Let P ∗ denote the equilibrium price and suppose that P1∗ > p, so that agent 1
is the only one investing in market 1. Then, from (B.15) market clearing implies

−1 

−1

−1 
(r)
(r)
−1
2
∗
−1
κ = N Ŷ = N
B11
+ γσ
1 − P1 + N
B11
κ ,

(B.16)

which gives upon rearrangement
P1∗ = 1 − γκσ 2 .

(B.17)

Thus, if p < 1 − γκσ 2 and the equilibrium satisfies (B.15), then agent 1 doesn’t invest in
market 2.
Suppose now that the agent invests in both markets. We use again market clearing from

37

(B.15),
−1 

−1 
(r)
∗
−1
κ= N
+ γσ
1 − P1 + N
B11
κ +

−1

−1

(r)
−1
−1
2
N
B22
1 − p−1 P2∗ ,
p + γσ


−1



(r)
B11

−1

2

(B.18)

which, using P1∗ = P2∗ , leads to



−1
(r)
−1
2
N
B11
+ γσ
P1∗ = 1 − γκσ 2 + 
N −1



(r)
B22

−1


 1 − p−1 P1∗ ,
p−1

+

(B.19)

γσ 2

further rewritten as
(p − P1∗ ) (1 + a0 ) = p − 1 − γκσ 2



(B.20)

with



−1
(r)
N −1 B11
+ γσ 2
 > 0.
a0 = 

−1
(r)
N −1 B22
+ pγσ 2
Thus p > P1∗ , implying active participation of agent 2 in market 1 if and only if p > 1−γκσ 2 .
We have therefore shown that Z22 (P ∗ ) = 1(p>1−γκσ2 ) , should an equilibrium exist.
Let Z ∗ ≡ Z(P ∗ ). We define the demand of agent 1 under consideration based on the
coefficients



(r) −1

−1

+ γN Ω
Π−1


κ
(r) −1
ψ (B) = φ (B) Π 1 + B
e1
.
N
φ (B) = Z

∗

B

(B.21)
(B.22)

Note that we used the known value of Z ∗ in this definition, as defined above.
Suppose that the mapping φ : R2 → R2 admitted a non-zero, positive fixed point. Then
38

let A = ψ(B) and compute the price from the market-clearing condition. It follows from
equation (B.15) that Ŷ = ψ(B) − φ(B)P ∗ as long as Ẑ(P ∗ ) = Z ∗ , i.e., as long as (i)
(ψ(B) − φ(B)P ∗ )11 = (A − BP ∗ )11 is positive, and (ii) (ψ(B) − φ(B)P ∗ )22 = (A − BP ∗ )22
∗
= 0, thus p > 1 − γκσ 2 .
is positive if and only if Z22
∗
Note, however, that Z22
= 0 implies B22 = A2 = 0, and therefore Ẑ22 (P ∗ ) = 0. Given
∗
symmetry and market clearing, it follows that A1 − B11 P1∗ > 0. If Z22
= 1 and both investors

invest in both markets, then we saw above that market clearing leads to (B.20), which implies
P1∗ < p. From the definitions,
A − BP ∗ =



B (r)

−1

+ γN Ω

−1 

1 + B (r)

−1

e1


κ
− Π−1 P ∗ .
N

(B.23)

∗
> 0, for j ∈ {1, 2}.
Since P1∗ < p, 1 − Π−1 P ∗ > 0, and therefore (A − BP ∗ )jj > 0, thus Ẑjj

One can use Brouwer’s theorem to show that φ has a strictly positive fixed point, as
follows. It is convenient to concentrate on the mapping φN (N B) ≡ N φ(B). To invoke this
theorem, we restrict attention to B1 > 0 (and B2 ≥ 0) and note that, as a consequence, the
image of φN is bounded above (in the operator sense) — uniformly in N , in fact. We also
see that δ > 0 exists such that, if N B1 ≥ δ, then (φN (N B))1 > δ. Specifically, from (B.21)
it follows that δ must obey
N (2N − 1)−1 δ −1 + γN σ 2

−1

≥ δ,

(B.24)

which holds, for instance, for
δ=

−1
1
γσ 2
.
2

(B.25)

Thus, we have verified that the continuous mapping φN maps a compact set into itself, and
therefore has a fixed point B characterized by B1 > δ > 0, B2 ≥ 0.
The last fact that must be established before concluding that we have an equilibrium is
that the agents’ portfolios are, indeed, optimal. We constructed them to satisfy first-order
conditions, but the agents’ objectives (B.11) are not concave in general. Given equilibrium
39

residual demands, though, they are concave.
To make the matters clear, we rewrite (B.11) as
>



>

−1

Ŷ 1 − Ŷ Π

γN >
κ >
Ŷ Ω Ŷ ,
− e1 P −
N
2

(B.26)

Since P is not a constant, this function is not quadratic in Ŷ . The implicit function P (Ŷ ),
though, defined via (B.12), is (piece-wise linear and) convex. To obtain concavity, it is
sufficient that P (Ŷ ) be linear whenever Ŷ > Π−1 −
κ
Πe1
N

=

κ
e,
N 1

κ >
e
N 1

< 0. Differently put, that for Ŷ <

both agents are long in both markets given equilibrium demands and P (Ŷ ).

Obviously, there is no problem concerning asset 2 (since e12 = 0: agent 1 has no endowment of asset 2). For asset 1, consider first the case in which agents only participate in their
home markets in equilibrium. Since we defined A2 = B22 = 0, i.e., constant, in this case,
there is no issue. In the other case, suppose that the agent increases Ŷ1 until agents 2 drop
out of the market, i.e., the price becomes P1 = p. Each other agent 1, at this price, holds

−1 

κ
(r)
(r)
A1 − B11 p = (B11 )−1 + γN σ 2
1 + (B11 )−1 − p
N


−1 
κ
(r) −1
(r)
< (B11 ) + γN σ 2
(B11 )−1 + γκσ 2
N
κ
= ,
N

(B.27)
(B.28)
(B.29)

where we used p > 1 − γκσ 2 . The residual demand is therefore linear until a point where
Ŷ1 = κ − (N − 1)(A1 − B11 p) >

κ
.
N

Let’s turn now to the behavior of this equilibrium as N grows large. Since N B is bounded
below by δ > 0 (independently of N ), (B.21) implies
B̄ = Z ∗ (γΩ)−1 Π−1 ,

(B.30)

with B̄ denoting the limit of N B.

40

We note that limN →∞ B (r) = B̄ + RB̄R. It follows, using (B.22), that the limit of N A is
Ā = B̄Π1 = Z ∗ (γΩ)−1 1

(B.31)

and that the limit price per share is
−1
P̄ = B̄ + RB̄R
(Ā + RĀ − κ1).

(B.32)

The quantities Ā and B̄ also correspond to the solution to (B.11) taking the price as
given. The price P̄ is therefore the competitive price in the two-asset, short-sale constrained
−1
equilibrium. The term B̄ + RB̄R
(Ā+RĀ) captures the aggregate expected payoff from
an asset one invests in. The remaining term is the risk adjustment, with κ1 the supply of
−1
the asset, and B̄ + RB̄R
accounting for the covariance between one asset the aggregate
investor purchases and one unit of the total supply.
Step 2: The other demands. Returning to the finite-N case, we consider now the demand
of a swindler in her own firm. Given that the only way to generate a positive demand in
her firm — given the other agents’ equilibrium strategies, described below — is to ensure
that its price is P1 , the swindler submits a perfectly elastic demand at the price P1 at which
all other firms clear, as long as the demand is a quantity that does not exceed one. At all
other prices, the swindler submits a demand (1, ∞), i.e., stands ready to clear the market as
long as she takes a gross position higher than one. This case can only obtain when another
agent is willing to short at the respective price, and the optimal reaction of the swindler is
to accommodate the shorter and manipulate dividends, as we describe below.
Formally, the demand of the swindler for her own firm l is

 (−∞, ∞) if
sl
X (P1l ) =
 (1, ∞)
if

∃P1 & P1l = P1

.

(B.33)

@P1 or P1l 6= P1

We also note that, in equilibrium, the swindler never shorts her own firm, since the demand
for it is lower than the demand for a regular firm, about which the signals are better.
41

All agents demand a zero amount of shares in firms in which they have bad signals.
Local agents know precisely all regular firms. If the set of prices of regular firms in market
1 is not a singleton, then we specify the demand of agent 1 as Ŷ1j = ∞ for all j such that
P1j < maxk P1k , and Ŷ1j = −∞ for all j such that P1j = maxk P1k . If all positive-signal firms
in market 2 do not have the same price, then agent 1 maximizes utility conditional on his
out-of-equilibrium beliefs, stated below. The important feature to note is that no deviation
by a swindler can prevent the regular firms having the same price — this is ensured by the
demands of the local common investors — and therefore the only relevant belief concerns
the case in which the price P2j of a fraudulent firm is not equal to that of at least κN other
firms in location 2.20
Step 3: Out-of-equilibrium beliefs. Investor 1 knows all types in market 1. Suppose
that she observes prices P2k . Given κ > 12 , there are only two possibilities. First, at least
κN firms of the p−1 κN ones about which the investor has positive signals have the same
price (there is only one price level for which this statement is true). Then the agent assigns
probability one that all firms with different price are fraudulent. Second, there is no such
subset of firms. Then the agent believes that the prices are entirely uninformative.
As remarked above, given the prescribed strategies, no swindler can bring about the
second case, and it is optimal for each swindler to induce the pooling outcome, as it carries
zero cost and unilateral deviation exposes the firm as certainly fraudulent.
Finally, common agents do not have an incentive to adjust demand for the regular stocks
in market 1 in the hope of signaling, given the swindlers’ equilibrium demand (which ensures
the same price for the fraudulent firm as for the regular ones).
Step 4: Dividend manipulation. The swindler’s action also includes the amount of dividend manipulation she engages in, subsequent to asset-market clearing. If the swindler
borrows the amount F ≥ 0 that she diverts in the firm, then she makes profit


X sl (F − P1l ) − F + Pil = Pil 1 − X sl + F X sl − 1 .

(B.34)

To simplify exposition, we make the parametric assumption κ > 12 , which excludes the possibility that
there are two or more disjoint sets of firms of size κN , which may have the same price.
20

42

Clearly, if X sl > 1, the swindler benefits from borrowing an arbitrarily large amount L
to divert in the firm, pushing its liquidating price arbitrarily high and making arbitrarily
high profits. As long as there is no shorting, however, there is no manipulation.
Step 5: Shorting. Agent 1 is perfectly informed about assets in market 1, and does not
short regular assets in market 1, as discussed in Step 1. She also does not short fraudulent
assets in market 1 because agent 2 may also know that they are fraudulent, and therefore
the swindler would be the only buyer, would end up being a net buyer of the asset and
manipulate the dividends to an arbitrary extent. Agent 1 does not short an asset in market
2 that is fraudulent, for everyone knows that it is fraudulent. Finally, she may consider
shorting an asset in market 2 about which she has a positive signal. If the equilibrium
demand for market 2 by agent 1 in the shorting-constrained economy without manipulation
is zero, then there is a positive probability that the asset is fraudulent and no one else invests
in it. If this demand is actually strictly positive, then taking a negative position would be
suboptimal even in the absence of the manipulation threat.

43

