NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREDIT EXPANSION AND NEGLECTED CRASH RISK
Matthew Baron
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 22695
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22695

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

We are grateful to Tobias Adrian, Nick Barberis, Michael Brennan, Markus Brunnermeier,
Priyank Gandhi, Sam Hanson, Dirk Hackbarth, Ravi Jagannathan, Jakub Jurek, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Luc Laeven, David Laibson, Matteo Maggiori, Alan Moreira, Ulrich Mueller,
Tyler Muir, Christopher Palmer, Alexi Savov, Hyun Shin, Jeremy Stein, Motohiro Yogo, Jialin
Yu, and participants in numerous seminars and workshops for helpful discussion and comments.
We also thank Andrei Shleifer and four anonymous referees whose constructive suggestions
helped to sharpen the analysis. Isha Agarwal provided excellent research assistance. M.B.
received financial compensation from the Federal Reserve Board and the New York Fed while
conducting this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Matthew Baron and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Expansion and Neglected Crash Risk
Matthew Baron and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 22695
September 2016
JEL No. E02,E03,G01,G02
ABSTRACT
By analyzing 20 developed countries over 1920–2012, we find the following evidence of
overoptimism and neglect of crash risk by bank equity investors during credit expansions: 1)
bank credit expansion predicts increased bank equity crash risk, but despite the elevated crash
risk, also predicts lower mean bank equity returns in subsequent one to three years; 2) conditional
on bank credit expansion of a country exceeding a 95th percentile threshold, the predicted excess
return for the bank equity index in subsequent three years is -37.3%; and 3) bank credit expansion
is distinct from equity market sentiment captured by dividend yield and yet dividend yield and
credit expansion interact with each other to make credit expansion a particularly strong predictor
of lower bank equity returns when dividend yield is low.

Matthew Baron
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
401J Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-6201
baron@cornell.edu
Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu

A Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22695

The recent financial crisis in 2007–2008 has renewed economists’ interest in the causes and
consequences of credit expansions. There is now substantial evidence showing that credit
expansions can have severe consequences on the real economy as reflected by subsequent banking
crises, housing market crashes, and economic recessions, e.g., Borio and Lowe (2002), Mian and
Sufi (2009), Schularick and Taylor (2012), and López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2015).
However, the causes of credit expansion remain elusive. An influential yet controversial view put
forth by Minsky (1977) and Kindleberger (1978) emphasizes overoptimism as an important driver
of credit expansion. According to this view, prolonged periods of economic booms tend to breed
optimism, which in turn leads to credit expansions that can eventually destabilize the financial
system and the economy. The recent literature has proposed various mechanisms that can lead to
such optimism, such as neglected tail risk (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny 2012, 2013),
extrapolative expectations (Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny 1998), and this-time-is-different
thinking (Reinhart and Rogoff 2009).
Greenwood and Hanson (2013) provide evidence that during credit booms in the U.S. the
credit quality of corporate debt issuance deteriorates and this deterioration forecasts lower
corporate bond excess returns. While these findings are consistent with debt holders being overly
optimistic at the time of credit booms—especially their finding that a deterioration in credit quality
predicts negative returns for high-yield debt—the low but, on average, positive forecasted returns
for the overall bond markets may also reflect elevated risk appetite of debt holders during credit
expansions. The severe consequences of credit expansions on the whole economy also invite
another important question of whether agents in the economy, other than debt holders, recognize
the financial instability associated with credit expansion at the time of an expansion. While
overoptimism might have caused debt holders to neglect credit risk during credit expansions, this
may not be true of equity holders—and, in particular, bank shareholders, who often suffer large
losses during financial crises and thus should have strong incentives to forecast the possibility of
financial crises. 1 On the other hand, a long tradition links large credit expansions with

In contrast, bank depositors and creditors are often protected by explicit and implicit government guarantees during
financial crises. Even in the absence of deposit insurance, U.S. depositors in the Great Depression lost only 2.7% of
the average amount of deposits in the banking system for the years 1930–1933, despite the fact that 39% of banks
failed (Calomiris 2010).
1

1

overoptimism in equity markets (Kindleberger 1978), even though it is challenging to find
definitive evidence of excessive equity valuations.
In this paper, we address these issues by systematically examining the expectations of equity
investors, an important class of participants in financial markets. Specifically, we take advantage
of a key property of equity prices—they reveal the knowledge and expectations of investors who
trade and hold shares. By examining bank equity returns predicted by credit expansion, we can
infer whether bank shareholders anticipate the risk that large credit expansions often lead to
financial distress and whether shareholders demand a risk premium as compensation.
Our data set consists of 20 developed economies with data from 1920 to 2012. We focus on
the bank lending component of credit expansions and measure bank credit expansion as the past
three-year change in the bank-credit-to-GDP ratio in each country, where bank credit is the amount
of net new lending from the banking sector to domestic households and non-financial corporations
in a given country. We use this measure of credit expansion, which excludes debt securities held
outside the banking sector, because data on non-bank credit are historically limited and because
previous studies (e.g., Schularick and Taylor 2012) demonstrate that the change in bank credit is
a robust predictor of financial crises. Furthermore, the build-up of credit on bank balance sheets
(rather than financed by non-bank intermediaries or bond markets) poses the most direct risk to
the banking sector itself. Thus, we analyze whether equity investors price in these risks.
Our analysis focuses on four questions regarding credit expansion from the perspective of
bank equity holders. First, does credit expansion predict an increase in the crash risk of the bank
equity index in subsequent one to three years? As equity prices tend to crash in advance of banking
crises, the predictability of credit expansion for banking crises does not necessarily imply
predictability for equity crashes. By estimating a probit panel regression as the baseline analysis
together with a series of quantile regressions as robustness checks, we find that credit expansion
predicts a significantly higher likelihood of bank equity crashes in subsequent years.
Our second question is whether the increased equity crash risk is compensated by higher
equity returns on average. Note that the predictability of bank credit expansion for subsequent
economic recessions, as documented by Schularick and Taylor (2012), does not necessarily imply
that shareholders should earn lower average returns. If shareholders anticipate the increased
2

likelihood of crash risk at the time of a bank credit expansion, they could demand higher expected
returns by immediately lowering share prices and thus earn higher future average returns from
holding bank stocks. This is a key argument we use to determine whether shareholders anticipate
the increased equity crash risk associated with credit expansions.
We find that one to three years after bank credit expansions, despite the increased crash risk,
the mean excess return of the bank equity index is significantly lower rather than higher.
Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in credit expansion predicts an 11.4 percentage
point decrease in subsequent 3-year-ahead excess returns. One might argue that the lower returns
predicted by bank credit expansion may be caused by a correlation of bank credit expansion with
a lower equity premium due to other reasons such as elevated risk appetite. However, even after
controlling for a host of variables known to predict the equity premium, including dividend yield,
book to market, inflation, term spread, and nonresidential investment to capital, bank credit
expansion remains strong in predicting lower mean returns of the bank equity index.
Our third question asks the magnitude of the average bank equity returns during periods of
large credit expansions and contractions. We find that conditional on credit expansions exceeding
a 95th percentile threshold, the mean excess return in subsequent two and three years is
substantially negative at -17.9% (with a t-statistic of -2.02) and -37.3% (with a t-statistic of -2.52),
respectively. Note that for publicly traded banks, there is no commitment of shareholders to hold
bank equity through both good and bad times and thus earn the unconditional equity premium. Our
analysis thus implies that bank shareholders choose to hold bank equity during large credit booms
even when the predicted excess returns are sharply negative. This substantially negative equity
premium cannot be explained simply by elevated risk appetite and, instead, points to the presence
of overoptimism or neglect of crash risk by equity holders during credit expansions.
Our final question is how the sentiment associated with bank credit expansions differs from
and interacts with equity market sentiment captured by dividend yield, which is a robust predictor
of mean equity returns and which is sometimes taken as a measure of equity market sentiment.
Interestingly, while both bank credit expansion and low dividend yield of the bank equity index
strongly predict lower bank equity returns, they have only a small correlation with each other.
Furthermore, credit expansion has strong predictive power for bank equity crash risk, while
dividend yield has no such predictive power for bank equity crash risk. Consistent with the
3

theoretical insight of Simsek (2013), this contrast indicates two different types of sentiment—
credit expansions are associated with neglect of tail risk, while low dividend yield is associated
with optimism about the overall distribution of future economic fundamentals. Nevertheless, they
are not independent predictors of bank equity returns. The predictive power of credit expansion is
minimal when dividend yield is high, but particularly strong when dividend yield is low. This
asymmetric pattern indicates that credit expansion and dividend yield amplify each other to give
credit expansion even stronger predictability for bank equity returns when equity market sentiment
is high.
As our analysis builds on predicting bank equity returns after extreme values of bank credit
expansion, we have paid particular attention to verifying the robustness of our results along a
number of dimensions. First, we have consistently used past information in constructing and
normalizing the predictor variables at each point in time throughout our predictive regressions to
avoid any look-ahead bias. In particular, the negative excess returns conditional on large credit
expansions are forecasted at each point in time using only past information. Second, to avoid
potential biases in computing t-statistics, we take extra caution along the following dimensions: a)
we use only non-overlapping equity returns (i.e. we delete intervening observations so that we are
effectively estimating returns on annual, biennial, or triennial data for 1-, 2-, or 3-year-ahead
returns, respectively), b) we dually cluster standard errors both on country and time as in
Thompson (2011), since returns and credit expansion may each be correlated both across countries
and over time, and c) as a further robustness test to account for correlations across countries, we
collapse all large credit expansions into 19 distinct historical episodes (e.g., the Great Depression,
the East Asian Crisis, the 2007–08 Financial Crisis, and many lesser known episodes involving
sometimes one or many countries) and find statistically significant negative returns by averaging
these 19 historical episodes as distinct, independent observations. Third, we repeat our analysis in
subsamples of geographical regions and time periods and find consistent results across the
subsamples; in particular, the results hold over the subsample 1950–2003, which excludes the
Great Depression and the 2007–08 financial crisis. Finally, we also examine a variety of alternative
regression specifications and variable constructions to avoid potential concerns of specification
optimizing. We obtain consistent results even after using these conservative measures and
robustness checks.

4

Our analysis thus demonstrates the clear presence of overoptimism by bank shareholders
during bank credit expansions.2 Our findings shed light on several important issues. First, in the
aftermath of the recent crisis, an influential view argues that credit expansion may reflect active
risk seeking by bankers as a result of their misaligned incentives with their shareholders, e.g., Allen
and Gale (2000) and Bebchuk, Cohen, and Spamann (2010). Our study suggests that as
shareholders do not recognize the risk taken by bankers, such risk taking is not against the will of
the shareholders and may have even been encouraged by them, as suggested by Stein (1996),
Bolton, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006), and Cheng, Hong, and Scheinkman (2013). In this sense,
policies that aim to tighten the corporate governance of banks and financial firms are unlikely to
fully prevent future financial crises caused by bank credit expansions.
Second, our results have implications for the design of financial regulations and other efforts
to prevent future financial crises. For example, there is increasing recognition by policymakers
across the world of the importance of developing early warning systems of future financial crises.
While prices of financial securities are often considered as potential indicators, the overvaluation
of bank equity and the neglect of crash risk associated with large credit expansions suggest that
market prices are poor predictors of financial distress. Similarly, Krishnamurthy and Muir (2016)
find that credit spreads in the run-up to historical crises are “abnormally low”; the same may be
said about credit-default swap spreads on U.S. banks in 2006 and early 2007. Thus, our analysis
suggests that the use of market prices for predicting future financial crises (or, for example, for
implementing countercyclical capital buffers) is limited because market prices do not price in the
risk of financial crises until it is too late. Quantity variables such as growth of bank credit to GDP
may be more promising indicators.
The paper is structured as follows. Section I describes the data used in our analysis. Section
II presents the main results using credit expansion to predict bank equity returns. Section III
provides a variety of robustness checks. Finally, Section IV concludes. We also provide an online

2

In this regard, our analysis echoes some earlier studies regarding the beliefs of financial intermediaries during the
housing boom that preceded the recent global financial crisis. Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012) argue that before the
crisis, top investment banks were fully aware of the possibility of a housing market crash but “irrationally” assigned
a small probability to this possibility. Cheng, Raina, and Xiong (2013) provide direct evidence that employees in the
securitization finance industry were more aggressive in buying second homes for their personal accounts than some
control groups during the housing bubble and, as a result, performed worse.

5

Appendix, which reports additional details related to data construction, analogous results for nonfinancial equities in place of bank equities, and additional robustness analysis.

I.

Data

We construct a panel data set for 20 developed countries with quarterly observations from
1920 to 2012. Specifically, for a country to be included in our sample, it must currently be
classified as an advanced economy by the IMF and have at least 40 years of data for both credit
expansion and bank equity index returns.3 For 12 countries, the data set is mostly complete from
around 1920 onwards, while for 8 countries the data set is mostly complete from around 1950
onwards. The sample length of each variable for each country can be found in Appendix Table 1.
A. Data Construction
The data set primarily consists of three types of variables: credit expansion, bank equity index
returns, and various control variables known to predict the equity premium. The construction of
the data is outlined below, and more detail can be found in Appendix Section A.
Credit expansion. The key explanatory variable in our analysis is referred to as credit expansion
and is defined as the annualized past three-year percentage point change in bank credit to GDP,
where bank credit is credit from the banking sector to domestic households and non-financial
corporations. Note that credit expansion throughout this paper refers to bank credit expansion
except where specifically noted. It is expressed mathematically as
/

/

/

/ 3.

Figure 1 plots this variable over time for the 20 countries in the sample, where credit expansion is
expressed in standard deviation units by standardizing it by its mean and standard deviation within
each country.4 Credit expansion appears cyclical and mean-reverting for all countries, with periods
of rapid credit expansion often followed by periods of credit contraction.

3
The latter criterion excludes advanced economies such as Finland, Iceland, and New Zealand, for which there is
limited pre-1990s data.
4
In the rest of the paper, in order to avoid look-ahead bias in predictive regressions, credit expansion is standardized
country-by-country using only past information at each point in time, as explained later. However, in Figure 1, the
variable is standardized country-by-country on the entire time sample to present the data in a straightforward manner.

6

Insert Figure 1 here
Credit expansion is constructed from merging two sources: 1) “bank credit” from the Bank
for International Settlements’ (BIS) “long series on credit to private non-financial sectors,” which
covers a large range of countries but generally only for the postwar era, and 2) “bank loans” from
Schularick and Taylor (2012), which extend back over a century but only for a subset of the
countries. In both data sets, the term “banks” is broadly defined—for example, Schularick and
Taylor’s definition includes all monetary financial institutions such as savings banks, postal banks,
credit unions, mortgage associations, and building societies for which data are available. As for
the term “credit”, in the BIS data set, “bank credit” refers broadly to credit in various forms (e.g.,
loans, leases, securities) extended from banks to domestic households and private non-financial
corporations. In the Schularick and Taylor (2012) data set, “bank loans” is more narrowly defined
as bank loans and leases to domestic households and private non-financial corporations. Both data
sets exclude interbank lending and lending to governments and related entities.
Whenever there is overlap, we use the BIS data, since it is provided at a quarterly frequency.
Because there are discrepancies between the two data sources, most likely stemming from differing
types of institutions defined as "banks," differing types of instruments considered “credit,” and
differing original sources used to compile the data, we take care when merging the data to avoid
break between the series: the Schularick-Taylor data is scaled for each country by an affine
function so that the overlap between the series joins without a break and has similar variance for
the overlap. (We find that the overlap between the data sets is highly correlated for all countries.)
To interpolate the Schularick-Taylor annual data to quarterly observations, we forward-fill for the
three subsequent quarters. In general, we fill forward explanatory variables to avoid look-ahead
bias in forecasting, since forward-filled information for each quarter would already be known. We
do the same for all other predictor variables (e.g., book to market) in cases in which only annual
data is given for a variable in certain historical periods.
Our analysis uses the change in bank credit to GDP, rather than the level, for the following
reasons. The change of credit emphasizes the cyclicality of credit and represents the amount of net
new lending to the private sector. When the change in bank credit is high, the rapid increase in
new lending may coincide with lower lending quality, as shown by Greenwood and Hanson (2013),
which may in turn increase subsequent losses in the banking sector and lead to a financial crisis.
7

In contrast to the change, the level of credit exhibits long-term trends presumably related to
structural and regulatory factors. Differencing bank credit removes the secular trend and
emphasizes the cyclical movements corresponding to credit expansions and contractions.5
As the magnitude of credit expansion varies substantially across countries due to their size
and institutional differences, we standardize credit expansion for each country separately to make
this variable comparable across countries.6 However, to avoid look-ahead bias in the predictability
regressions, we normalize in such a way so that at each point in time we use only past information.
That is, for each country and each point in time, we calculate the mean and standard deviation
using only prior observations in that country and use these values to standardize the given
observation.
Equity index returns. The main dependent variable in our analysis is the future return of the
bank equity index for each country. In Appendix Section B, results for the non-financials equity
index are presented, but in all other places, we always refer to the bank equity index for each
country. Also, the terminology returns always refers to log excess total returns throughout the
paper.7
Our main source for price data for the bank equity index (and for price and dividend data for
the non-financials indices) is Global Financial Data (GFD). Our main source of bank dividend
yield data is hand-collected data from Moody’s Banking Manuals. In many cases, both price and
dividend data are supplemented with data from Compustat, Datastream, and data directly from
stock exchanges' websites and central bank statistics. 8 For both banks and non-financials, we

5

Why do we choose the past three-year change and not use some other horizon? In Appendix Table 8, we provide
analysis to show that the greatest predictive power for subsequent equity returns comes from the 2nd and 3rd lags in
the one-year change in bank credit to GDP, with predictability strongly dropping off at longer lags. It should also be
noted that Schularick and Taylor (2012) find similar results for the greatest predictability of future financial crises
with the 2nd and 3rd one-year lags. Thus, we cumulate the three one-year lags to arrive at the past three-year change
in bank credit to GDP as the main predictor variable in our analysis.
6
For example, credit expansion in Switzerland has substantially greater variance than in the U.S., because Switzerland
has a much larger banking sector relative to GDP. Preliminary tests suggested that it is crucial to standardize by
country: it is the relative size of credit booms relative to the past within a given country (perhaps, relative to what a
country’s institutions are designed to handle) that best predicts returns.
7
We also repeat our main results in Appendix Table 9 with arithmetic equity returns as a robustness check. The results
do not meaningfully change.
8
See Appendix Section A for additional details on constructing the bank and non-financials equity indices and
dividend yield indices for each country, including links to spreadsheets detailing our source data. Appendix Section

8

choose market-capitalization-weighted indices for each country that are as broad as possible within
the banking or non-financial sectors (though often, due to limited historical data, the non-financials
index is a broad manufacturing or industrials index). We compare many historical sources to
ensure accuracy of the historical data. For example, we compare our main bank price index for
each country with several alternative series from GFD and Datastream, along with an index
constructed using hand-collected bank stock prices (annual high and low prices) from Moody’s
Manuals; we retained only series that are highly correlated with other sources (see Appendix Table
2).
Excess total returns are constructed by taking the quarterly price returns, adding in dividend
yield, and subtracting the three-month short-term interest rate. For forecasting purposes, we
construct 1-, 2-, and 3-year-ahead log excess total returns by summing the consecutive quarterly
log returns and applying the appropriate lead operator.
Finally, we also define a crash indicator for 1-, 2-, and 3-years ahead for the bank and nonfinancials equity indices, which takes on the value of 1 if the log excess total return of the
underlying equity index is less than -30% for any quarter within the 1-, 2-, or 3-year horizon, and
0 otherwise. Analogously, we also define a boom indicator but for greater than +30% returns for
any quarter within the 1-, 2-, or 3-year horizon. We find that, for the bank equity index, +30% and
-30% quarterly returns happen roughly 1.1% and 3.2% of quarters, respectively. As these threshold
values were chosen somewhat arbitrarily, Section IV.C also provides additional analysis to show
that our results on crash risk are robust to using an alternative, quantile-regression approach, which
does not rely on the choice of a particular crash definition.9
Control variables. We also employ several financial and macroeconomic variables, which are
known to predict the equity premium, as controls. The main control variables are dividend yield of
the bank equity index10, book-to-market, inflation, non-residential investment to capital (I/K), and

A also discusses further details regarding the construction of the three-month short-term interest rate, control variables,
and other variables.
In unreported results, we verify that our analysis on crash risk is robust to choosing other thresholds of 20% or
25% for booms and crashes.
10
The dividend yield of the entire equity market and smoothed variations of both bank and broad-market measures
are employed in Appendix Table 6, which shows that the main results of this paper are robust to these alternative
measures of dividend yield.
9

9

term spread. These variables are chosen because the data are available over much of the sample
period for the 20 countries and because these variables have the strongest predictive power for
bank equity index returns in a univariate framework.11 Bank dividend yield is trimmed if it exceeds
40% annualized (i.e. 10% in a given quarter) to eliminate outliers. We standardize the control
variables across the entire sample pooled across countries and time, which does not introduce
forward-looking bias, as it is simply a change of units.
Other variables. We also employ various other measures of aggregate credit of the household,
corporate, and financial sectors and measures of international credit. Further information on data
sources and variable construction for all variables can be found in Appendix Section A.
B. Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics for bank equity index returns, non-financials equity index
returns, credit expansion (i.e. the annualized past-three-year change in bank credit to GDP,
sometimes denoted mathematically as ∆

/

), and control variables.

Observations are pooled across time and countries. Statistics for returns are all expressed in units
of annualized log returns.
Insert Table 1 here
The mean bank and non-financials equity index returns are 5.9% and 6.4%, respectively,
comparable to the historical U.S. equity premium. The standard deviation of bank index returns is
28.6%, slightly higher than the standard deviation of 25.6% for non-financials. In general, equity
returns are moderately correlated across countriesbank index returns have an average correlation
of 0.394 with the U.S., and non-financials index returns have an average correlation of 0.411.
Given that this paper studies crash events, it is useful to get a sense of the magnitude of price drops
in various percentiles. The 5th percentile quarterly return, which occurs on average once every 5
years, is -76.2% (in annualized log terms, thus corresponding to a quarterly drop of -76.2% / 4 =
19.1%), and the 1st percentile return is -137.6%.

Appendix Table 11 analyzes other possible control variables, for which there is limited data availability (such as
the corporate yield spread and realized daily volatility) or little predictive power (such as three-month short-term
interest rate (trailing 12-month average), real GDP growth, and sovereign default spread) and shows that the addition
of these control variables does not meaningfully change the main results.
11

10

Credit expansion is on average 1.3% per year. In terms of variability, credit expansion grew
as rapidly as 6.4 percentage points of GDP per year (in the 95th percentile) and contracted as
rapidly as -3.2 percentage points of GDP per year (in the 5th percentile). Table 1 reports that its
time-series correlation with the U.S., averaged across countries, is 0.221. This correlation is rather
modest, considering that the two most prominent credit expansions, those leading up to the Great
Depression and the 2007–08 Financial Crisis, were global in nature. In fact, the average correlation
of bank credit expansions in 1950–2003 (i.e. outside of these two episodes) is only 0.109. The
relatively idiosyncratic nature of historical credit expansions, which is also visible in Figure 1,
helps our analysis, as credit expansion’s associations with equity returns and crashes may be
attributed in large part to local conditions and not through spillover from crises in other countries.12
Insert Table 2 here
Table 2 examines time-series correlations between credit expansion and other variables. We
first compute these time-series correlations within each country and then average the correlation
coefficients across the countries in our sample. Table 2 shows that, as expected, bank credit
expansion is correlated with changes in other aggregate credit variablesincluding total credit (i.e.
both bank and non-bank credit), total credit to households, total credit to non-financial corporations,
bank assets to GDP, and growth of household housing assetsand with change in international
credit (current account deficits to GDP and change in gross external liabilities to GDP), verifying
that all these measures of credit generally coincide.13 However, the correlations of credit expansion
with the dividend yield of both the bank equity index and the broad market index are statistically
indistinguishable from zero, which suggests that credit expansion and dividend yield are relatively
orthogonal variables in predicting future equity returns. We will further compare the predictability
of bank credit expansion and bank dividend yield in Section II.D and argue that they capture
different dimensions of market sentiment.
C. Large Credit Booms and Bank Equity Declines

Appendix Table 10 shows that predictive power of credit expansion on subsequent returns is in large part due to
country-specific credit expansion and not spillover effects from other countries.
13
The construction of these variables and their data sources are described in Appendix Section A.
12

11

To understand the timing of credit expansions and bank equity declines, it is useful to plot
their dynamics. Figure 2 depicts the bank equity index, together with credit expansion, before and
after large credit booms, where a large credit boom is defined as any observation in which credit
expansion is above the 95th percentile relative to past data in that country. We will return to this
definition of a large credit boom again in Section II.C.
To produce Figure 2, the past-three-year change in bank credit to GDP and bank total excess
log returns are averaged, pooled across time and country, conditional on the given number of years
before or after a large credit boom (from t = -6 to t = +6). To convert from returns to an index, the
average bank log returns are then cumulated from t = -6 to t = +6, and the level is adjusted to be 0
at t = 0, the onset of the large credit boom.
The solid curve is the bank equity index (a cumulative log excess total returns index relative
to t = 0, the time of the large credit boom), and the dashed line is credit expansion (the three-year
past change in bank credit to GDP), which reaches a peak of around a 7.2 percentage point
annualized change in bank credit to GDP at t = 0. In subsequent years, credit expansion gradually
slows down to zero, below its historical trend growth rate of 1.3 percentage points; however, when
a large credit boom is followed by a banking crisis, as it often is (Borio and Lowe 2002, Schularick
and Taylor 2014), the decline in credit expansion is much steeper and turns negative after year 2;
see Appendix Figure 2 for the dynamics of credit expansion and equity prices before and after
banking crises.
Figure 2 previews our main result that credit booms forecast large declines in bank equity
prices. On average, the equity market decline starts around the peak of the credit boom and
continues for just over three years. From peak to trough, the average bank index declines over 30%
in log return.14
Insert Figure 2 here
Figure 2 also highlights various other aspects of the dynamics of bank equity prices around
large credit booms. For example, Figure 2 shows how bank equity prices tend to rise considerably

14

The magnitude of the decline in Figure 2 is slightly different from the results in Table 5 because Table 5 uses nonoverlapping 1-, 2-, and 3-year-ahead returns for econometric reasons, as explained in Section II. However, the
magnitudes are roughly similar.

12

leading up to the peak of the credit boom, with log excess returns of the bank equity index of 8.5%
per year, which is considerably above the historical average of 5.9%. Thus, bank equity prices rise
rapidly during the boom years, only to crash on average after the peak of the boom.

II. Empirical Results
As banks directly suffer from potential defaults of borrowers during credit expansions and the
risk of a run, bank equity prices should better reflect market expectations of the consequences of
credit expansions than non-financial equity prices. In this section, we report our empirical findings
using credit expansion to predict both crash risk and mean returns of the bank equity index. We
also find similar, albeit less pronounced, results from using credit expansion to predict crash risk
and equity returns of non-financials; we leave the results for non-financials for Appendix Section
B.
Our analysis follows an intuitive and logical sequence. We first examine whether credit
expansion predicts an increased equity crash risk in subsequent quarters and indeed find supportive
evidence. We then examine whether credit expansion predicts an increase in mean equity excess
returns to compensate investors for the increased crash risk and find the opposite result. We then
examine the magnitude of the mean equity excess returns and find that conditional on a large credit
expansion, the predicted mean equity excess returns over the subsequent two or three years can be
significantly negative. Finally, we compare the sentiment reflected by bank credit expansion and
dividend yield and examine their interaction in predicting bank equity returns.
Before turning to the regression specifications and estimation results, we note two
econometric issues, which apply to all the following analyses. The first is that special care is
needed in computing standard errors of these predictive return regressions with a financial panel
data setting. This is because both outcome variables (e.g. K-year-ahead excess returns, K = 1, 2,
and 3) and explanatory variables (e.g. credit expansion and controls) may be correlated across
countries (due to common global shocks) and over time (due to persistent country-specific shocks).
Therefore, we estimate standard errors that are dually clustered on time and country, following
Thompson (2011), to account for both correlations across countries and over time. For panel linear
regression models with fixed effects, i.e., equations (2) and (3) below, we implement dually
clustered standard errors by using White standard errors adjusted for clustering on time and
13

country separately, and then combined into a single standard error estimate as explicitly derived
in Thompson (2011). For the probit regression, i.e., equation (1), and the quantile regressions
specified in Section IV.C, we estimate dually clustered standard errors by block bootstrapping,
drawing blocks that preserve the correlation structure both across time and country.
Second, due to well-known econometric issues arising from using overlapping returns as the
dependent variable (Hodrick 1992; Ang and Bekaert 2007), we also take a deliberately
conservative approach by using non-overlapping returns throughout the analysis in this paper. That
is, in calculating 1-, 2- or 3-year- ahead returns, we drop the intervening observations from our
data set, in effect estimating the regressions on annual, biennial, or triennial data.15 As a result, we
can assume that auto-correlation in the dependent variables (excess returns) is likely to be minimal.
Using non-overlapping returns thus makes our estimation robust to many potential econometric
issues involved in estimating standard errors of overlapping returns.
To carry out the regression analyses, we collect the series of credit expansion and bank equity
index returns together in a final consolidated data set. Observations are included only if both credit
expansion and bank equity index returns are both non-missing.16 This gives us a total of 4155
quarterly observations. After deleting intervening observations to create non-overlapping 1-, 2- or
3-year- ahead returns, there are 957, 480, and 316 observations for the 1-, 2- and 3-year-ahead
regressions, respectively.
A. Predicting Crash Risk
We first estimate probit regressions with an equity crash indicator as the dependent variable
to examine whether credit expansion predicts increased crash risk. Specifically, we estimate the
following probit model, which predicts future equity crashes using credit expansion and various
controls:

15

Specifically, we look at returns from close December 31, 1919 to close December 31, 1920, etc., for the 1-yearahead returns; from close December 31, 1919 to close December 31, 1921, etc. for the 2-year-ahead returns; and from
close December 31, 1919 to close December 31, 1922, etc. for the three-year-ahead returns.
16
Given that the control variables are sometimes missing for certain countries and time periods due to historical
limitations, missing values for control variables are imputed using each country’s mean, where the mean is calculated
at each point in time using only past information, in order to avoid any look-ahead bias in the predictive regressions.
As shown in Appendix Table 11, mean imputation of control variables has little effect on the regression results but is
important in preventing shifts in sample composition when control variables are added.

14

Pr

1

,

Φ

,

,

(1)

where Φ is the CDF of the standard normal distribution and Y = 1crash is a future crash indicator,
which takes on a value of 1 if there is an equity crash in the next K years (K = 1, 2, and 3) and 0
otherwise.17 As discussed previously in Section I.A, we define the crash indicator to take on the
value of 1 if the log excess total return of the underlying equity index is less than -30% for any
quarter within the subsequent 1-, 2-, or 3-year horizon, and 0 otherwise. Given that an increased
crash probability may be driven by increased volatility rather than increased crash risk on the
downside, we also estimate equation (1) with Y = 1boom, where 1boom is a symmetrically defined
positive tail event, and compute the difference in the marginal effects between the two probit
regressions (probability of a crash minus probability of a boom).18
Insert Table 3 here
Table 3 reports the marginal effects corresponding to crashes in the bank equity index
conditional on a one-standard-deviation increase in credit expansion. Regressions are estimated
with and without the control variables. The blocks of columns in Table 3 correspond to the 1-, 2and 3-year-ahead increased probability of a crash event. Each regression is estimated with various
controls: the first block of rows (rows 1-3) reports marginal effects conditional on credit expansion
with no controls, the second block of rows (rows 4-6) reports marginal effects conditional on bank
dividend yield with no controls, the third block of rows (rows 7-11) reports marginal effects
conditional on both credit expansion and bank dividend yield, and the last block of rows (rows 12-

17

Another potential way is to use option data to measure tail risk, or, more precisely, the market perception of tail risk.
However, such data are limited to recent years in most countries. Furthermore, as we will see, the market perception
of tail risk may be different from the objectively measured tail risk.
18
Probit regressions have been widely used to analyze currency crashes, e.g., Frankel and Rose (1996), who define a
currency crash as a nominal depreciation of a currency of at least 25% and use a probit regression approach to examine
the occurrence of such currency crashes in a large sample of developing countries. The finance literature tends to use
conditional skewness of daily stock returns to examine equity crashes, e.g., Chen, Hong, and Stein (2001), but this
approach would not work in the present context. As large credit expansions tend to be followed by large equity price
declines over several quarters, as showed by Figure 2, such large equity price declines cannot be simply captured by
daily stock returns. Furthermore, as the Central Limit Theorem implies that skewness in daily returns is averaged out
in quarterly returns, we opt to define equity crashes directly as large declines in quarterly stock returns, following the
literature on currency crashes. One might be concerned that the threshold of -30% is arbitrary. We address this concern
by using a quantile regression approach as a robustness check in Section III.C. We also note that similar results
(unreported) hold for -20% and -25% thresholds.

15

14) uses credit expansion and all five main control variables (bank dividend yield, book to market,
term spread, investment to capital, and inflation; coefficients on controls omitted to save space).
Table 3 shows that credit expansion predicts an increased probability of bank equity crashes.
The interpretation of the reported marginal effects is as follows: using the estimates for 1-, 2-, and
3-year-ahead horizons without controls, a one standard deviation rise in credit expansion is
associated with an increase in the probability of a subsequent crash in the bank equity index by
2.7, 3.3, and 5.4 percentage points, respectively, all statistically significant at the 5% level. (As
reference points, the unconditional probabilities of a bank equity crash event within the next 1, 2,
and 3 years are 8.0%, 13.9%, and 19.3%, respectively, so a two-standard deviation credit
expansion increases the probability of a crash event by approximately 50–70%.) Bank dividend
yield is not significant in predicting the crash risk of bank equity. More important, the marginal
effects of credit expansion are not affected after adding bank dividend yield and are slightly
reduced but still significant after adding all five controls.
To distinguish increased crash risk from the possibility of increased return volatility
conditional on credit expansion, we subtract out the marginal effects estimated for a symmetrically
defined positive tail event (i.e. using Y = 1boom as the dependent variable). After doing so, the
marginal effects stay about the same or actually increase slightly: the probability of a boom
conditional on credit expansion tends to decrease, while the probability of a crash increases,
suggesting that the probability of an equity crash subsequent to credit expansion is driven primarily
by increased negative skewness rather than increased volatility of returns. Also, as a robustness
check, we adopt an alternative measure of crash risk in Section III.C using a quantile-regressionbased approach, which studies crash risk without relying on a particular choice of thresholds for
crash indicator variables.
In summary, we find that bank credit expansion predicts an increase in the crash risk of the
bank equity index in subsequent 1, 2, and 3 years. This result expands the findings of Borio and
Lowe (2002) and Schularick and Taylor (2012) by showing that credit expansion not only predicts
banking crises but also bank equity crashes.
B. Predicting Mean Equity Returns

16

Given the increased crash risk subsequent to credit expansions, we now turn to examining
whether the expected returns of the bank equity index are also higher to compensate equity holders
for the increased risk. If bank shareholders recognize the increased equity crash risk associated
with bank credit expansions, we expect them to lower current share prices, which in turn would
lead to higher average returns from holding bank stocks despite the increased equity crash risk in
the lower tail.
To examine whether credit expansion predicts higher or lower mean returns, we use an OLS
panel regression with country fixed effects:
,

,

,

,

(2)

which predicts the -year ahead excess returns (K = 1, 2 and 3) of the equity index, conditional
on a set of predictor variables including credit expansion. We test whether the coefficient of credit
expansion is different from zero. By using a fixed effects model, we focus on the time series
dimension within countries.
From an empirical perspective, it is useful to note that credit expansion may also be correlated
with a time-varying equity premium caused by forces independent of the financial sector, such as
by habit formation of representative investors (Campbell and Cochrane 1999) and time-varying
long-run consumption risk (Bansal and Yaron 2004). A host of variables are known to predict the
time variation in the equity premium, such as dividend yield, inflation, book-to-market, term
spread, and investment to capital. See Lettau and Ludvigson (2010) for a review of this literature.
It is thus important in our analysis to control for these variables to isolate effects associated with
bank credit expansion.
When estimating regressions with bank equity returns, we do not control for market returns.
While it is true that market and bank returns are highly correlated and that bank equity crashes are
typically accompanied by contemporaneous declines in the broad market index, our research
question focuses specifically on bank shareholders: why do bank shareholders hold bank stocks
during large credit booms when the predicted returns are sharply negative? To study this question,

17

we choose to directly analyze how credit expansion predicts bank equity returns, without explicitly
differentiating the market component versus the bank idiosyncratic component.19
Table 4 estimates the panel regression model specified in equation (2). Various columns in
Table 4 report estimates of regressions on credit expansion without controls, with bank dividend
yield only, with credit expansion and bank dividend yield together, and with credit expansion and
all five main controls (bank dividend yield, book to market, term spread, investment to capital, and
inflation).
Insert Table 4 here
Columns 1-4, 5-8, and 9-12 correspond to results associated with predicting 1-, 2-, and 3-yearahead excess returns, respectively. Coefficients and t-statistics are reported, along with the (withincountry) R2 and adjusted R2 for the mean regressions. A one standard deviation increase in credit
expansion predicts 3.2, 6.0, and 11.4 percentage point decreases in the subsequent 1-, 2-, and 3year-ahead excess returns, respectively, all significant at the 5% level. When the controls are
included, the coefficients are slightly lower but have similar statistical significance. In general,
coefficients for the mean regressions are roughly proportional to the number of years, meaning
that the predictability is persistent and roughly constant per year up to 3 years.20
Regarding the controls, higher dividend yield, term spread, and book to market are all
associated with a higher bank equity premium (though these coefficients are generally not
significant when estimated jointly with credit expansion; however, it should be noted the
predictability using these control variables is considerably stronger for the non-financials equity
index than for the bank equity index, as shown in Appendix Table 3, which is not surprising). The
signs of these coefficients are in line with prior work on equity premium predictability. In
particular, bank dividend yield has statistically significant predictive power for mean excess

19

Nevertheless, we verify that the coefficients for the bank equity index are not higher due to bank stocks having a
high market beta. The bank equity index has an average market beta of about 1. Also, even after estimating a timevarying beta for the bank stock index using daily returns, the idiosyncratic component of bank returns also exhibits
increased crash risk and lower mean returns subsequent to credit expansion.
20
The coefficients level off after about 3 years, implying that the predictability is mostly incorporated into returns
within 3 years.

18

returns of the bank equity index across all horizons and specifications. 21 Nevertheless, the
coefficient for credit expansion remains roughly the same magnitude and significance, despite the
controls that are added. Thus, credit expansion adds new predictive power beyond these other
variables and is not simply reflecting another known predictor of the equity premium.
Table 4 also reports within-country R2 and adjusted within-country R2 (as both have been
reported in the equity premium predictability literature). In the univariate framework with just
credit expansion as the predictor, the R2 is 2.8%, 6.4%, and 13.1% for bank returns for 1-, 2- and
3-years ahead, respectively. Adding the five standard controls increases the R2 to 5.7%, 10.4, and
23.3% for the same horizons. The relatively modest R2 implies that it may be challenging for policy
makers to adopt a sharp, real-time policy to avoid the severe consequences of credit expansion and
for traders to construct a high Sharpe ratio trading strategy based on credit expansion. Nevertheless,
the return predictability of credit expansion is strong compared to other predictor variables
examined in the literature.22
In estimating coefficients for equation (2), we test for the possible presence of small-sample
bias, which may produce biased estimates of coefficients and standard errors in small samples
when a predictor variable is persistent and its innovations are highly correlated with returns, e.g.,
Stambaugh (1999). In Appendix Section E, we use the methodology of Campbell and Yogo (2006)
to show that small-sample bias is unlikely a concern for our estimates.

21
Note that in Appendix Table 6, we use market dividend yield as an alternative control variable. While market
dividend yield is perhaps a better measure of the time-varying equity premium in the broad equity market, bank
dividend yield performs uniformly better than market dividend yield in predicting both crash risk and mean excess
returns of bank equity index. Given that we are running a horserace between credit expansion and dividend yield, we
choose to use bank dividend yield as the stronger measure to compete against credit expansion. Appendix Table 6
also considers variations on market dividend yield and bank dividend yield in an effort to “optimize” dividend yield,
but none of these alternatives meaningfully diminishes the magnitude and statistical significance of the coefficient on
credit expansion.
22
There is a large range of R2 and adjusted R2 values reported in the literature for common predictors of the equity
premium in U.S. data. For example, Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1996) report R2 for dividend yield: 0.015, 0.068,
0.144 (1, 4, 8 quarter overlapping horizons, 1927-1994); Lettau and Ludvigsson (2010) report adjusted R2 for dividend
yield: 0.00, 0.01, 0.02, and for cay: 0.08, 0.20, 0.28 (1, 4, 8 quarter overlapping horizons, respectively, 1952-2000);
Cochrane (2012) reports R2 for dividend yield: 0.10, for cay and dividend yield together: 0.16, and for i/k and dividend
yield together: 0.11 (for 4 quarter horizons, 1947-2009); Goyal and Welch (2008) report adjusted R2 of 0.0271, 0.0099, -0.0094, 0.0414, 0.0663, 0.1572 (annual returns, 1927-2005) for dividend yield, inflation, term spread, book
to market, i/k, and cay, respectively.

19

Taken together, the results in subsections II.A and II.B show that despite the increased crash
risk associated with bank credit expansion, the predicted bank equity excess return is lower rather
than higher.23 It is important to note that bank credit expansions are directly observable to the
public through central bank statistics and banks’ annual reports.24 Thus, it is rather surprising that
bank shareholders do not demand a higher equity premium to compensate themselves for the
increased crash risk.
C. Excess Returns Subsequent to Large Credit Expansions and Contractions
We further examine the magnitude of predicted bank equity returns subsequent to “large”
credit expansions and contractions. We find that predicted bank equity excess returns subsequent
to large credit expansions are significantly negative and large in magnitude. This analysis helps to
isolate the role of overoptimism in driving large credit expansions from that of elevated risk
appetite, which does not cause the equity premium to go negative.
Specifically, we use a non-parametric model to estimate the magnitude of the predicted equity
excess return subsequent to a large credit expansion:
,

–

,

,

(3)

50% is a threshold for credit expansion, expressed in percentiles of credit expansion

where
within

⋅1

,

a
|

country.

We

then

use

the

estimates

to

compute

predicted

returns:

, which we report in Table 5. As a benchmark, we

often focus on a “large credit expansion” using the 95th percentile threshold (

95%). To avoid

any look-ahead bias, percentile thresholds are calculated for each country and each point in time
using only past information. For example, for credit expansion to be above the 95% threshold,
credit expansion in that quarter must be greater than 95% of all previous observations for that

23

Gandhi (2011) also shows that in the U.S. data, aggregate bank credit expansion negatively predicts the mean return
of bank stocks, but he does not examine the joint presence of increased crash risk subsequent to bank credit expansions.
24
In all the countries in our sample over the period of 1920–2012, balance sheet information of individual banks was
widely available in “real-time” on at least an annual basis to investors in the form of annual reports (a historical
database can be found here: https://apps.lib.purdue.edu/abldars/); in periodicals such as The Economist, Investors
Monthly Manual, Bankers Magazine, etc.; and in investor manuals such as the annual Moody’s Banking Manuals
(covering banks globally from 1928 onwards) and the International Banking Directory (covering banks globally from
1920 onwards). In addition to the balance sheets of individual banks, The Economist and other publications also
historically published aggregated quarterly or annual statistics of banking sector assets, deposits, loans, etc.

20

country.
Using this regression model to compute predicted is equivalent to simply computing average
excess returns conditional on credit expansion exceeding the given percentile threshold .25 The
advantage of this formal estimation technique over simple averaging is that it allows us to compute
dually clustered standard errors for hypothesis testing, since the error term

,

is possibly

correlated both across time and across countries. This model specification is non-linear with
respect to credit expansion and thus also serves to ensure that our analysis is robust to the linear
regression model in equation (2). After estimating this model, we report a t-statistic to test whether
the predicted equity premium

,

,

| ∙ is significantly different from zero.

Furthermore, to examine the predicted equity excess return subsequent to large credit
contractions, we also estimate a similar model by conditioning on credit contraction, i.e., credit
expansion lower than a percentile threshold
,

,

50%:
⋅1

,

.

(4)

The predicted excess returns conditional on credit expansion exceeding or falling below given
percentile thresholds are plotted in Figure 3 and reported in Table 5. Specifically, Figure 3 plots
the predicted 2- and 3-year-ahead excess returns conditional on credit expansion exceeding various
high percentile thresholds varying from the 50th to 98th percentiles and on credit expansion below
various low percentile thresholds from the 2nd to 50th percentiles. A 95% confidence interval is
plotted for each of the returns based on dually clustered standard errors.
Insert Figure 3 here
Figure 3 shows that the predicted excess returns for the bank equity index are decreasing with
the threshold and remain negative across the upper percentile thresholds. Table 5 reports the same
information but in tabular form. The predicted negative returns are weaker for the 1-year horizon
but get increasingly stronger for the 2- and 3-year horizons. For example, at the 95th percentile

25

Note that equation (3) does not have country fixed effects, both to avoid look-ahead bias and to be able to compute
average returns conditional on a large credit boom. Only without fixed effects is our approach mathematically
equivalent to hand-picking all large credit booms and taking a simple average of the subsequent returns, a fact which
can be verified empirically.

21

threshold, the predicted negative returns are -9.4%, -17.9%, and -37.3% for the 1-, 2-, and 3-yearahead horizons, with t-statistic of -0.918, -2.021, and -2.522, respectively. Also note that there are
a reasonably large number of observations satisfying the 95th percentile threshold, which comes
from having a large historical data set across 20 countries. According to Table 5, there are 80, 40,
and 19 non-overlapping observations for 1-, 2-, and 3-year-ahead horizons, respectively.
Insert Table 5 here
Finally, Figure 3 and Table 5 also show that subsequent to credit contractions, the excess
returns are positive. When credit contraction is less than the 5th percentile threshold, the predicted
excess return for the bank equity index in the subsequent 2 and 3 years is 19.0% and 28.3%, both
significant at the 5% level.26
To sum up, Figure 3 and Table 5 document a full picture of the time-varying bank equity
premium across credit cycles. The expected excess return of the bank equity index is substantially
negative during large bank credit expansions while positive during large contractions.
We provide various robustness checks in Section III to show that predicted excess returns
subsequent to large credit expansions are robustly negative: 1) even after grouping concurrent
observations of large credit expansions into distinct episodes and then averaging across these
episodes (addressing the concern that concurrent credit expansions in multiple countries during
the same global episode ought to be treated as a single observation rather than separate
observations), and 2) after re-analyzing the results on various geographical subsets and time
subsets (most importantly, over the period 1950–2003, showing that the results are not simply
driven by the Great Depression and the 2007–08 financial crisis).
In the aftermath of the recent financial crisis, a popular view posits that credit expansion may
reflect largely increased risk appetite of financial intermediaries due to relaxed Value-at-Risk
constraints (Danielsson, Shin, and Zigrand 2012; Adrian, Moench, and Shin 2013). While elevated
risk appetite may lead to a reduced equity premium during periods of credit expansions, it cannot

26

The large positive returns subsequent to credit contractions may reflect several possible mechanisms. First, this
pattern is consistent with intermediary capital losses during credit contraction episodes causing asset market risk
premia to rise sharply, e.g., Adrian, Etula and Muir (2014) and Muir (2016). Alternatively, bank shareholders may
systematically underestimate the probability of a government bailout during the depth of a financial crisis, only to be
surprised later when a bailout happens.

22

explain the largely negative bank equity premium reported in Figure 3 and Table 5. Instead, this
finding suggests the need to incorporate an additional feature that bank shareholders are overly
optimistic and neglect crash risk during credit expansions. Recently, Jin (2015) provides a
theoretical model to incorporate this important feature in a dynamic equilibrium model of financial
stability.
D. Sentiment Reflected by Credit Expansion vs Dividend Yield
Given the presence of overoptimism during credit expansions, one might naturally wonder
how the optimism associated with credit expansions is related to equity market sentiment. In this
subsection, we further relate the return predictability of credit expansion to that of dividend yield,
as the strong predictability of dividend yield for equity returns is sometimes acknowledged by the
literature as a reflection of equity market sentiment. We are particularly interested in examining
whether credit expansion and equity market sentiment may amplify each other in predicting bank
equity returns.
We first note that booms in equity and credit markets might be driven by different types of
sentiment. Credit valuation is particularly sensitive to the belief held by the market about the lower
tail risk, while equity valuation is primarily determined by the belief about the mean or upper end
of the distribution of future economic fundamentals. Geanakoplos (2010) develops a tractable
framework to analyze credit cycles driven by heterogeneous beliefs between creditors and
borrowers. Simsek (2013) builds on this framework to show that only when both creditors and
borrowers share similar beliefs about downside states, a credit boom may arise in equilibrium.
This credit boom is then able to fuel the optimism of the borrowers about the overall distribution
and lead to an asset market boom.
Simsek’s analysis generates two particularly relevant points for our study. First, a credit boom
is mainly determined by the beliefs of both creditors and borrowers about the lower tail states and
can occur without necessarily being accompanied by an overall asset market boom. The negligible
correlation between credit expansion and bank dividend yield, as shown by Table 2, nicely
confirms this insight. More important, as shown by Table 3, credit expansion has strong predictive
power for bank equity crash risk, while dividend yield has no such predictive power. Furthermore,
Appendix Figure 3 plots average bank equity index returns subsequent to high values of bank
23

dividend yield (when it exceeds a given percentile threshold) and low values (when bank dividend
yield falls below a given percentile threshold), similar to Figure 3 but with bank dividend yield
rather than credit expansion. This figure shows that conditional on bank dividend yield being lower
than its 2nd- or 5th-percentile value, the predicted returns are somewhat negative in magnitude
though not significantly different from zero. These observations about the predictability of bank
dividend yield all contrast that of bank credit expansion, indicating that the sentiment associated
with credit expansions is distinct from the equity market sentiment.
Second, when a credit boom occurs together with overoptimistic beliefs of the borrowers
about the upper states of the distribution of future economic fundamentals, the borrowers are able
to use leverage to bid up asset prices, or put differently, the predictability of the credit boom for a
negative bank equity premium is particularly strong. This important insight suggests that credit
expansion may interact with bank dividend yield to provide even stronger predictive power of the
bank equity premium, in particular when bank dividend yield is low (i.e., when there is
overoptimism about the overall distribution). We now examine this insight empirically.
Table 6 reports estimation results interacting credit expansion with bank dividend yield.
Specifically, we estimate the following specification:
,

,

,

,

,

,

(5)

where the interaction term is either the standard interaction term (credit expansion x bank dividend
yield) or a non-linear version interacting credit expansion with quintile dummies for bank dividend
yield. As before, the regression is estimated for 1-, 2-, and 3-year horizons (column groups 1-3,
4-6, and 7-9, respectively, in Table 6). Coefficients and t-statistics are reported, along with the
(within-country) R2 and adjusted R2 for the regressions.
Insert Table 6 here
In each group of columns corresponding to 1-, 2-, and 3-year horizons, the first column reports
estimates for just credit expansion and dividend yield with no interaction term (as in Table 4).The
second column adds in the standard interaction term (credit expansion x bank dividend yield).

24

Although the estimates are small and not significant at the 1- and 2-year-ahead horizons, the result
of 0.042 is sizeable and statistically significant at the 3-year-ahead horizon. A positive coefficient
is what we expect: a one-standard-deviation increase in credit expansion combined with a onestandard-deviation decrease in dividend yield predicts an interaction effect of lower log excess
returns of 4.2% (that is, beyond what is predicted with credit expansion and dividend yield
individually).
However, the small and insignificant coefficients at the 1- and 2-year-ahead horizons may be
due to the fact that the predictive power of dividend yield is non-linear and is strongest when
dividend yield is very low. We therefore re-estimate equation (5) in the third column with a nonlinear interaction term, interacting credit expansion with quintile dummies for bank dividend yield.
Specifically, we interact credit expansion with the 4 lowest quintile groups, leaving in credit
expansion on its own to capture the highest group. As a result, the coefficients test the interactions
relative to the omitted group, the highest bank dividend yield quintile.
In Table 6, the third column shows that, in fact, the predictive power of credit expansion is
particularly strong when bank dividend yield is low, specifically in its lowest quintile: the
regression coefficient is significantly negative. To interpret the magnitudes, take, for example, the
coefficient of -0.039 for the one-year horizon. A one standard deviation increase in credit
expansion predicts an additional lower mean return of 3.9% when dividend yield is in its lowest
quintile relative to its highest quintile (beyond what is predicted with credit expansion and
dividend yield individually). The magnitude is considerably larger, 14.4%, at the three-year-ahead
horizon.
Across all the quintiles of bank dividend yield, the coefficients are statistically significant
generally only when bank dividend yield is in the lowest quartile, and its magnitude decreases
somewhat monotonically across the four dividend yield quintiles. This suggests that dividend yield
has a non-linear interaction effect with credit expansion. When dividend yield is high, the
predictive power of credit expansion is minimal (as shown by the coefficient on the non-interacted
credit expansion term, row 1). However, when dividend yield is very low (in its lowest quintile),
the predictive power of credit expansion is particularly strong.

25

Overall, we observe that the sentiment associated with credit expansion is different from
equity market sentiment reflected by dividend yield, and yet they interact with each other to give
credit expansion even stronger predictive power for lower bank equity premium when equity
market sentiment is high.

III.

Robustness

We present a battery of robustness checks in this section. First, we show that predicted excess
returns subsequent to large credit expansions remain negative even after robustly accounting for
correlations across time and countries. Second, we show that the main results hold on various
geographical and time subsets. Finally, we outline a variety of other robustness checks, the results
of which can be found in the Appendix.
A. Clustering Observations by Historical Episodes
Recall Table 5, which analyzes equity excess returns subsequent to large credit expansions
and contractions. Approximately concurrent observations of large credit expansions across
multiple countries might reflect a single global episode rather than various local events.
Accordingly, the episode may have correlated effects across countries and over the duration of the
episode in ways not captured by dually clustered standard errors. Here we demonstrate that the
predicted excess returns subsequent to large credit expansions are robustly negative, even after
grouping observations of large credit expansions into distinct historical episodes and then
averaging across these episodes.
Insert Table 7 here
Table 7 organizes credit expansion observation satisfying the 95th percentile threshold into
19 distinct historical episodes. These 19 historical episodes are widely dispersed throughout the
sample period. Some of these 19 distinct historical episodes are well known (e.g. the booms
preceding: the Great Depression, the Japanese crisis of the 1990s, the Scandinavian financial crises,
the 1997–98 East Asian crisis, and the 2007–08 global financial crisis), while other historical
episodes are less well known. Some of these episodes consist of just a single country (Japan, 1989),
while other episodes consist of either a few countries (the late-1980s booms in Scandinavian
countries) or nearly all the countries in the sample (the 2000s global credit boom). This robustness
26

check first averages large credit expansion observations across multiple countries and years that
are part of the same historical episode, and then considers each of the resulting 19 historical
episodes as a single, independent data point.
The procedure is specifically as follows. Looking at the credit expansion series for each
individual country, we select observations in which credit expansion first crosses the 95th
percentile thresholds. (Given that there is a potential for multiple successive observations to be
over the 95th percentile due to autocorrelation, we select only the first in order to be robust to
autocorrelation.) These events and their subsequent 3-year-ahead returns of the bank equity index
are plotted in Figure 4.
Insert Figure 4 here
Then, to be robust to potential correlations across countries, we group approximately
concurrent observations across countries into 19 distinct historical episodes and average the returns
within each historical episode. Note that the returns within each of the 19 historical episodes are
not necessarily exactly concurrent: for example, in the Scandinavian credit booms of the late 1980s,
Denmark, Sweden, and Norway crossed the 95th percentile credit expansion threshold in 1986:q3,
1986:q4, and 1987:q4, respectively. Finally, the average returns from these 19 historical episodes
are then themselves averaged together—taking each such historical episode as a single,
independent observation—to generate the final average return reported at the bottom of Table 7.
In Table 7 and Figure 4, it is important to note that timing the onset of a bank equity crash is
difficult, especially when restricted to using only past information at each point in time. Therefore,
it is to be expected that the timing of events in Table 7 and Figure 4 may sometimes look “off.”
They do not necessarily correspond to the peak of the credit expansion or the stock market; they
are what an observer in real-time could infer about the credit boom using the 95th percentile rule.27
Even after averaging observations within distinct historical episodes and then averaging
across these historical episodes, the subsequent returns are robustly negative. Table 7 reports that

Many observations in Table 7 and Figure 4 miss the crash either because the large credit is picked up too early (e.g.,
Spain 2004) or too late (e.g., U.S. 1932). In addition, in the early part of the sample (i.e. the late 1920s), many credit
booms are not picked up at all because there is a limited historical sample on which to calibrate the 95th percentile
threshold using only past data.
27

27

the average excess returns in the 1, 2, and 3 years following the start of historical episodes of large
credit expansions are: -9.9%, -13.6%, and -18.0% with t-statistics of -1.945, -1.524, and -1.993,
respectively.
B. Robustness in Subsamples
We re-estimate the probit (Table 3), OLS (Table 4), and non-parametric (Table 5) regressions
in various geographical and time subsamples and find the coefficients have similar magnitudes
regardless of the subsamples analyzed. The evidence demonstrates that our results are not driven
by any particular subsets of countries or by specific time periods but hold globally and, most
importantly, are not simply driven by the Great Depression and the 2007–08 global financial crisis.
Insert Table 8 here
Table 8, Panels A and B, reports probit marginal effects and OLS coefficients for
∆

/

on future excess returns of the bank equity index for various subsets of

countries and time periods. Using a 3-year forecasting horizon, the regressions are analogous to
those reported in Tables 3 and 4. (Results also hold for 1- and 2-year forecasting horizons.) The
sample is subdivided into geographical regions (e.g., the U.S., Western Europe) and the time
subsample 1950–2003 (i.e. excluding the Great Depression and the 2007–08 financial crisis), and
separate regressions are run for each of the subsets. In Panel C, we reanalyze returns subsequent
to large credit expansions (using the 95th percentile threshold) for the various subsets.
In Panels A and B, we see that the coefficients for the mean and probit regressions are roughly
similar for each of the geographical subsets as they are for the full sample of developed countries.
The OLS coefficients are slightly larger for some regions (Southern Europe, Western Europe,
Scandinavia) and slightly lower for other regions (the U.S. and English-speaking countries). The
statistical power is reduced for several regions due to the smaller sample size of the subsets. The
probit coefficients are similar in magnitude across regions, though with somewhat less statistical
power, again due to the smaller sample size. In the last column, the coefficients have almost the
same magnitude and statistical significance over the subperiod 1950–2003, implying that the main
results are not driven simply by the Great Depression or the 2007–08 financial crisis.

28

Panel C shows the average 3-year-ahead returns subsequent to large credit expansions (using
the 95th percentile threshold) over the various subsets. In general, the coefficients have similar
magnitude regardless of the sample period we use, though the statistical power is reduced for
several subsets due to the often much smaller sample size. In particular, the results are sharply
negative and statistically significant over the subperiod 1950-2003, again implying that the main
results are not driven simply by the Great Depression or the 2007–08 financial crisis.
As a related robustness check, Appendix Figure 2 examines whether future returns are
forecastable at various points historically. This figure presents the coefficient from the OLS
regressions for 3-year-ahead bank index returns (Panel A) and 3-year-ahead returns subsequent to
large credit expansions (Panel B) estimated at each point in time t with past data up to time t (top
plot) and over a rolling past-20-years window (bottom plot). Thus, Appendix Figure 2 can help
assess how these estimates evolved throughout the historical sample and what could have been
forecastable by investors in “real-time.” See Appendix Section D for further details on
methodology.
As one can see in Appendix Figure 2, the estimate of beta in Panel A is quite stable over the
entire sample period, except for a period in the 1950s and early 1960s when the coefficient trended
upwards but subsequently declined. Similarly, the estimate of future 3-year-ahead excess returns
in Panel B is also robustly negative, except for a period in the 1950s and early 1960s when the 20year-past rolling window saw positive returns. (Perhaps credit booms were not always bad for
bank shareholders in an era of high underlying productivity growth and highly regulated banking.)
Thus, Appendix Figure 2 shows that the main results have held since at least the 1980s and, more
importantly, could have been forecastable at the time by investors during large historical credit
expansions.
C. Quantile regressions as an alternative measure of crash risk.
We use quantile regressions to construct two alternative measures of crash risk subsequent to
credit expansion. We use these two quantile regression approaches to confirm the results of the
probit regression reported in Table 3, that credit expansion predicts increased crash risk of the
bank equity index. The first approach uses a quantile regression to examine the difference between
the predicted mean and median (50th quantile) returns—is the difference being a measure of crash
29

risk or negative skewness risk—subsequent to credit expansion. The second approach uses quantile
regressions to construct another measure of negative skewness of future returns, which compares
the increase in extreme left-tail events relative to extreme right-tail events subsequent to credit
expansion.
A quantile regression estimates the best linear predictor of the qth quantile of future equity
excess returns conditional on the predictor variables:
,

,

|

,

,

,

(6)

This quantile regression allows one to study how predictor variables forecast the entire shape of
the distribution of subsequent excess returns.
For the first alternative measure of increased crash risk, we analyze a median regression (50th
quantile regression) and compare the mean and median excess returns predicted by bank credit
expansions. βmedian estimated from equation (6) measures how much bank equity returns decrease
“most of the time” during a credit expansion. A negative βmedian indicates that equity excess returns
subsequent to credit expansions are likely to decrease even in the absence of the occurrence of
crash events. Such a negative coefficient reflects gradual correction of equity overvaluation
induced by shareholders’ overoptimism during credit expansions. Thus, the difference between
βmean (estimated from equation (2)) and βmedian measures the degree to which crash risk pulls down
the mean returns subsequent to credit expansion.
For the second alternative measure of increased crash risk, we adopt a direct quantile-based
approach to study crash risk without relying on a particular choice of thresholds for crash indicator
variables. 28 Specifically, we employ jointly estimated quantile regressions to compute the
following negative skewness statistic to ask whether credit expansion predicts increased crash risk:
= (βq=50 - βq=2) - (βq=98 - βq=50)

(7)

Quantile regression estimates have a slightly different interpretation from the probit estimates: the probits analyze
the likelihood of tail events, while quantile regressions indicate the severity of tail events. It is possible, for example,
for the frequency of crash events to stay constant, while the severity of such events to increase.
28

30

where βq=x denotes the coefficient estimated for the x quantile. This statistic βnegative skew equals the
increased distance from the median to the lower tail minus the distance to the upper tail, conditional
on credit expansion. As with the probit regressions, we do not measure just (βq=50 - βq=2), the
distance between the median and the left tail, because a larger number could simply be indicative
of increased conditional variance. Instead, in equation (7), we measure the asymmetry of the return
distribution conditional on credit expansion, specifically the increase in the lower tail minus the
increase in the upper tail.29
Insert Table 9 here
Table 9 reports estimates from the quantile regressions. The columns correspond to 1-, 2-, and
3- year-ahead excess returns for the bank equity index. The top part of the table reports results for
the (βmean - βmedian) measure: specifically, the coefficients and t-statistics for the estimates of βmean
and βmedian, as well as their difference and its associated p-value. The estimates for βmedian, which
measures how much bank equity index returns decrease “most of the time” subsequent to credit
expansion, are -0.019, -0.041, and -0.086 for the bank equity index at 1-, 2-, and 3-year horizons,
respectively; all coefficient estimates are significant at the 5% level. As this decrease in the median
excess return is not related to the occurrence of crash events, it reflects either the gradual correction
of shareholders’ overoptimism over time or the elevated risk appetite of shareholders.
(βmean - βmedian) measures how much the mean return is reduced due to the occurrence of tail
events in the sample. In general, the median coefficients are about two-thirds of the level of
corresponding mean coefficients. The remaining third of the decrease (i.e., βmean - βmedian) reflects
the contribution of the occurrence of crash events in the sample to the change in the mean return
associated with credit expansion. If shareholders have rational expectations, they would fully
anticipate the frequency and severity of the crash events subsequent to credit expansions and thus
29
In the statistics literature, this measure is called the quantile-based measure of skewness. We use the 5th and 95th
quantiles to represent tail events, though the results from the quantile regressions are qualitatively similar for various
other quantiles (for example, 1st/99th or 2th/98th quantiles) but with slightly less statistical significance. There is a
trade-off with statistical power in using increasingly extreme quantiles, since the number of extreme events gets
smaller, while the magnitude of the skewness coefficient gets larger. In the case of testing linear restrictions of
coefficients, multiple regressions are estimated simultaneously to account for correlations in the joint estimates of the
coefficients. For example, in testing the null H0: βnegative skew = (βq=50 - βq=5) - (βq=95 - βq=50) = 0, standard errors are
generated by block bootstrapping simultaneous estimates of the q=5, 50, and 95 quantile regressions. Similarly, the
difference between the mean and median coefficients, H0: βmean - βmedian = 0, is tested by simultaneously bootstrapping
mean and median coefficients; the resulting Wald statistic is then used to compute a p-value.

31

demand a higher equity premium ex ante to offset the subsequent crashes. To the extent that the
median return predicted by credit expansion is lower rather than higher, shareholders do not
demand an increased premium to protect them against subsequent crash risk.
The bottom part of Table 9 reports the coefficients and t-statistics for credit expansion from
the three quantile regressions, βq=5, βq=50, and βq=95, followed by the alternative crash risk measure
—the conditional negative skewness coefficient βnegative skew = (βq=50 - βq=5) - (βq=95 - βq=50)—and
its associated t-statistic. For bank equity index returns, the coefficient for negative skewness,
βnegative skew, is estimated to be 0.088, 0.053, and 0.172 (all significant at the 5% level) for 1-, 2-,
and 3-year horizons, respectively. Overall, the alternative quantile measure of crash risk confirms
our earlier finding from probit regressions of increased crash risk associated with credit expansion.
D. Additional Robustness Checks
We perform a variety of other robustness checks in the Appendix, which we briefly describe
below.
Test for possible small-sample bias. Tests of predictability in equity returns may produce biased
estimates of coefficients and standard errors in small samples when a predictor variable is
persistent and its innovations are highly correlated with returns, e.g., Stambaugh (1999). This
small-sample bias could potentially pose a problem for estimating coefficients in our study because
the main predictor variable, credit expansion (i.e. the three-year change in bank credit to GDP), is
highly persistent on a quarterly level. In Appendix Section E and Appendix Tables 4 and 5, we
test for the possibility of small-sample bias using the methodology of Campbell and Yogo (2006)
and find that small-sample bias is not likely a concern for our estimates.
“Optimizing” dividend yield. Appendix Table 6 addresses concerns that perhaps dividend yield
does not drive out the significance of credit expansion because dividend yield is not “optimized”
to maximize its predictive power. In Appendix Table 6, we therefore consider both market
dividend yield and bank dividend yield, with each of those measures also alternatively smoothed
over the past 2, 4, or 8 quarters. The results with these alternative dividend yield measures as
controls demonstrate that even “optimizing” dividend yield does not meaningfully diminish the
magnitude and statistical significance of the returns predictability of credit expansion.

32

Decomposing the credit expansion measure. Appendix Table 7 addresses concerns that the
/

predictive power of

might be driven by the denominator (GDP) rather than
/

the numerator (bank credit). However, by breaking down
and

or into

into

and

,

Appendix Table 7 demonstrates that the predictability in returns is driven by changes in the
numerator (i.e. by

).

Furthermore, in Appendix Table 8, we motivate the use of the three year change in bank credit
to GDP by breaking down this variable into a series of successive one-year-change lags. We find
that the predictive power of the three year change in bank credit comes mainly from the second
and third one-year lags:

/

,

and

/

,

,

dropping off at lags greater than t – 3. This finding sheds light on the timing of financial distress,
which seems generally to take place at a 1- to 3-year horizon subsequent to credit expansion.
Robustness in arithmetic returns. Appendix Table 9 addresses the potential concern that our
results might be driven by the use of log returns rather than arithmetic returns. While log returns
are most appropriate for time-series regressions as they reflect compounded returns over time, they
can accentuate negative skewness. Appendix Table 9 replicates the main results of the paper but
using arithmetic returns and shows that the main results (Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6) are robust to using
arithmetic returns as the dependent variable.
Global vs. country-specific credit expansions. Appendix Table 10 addresses concerns that the
predictive power of credit expansion is not due to country-specific credit expansion but from its
correlation with a global credit expansion—in other words, that the financial instability comes
from spillover effects from correlated credit expansions in other countries. While this concern
would not in any way invalidate this paper’s argument that bank shareholders overvalue bank
equity and neglect tail risk during credit booms, it would suggest that it might be more useful to
analyze global credit expansion rather than country-specific components. Appendix Table 10
shows that the predictive power of credit expansion on subsequent returns is mostly due to countryspecific effects and not spillover effects from other countries. To disentangle the effects of local
versus global credit expansions, we re-estimate the regressions in Table 4 but control for three
additional explanatory variables that measure global credit expansion: U.S. credit expansion, U.S.
broker-dealer leverage, and the first principal component of credit expansion across countries,
33

which are all plotted in Appendix Table 10. U.S. credit expansion has no predictive power for
equity returns in other countries, U.S. broker-dealer leverage is a significant pricing factor for
foreign equity returns but does not reduce the predictive power of local credit expansion, and the
first principal component only partially reduces the predictive power of local credit expansion. We
also try various specifications with time fixed effects to control for global average bank returns.
As a result, we conclude that the predictive power of credit expansion on subsequent returns is in
large part due to country-specific credit expansion and not spillover effects from other countries.

IV.

Conclusion

By analyzing the predictability of bank credit expansion for bank equity index returns in a set
of 20 developed countries over the years 1920–2012, we document empirical evidence supporting
the longstanding view of Minsky (1977) and Kindleberger (1978) regarding overoptimism as an
important driver of credit expansion. Specifically, we find that 1) bank credit expansion predicts
increased crash risk in the bank equity index, but, despite the elevated crash risk, bank credit
expansion predicts lower mean bank equity returns in subsequent one to three years; 2) conditional
on bank credit expansion of a country exceeding a 95th percentile threshold, the predicted excess
return of the bank equity index in the subsequent three years is -37.3%, strongly indicating the
presence of overoptimism and neglect of crash risk at times of rapid credit expansions; 3) the
sentiment associated with bank credit expansion is distinct from equity market sentiment captured
by dividend yield, and yet dividend yield and credit expansion interact with each other to make
credit expansion a particularly strong predictor of lower bank equity returns when dividend yield
is low (i.e. when equity market sentiment is strong).
In the aftermath of the recent financial crisis, an influential view argues that credit expansion
may reflect active risk seeking by bankers as a result of their misaligned incentives with their
shareholders, e.g., Allen and Gale (2000) and Bebchuk, Cohen, and Spamann (2010). While
shareholders may not be able to effectively discipline bankers during periods of rapid bank credit
expansions, they can always vote with their feet and sell their shares, which would in turn lower
equity prices and induce a higher equity premium to compensate the remaining shareholders for
the increased equity risk. In this sense, there does not appear to be an outright tension between
shareholders and bankers during bank credit expansions. Our finding thus implies that bank credit
34

expansions are not simply caused by bankers acting against the will of shareholders. Instead, there
is a need to expand this view by taking into account of the presence of overoptimism or elevated
risk appetite of shareholders.
Our study also has important implications for the pricing of tail risk. Following Rietz (1998)
and Barro (2006), a quickly growing body of literature, e.g., Gabaix (2012) and Wachter (2013),
highlights rare disasters as a potential resolution of the equity premium puzzle. Gandhi and Lustig
(2013) argue that greater exposure of small banks to bank-specific tail risk explains the higher
equity premium of small banks. Furthermore, Gandhi (2011) presents evidence that in the U.S.,
aggregate bank credit expansion predicts lower bank returns and argues that this finding is driven
by reduced tail risk during credit expansion. In contrast to this argument, we find increased rather
than decreased crash risk subsequent to bank credit expansion, which we can do by taking
advantage of our large historical data set to forecast rare crash events. In this regard, our analysis
also reinforces the concern expressed by Chen, Dou, and Kogan (2013) regarding a common
practice of attributing puzzles in asset prices to “dark matter,” such as tail risk, that is difficult to
measure in the data. Our finding also suggests that shareholders neglect imminent crash risk during
credit expansions, as pointed out by Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012, 2013). Our analysis
does not contradict the importance of tail risk in driving the equity premium. Instead, it highlights
that shareholders’ perceived tail risk may or may not be consistent with realized tail risk, as
suggested by Weitzman (2007)—and may even be reversed across credit cycles.

References
Adrian, Tobias, Emanuel Moench, and Hyun Song Shin, “Leverage Asset Pricing,” Working
paper, Princeton University, (2013).
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, “Bubbles and Crises,” Economic Journal, 110, (2000), 236255.
Ang, Andrew and Geert Bekaert, “Stock Return Predictability: Is it there?,” Review of Financial
Studies, 20.3 (2007), 651-707.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing
Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59 (2004), 1481-1509.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “A Model of Investor Sentiment,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 49 (1998), 307-343.

35

Barro, Robert, “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 121 (2006), 823-866.
Bebchuk, Lucian, Alma Cohen and Holger Spamann, “The Wages of Failure: Executive
Compensation at Bear Stearns and Lehman 2000-2008,” Yale Journal on Regulation, 27
(2010), 257-282.
Bolton, Patrick, Jose Scheinkman and Wei Xiong, “Executive Compensation and Short-termist
Behavior in Speculative Markets,” Review of Economic Studies, 73 (2006), 577-610.
Borio, Claudio and Philip Lowe, “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the
Nexus,” Working paper, Bank for International Settlements, (2002).
Calomiris, Charles, “The Political Lessons of Depression-era Banking Reform,” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 26.3 (2010), 285–317.
Campbell, John and John Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-based Explanation of
Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107 (1999), 205-251.
Campbell, John and Motohiro Yogo “Efficient Tests of Stock Return Predictability,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 81 (2006), 27-60.
Chen, Hui, Winston Dou, and Leonid Kogan, “Measuring the ’Dark Matter’ in Asset Pricing
Models,” Working paper, MIT, (2013).
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Forecasting Crashes: Trading Volume, Past
Returns, and Conditional Skewness in Stock Prices,” Journal of Financial Economics, 61
(2001), 345-381.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Harrison Hong and Jose Scheinkman “Yesterday's Heroes: Compensation and
Creative risk-taking,” Journal of Finance, 70.2 (2015), 839-879.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Sahil Raina and Wei Xiong, “Wall Street and the Housing Bubble,” American
Economic Review, 104.9 (2014), 2797-2829.
Danielsson, Jon, Hyun Song Shin and Jean-Pierre Zigrand, “Procyclical Leverage and Endogenous
Risk, Working paper, Princeton University, (2012).
Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi and Paul Willen, “Why Did So Many People Make Po
Many Ex-post Bad Decisions? The Causes of the Foreclosure Crisis,” Working paper, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, (2012).
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose, “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An Empirical
Treatment,” Journal of international Economics, 41 (1996), 351-366.
Gabaix, Xavier, “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
Macro-finance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (2012), 645-700.
Gandhi, Priyank, “The Relationship between Credit Growth and the Expected Returns of Bank
Stocks,” Working paper, UCLA, (2011).
Gandhi, Priyank, and Hanno Lustig, “Size Anomalies in US Bank Stock Returns,” Journal of
Finance, 70.2 (2015), 733-768.
Geanakoplos, John, “The Leverage Cycle,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, 24 (2010), 165.

36

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Neglected Risks, Financial Innovation,
and Financial Fragility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 104, (2012), 452-468.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “A Model of Shadow Banking,” Journal
of Finance 68.4 (2013), 1331-1363.
Goyal, Amit and Ivo Welch, “A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance of Equity
Premium Prediction,” Review of Financial Studies, 21 (2008), 1455-1508.
Greenwood, Robin and Samuel G. Hanson, “Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns,” Review
of Financial Studies, 26 (2013), 1483-1525.
Hodrick, Robert, “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for
Inference and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies, 5.3 (1992), 357-386.
Jin, Lawrence, “A Speculative Asset Pricing Model of Financial Instability,” Working Paper, Yale
University, (2015).
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor, “When Credit Bites Back: Leverage, Business
Cycles, and Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45.s2 (2013), 3-28.
Kindleberger, Charles, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, (New York,
NY: Basic Books).
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Tyler Muir, "Credit Spreads and the Severity of Financial
Crises," Working Paper, Stanford University, (2015).
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-Return
Tradeoff,” in Handbook of Financial Econometrics, Yacine Ait-Sahalia and Lars-Peter
Hansen, eds. (Oxford, UK: North-Holland, 2010).
López-Salido, David, Jeremy Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek, “Credit-market Sentiment and the
Business Cycle,” NBER Working Paper No. 21879, (2016).
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the
US Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2009), 1449-1496.
Minsky, Hyman, “The Financial Instability Hypothesis: An Interpretation of Keynes and an
Alternative to ‘Standard’ Theory,” Nebraska Journal of Economics and Business, 16 (1977),
5-16.
Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff, “This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial
Folly,” (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009).
Rietz, Thomas, “The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution, “Journal of Monetary Economics,” 22
(1988), 117-131.
Schularick, Moritz and Alan Taylor, “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles
and Financial Crises, 1870–2008,” American Economic Review, 102 (2012), 1029-1061.
Simsek, Alp, “Belief Disagreements and Collateral Constraints,” Econometrica, 81 (2013), 1-53.
Stambaugh, Robert, “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 54 (1999), 375421.
Stein, Jeremy, “Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World,” Journal of Business,” 69
(1996), 429-455.

37

Thompson, Samuel B., “Simple Formulas for Standard Errors that Cluster by Both Firm and Time,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 99 (2011), 1-10.
Wachter, Jessica, “Can Time-varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock Market
Volatility?,” Journal of Finance, 68 (2013), 987-1035.
Weitzman, Martin, “Subjective Expectations and Asset-return Puzzles,” American Economic
Review, 97 (2007), 1102-1130.

38

1

2

3

-3 -2 -1

0

1

2

3

-3 -2 -1

0

1

2

3

1920

1940

1940

1920

1960

1940

1920

1980

1980

2000

1960

1980

Spain

1980

Korea

1960

France

1960

Australia

2000

2000

2000

2020

2020

2020

2020

1920

1920

1920

1960

1980

2000

2000

Germany

1980

1940

1940

1980

1960

1980

Sweden

1960

2000

2000

Netherlands

1940

1960

Austria

2020

2020

2020

2020

1940

1920

1920

1980

1970

2000

1960

1980

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

2020

2010

2010

2000

2000

Norway

1990

Ireland

1990

Switzerland

1980

1970

Belgium

1920

1940

1980

1960

1980

Italy

1960

1960

1980

UK

1980

2000

2000

2000

2000

Portugal

1960

1940

1920

1940

1940

1920

Canada

2020

2020

2020

2020

1920

1940

1940

1920

1960

1940

1920

1980

1980

2000

1980

US

1960

1980

Singapore

1960

Japan

1960

Denmark

2000

2000

2000

2020

2020

2020

2020

Credit expansion, measured as the past three-year change of bank credit to GDP and denoted ∆(bank credit/GDP), is plotted over time for the 20
countries in the sample. Observations are quarterly, 1920–2012. Bank credit refers to credit issued by banks to domestic households and domestic
private non-financial corporations.

Figure 1: Credit expansion

0

-3 -2 -1 0

-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3

3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
3
2
1
-3 -2 -1 0
3
1
-3 -2 -1

2

3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
3
1
-3 -2 -1 0

2

3
2
1
-3 -2 -1 0
3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1

3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
3
2
1
0
-3 -2 -1
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3

Figure 2: Bank equity prices and bank credit before and after large credit expansions
The past three-year change in bank credit to GDP (∆(bank credit/GDP)) and the bank total excess log returns
index are plotted before and after a large credit expansion. A large credit expansion is defined as credit expansion
exceeding the 95th percentile threshold, which is calculated for each country and each point in time using only
past information to avoid any future-looking bias. ∆(bank credit/GDP) and bank total excess log returns are
pooled averages across time and countries, conditional on the given number of years before or after the start of a
banking crisis. The average bank log returns are then cumulated from t = -6 to t = +6, and the level is adjusted to
be 0 at t = 0. Observations are over the sample of 20 countries, 1920–2012.

.2

.1

0

0

-.2

-.1

-.4

-.2

-.6

-.3
-6

-4
-2
0
2
4
year before / after large credit expansion
Bank total excess returns index, left axis
D(bank credit to GDP), right axis

6

D(bank credit to GDP)

Cumulative log excess returns
relative to t = 0

Bank equity prices and bank credit
before and after large credit expansions

Figure 3: Bank equity index returns subsequent to large credit expansions & contractions
This figure plots estimates reported in Table 5. The plot shows the magnitude of bank equity index excess returns
2 and 3 years subsequent to large credit expansions (defined as when ∆(bank credit/GDP) exceeds a given percentile threshold), in addition to average returns subsequent to large credit contractions (when ∆(bank credit/GDP)
falls below a given percentile threshold). To avoid any future-looking bias, percentile thresholds are calculated for
each country and each point in time using only past information. Average returns conditional on the thresholds
are computed using regression models (3) and (4) with non-overlapping returns. 95% confidence intervals are
computed using dually-clustered standard errors. Observations are over the sample of 20 countries, 1920–2012.

Bank equity index returns
60%
40%
Credit expansion
(in percentiles by country)

log excess returns

20%
0%
<2%

<5%

<10%

<25%

<50%

-20%
-40%

-60%
-80%
-100%

2-years ahead
3-years ahead
Average bank excess returns

>50%

>75%

>90%

>95%

>98%

Figure 4: Bank equity index returns subsequent to large credit expansions, individual
episodes
This figure plots 3-year-ahead returns of the bank equity index subsequent to the initial year of all large credit
expansions. This figure corresponds to the observations listed in Table 7. A large credit expansion is defined
as credit expansion exceeding the 95th percentile threshold, which is calculated for each country and each point
in time using only past information to avoid any future-looking bias. Observations are over the sample of 20
countries, 1920–2012.

1

Bank index returns subsequent to large credit expansions

.5

UK

Spa
Net

log excess returns
(3-years ahead)
-.5
0

Jap
Ire

US
Jap

Swi

UK

Swe

US

Ire

Ire

Swe

Can
Net US
Den
Jap
Bel
Aus

PorCan Aus
Spa Den
Swe

Bel
Fra

Fra

US

Nor

-1

Kor

Ita

UK
Kor

1920

1940

1960
1980
start of large credit expansion

2000

Por

-0.762
0.008
-0.748
0.013

-0.507
0.014
-0.518
0.016

0.597
0.060
0.627
0.059

95%

99%

4147
4088
2437
3266

0.037
0.012
0.707
0.102

0.028
0.012
0.621
0.099

0.043
0.018
0.416
0.019

-0.076
-0.042
0.265
0.068

-0.011
-0.016
0.341
0.075

0.001
-0.007
0.377
0.081

0.090
0.030
1.042
0.127

0.119
0.036
1.333
0.140

0.185
0.053
2.564
0.161

-1.376
0.000
-1.266
0.008

90%

Control variables
Inflation
Term spread
Book / market
I/K

0.286
0.019
0.256
0.020

10%

0.115

0.045
0.036
0.060
0.033

5%

Credit to private households and non-financial corporations, past-three-year annualized percentage-point change
Δ (Bank credit / GDP)
4155 0.013 0.011 0.032
-0.059 -0.032 -0.022 0.050 0.064

0.059
0.037
0.064
0.036

1%
1.803
0.093
1.461
0.117

4155
4155
4092
4092

Mean Median Stdev.
0.857
0.067
0.856
0.068

Quarterly log returns, annualized
Bank index: excess total returns
Bank index: dividend yield
Non-financials index: excess total returns
Market index: dividend yield

N

0.686
0.184
0.543
0.550

0.221

0.394
0.305
0.411
0.606

Average cross-country
correlation (with U.S.)

Summary statistics are reported for log total excess returns for both the bank and non-financials equity indices. Summary statistics are also reported
for the three-year past change in (bank credit / GDP) and the control variables. All statistics are pooled across countries and time. Observations are
quarterly over the sample of 20 countries, 1920 - 2012.

Table 1: Summary statistics

Table 2: Correlations
This table reports correlations of the past-three-year change in (bank credit/GDP) with various other measures
of aggregate credit and with the control variables (market dividend yield, year-over-year inflation, term spread,
book to market, and non-residential investment to capital). Because the measurement of these variables may be
different from country to country, each correlation is first calculated country-by-country; then, the correlation coefficient is averaged (and standard errors are calculated) across the 20 countries. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Observations are quarterly over the sample of 20 countries, 1920–2012.

Correlation of Δ (bank credit / GDP) and:
Variable
Δ (total credit / GDP)
Δ (total credit to HHs / GDP)
Δ (total credit to private NFCs / GDP)
Δ (Bank assets / GDP)
Growth of household housing assets
∆ (gross external liabilities / GDP )
Current account deficit / GDP
Market D / P
Bank D / P
Book / market
Inflation
Term spread
I/K

Average
correlation
.792***
.636***
.608***
.592***
.316***
.338***
.172***
-.026
.052
-.094*
-.103***
-.136***
.300***

(S.E.)
(.048)
(.054)
(.067)
(.056)
(.085)
(.073)
(.057)
(.046)
(.046)
(.056)
(.039)
(.049)
(.070)

0.029**
[2.54]
‐0.018
[‐1.33]
957
0.026***
[3.03]
957

Δ (bank credit / GDP)
T‐stat
log(bank D/P)
T‐stat
N

With Bank D/P as control

With all 5 controls
Δ (bank credit / GDP)
(coeff on controls not reported) T‐stat
N

‐0.015
[‐1.16]
957

log(bank D/P)
T‐stat
N

No controls

0.027**
[2.40]
957

Δ (bank credit / GDP)
T‐stat
N

No controls

‐0.003
[‐0.66]
957

‐0.003
[‐0.59]
0.006
[1.01]
957

0.005
[0.86]
957

‐0.003
[‐0.46]
957

0.030***
[2.96]
957

0.032**
[2.49]
‐0.023
[‐1.47]
957

‐0.020
[‐1.28]
957

0.030**
[2.24]
957

1 year ahead
Crash
Boom Difference

Probit estimates of increased crash likelihood of the bank equity index

0.027**
[2.21]
480

0.034***
[3.04]
‐0.023
[‐1.39]
480

‐0.022
[‐1.30]
480

0.033***
[3.11]
480

‐0.002
[‐0.29]
480

‐0.002
[‐0.30]
0.009
[1.48]
480

0.009
[1.44]
480

‐0.002
[‐0.27]
480

0.028*
[1.80]
480

0.036***
[2.95]
‐0.032
[‐1.46]
480

‐0.030
[‐1.37]
480

0.035***
[3.04]
480

2 years ahead
Crash
Boom Difference

0.005
[0.46]
316

‐0.024
[‐0.87]
316

0.046*** ‐0.013*** 0.059***
[3.11]
[‐3.24]
[3.48]
316
316
316

0.054*** ‐0.012*** 0.066***
[4.17]
[‐3.02]
[5.13]
‐0.021
0.005
‐0.026
[‐1.09]
[0.49]
[‐0.96]
316
316
316

‐0.020
[‐0.98]
316

0.054*** ‐0.012*** 0.065***
[4.27]
[‐2.91]
[5.20]
316
316
316

3 years ahead
Crash
Boom
Difference

This table reports estimates from the probit regression model specified in equation (1) for the bank equity index in subsequent 1, 2, and 3 years. The
dependent variable is the crash indicator (Y = 1crash ), which takes on a value of 1 if there is a future equity crash, defined as a quarterly drop of -30%,
in the next K years (K = 1, 2, and 3) and 0 otherwise. The crash indicator is regressed on ∆(bank credit/GDP) and several subsets of control variables
known to predict the equity premium. Explanatory variables are in standard deviation units. All reported estimates are marginal effects. A coefficient
of 0.027, for example, means that a one-standard deviation increase in ∆(bank credit/GDP) predicts a 2.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood of
a future crash. This table also reports estimates from equation (1) with (Y = 1boom ), a symmetrically defined right tail event, along with the difference in
the marginal effects between the two probit regressions (the probability of a crash minus probability of a boom). Analogous results for the non-financials
equity index are reported in Appendix Table 3. T-statistics in brackets are computed from standard errors dually clustered on country and time. *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Observations are over the sample of 20 countries, 1920–2012.

Table 3: Credit expansion predicts increased crash risk in the bank equity index

R2
Adj. R2
N

log(I/K)

log(book / market)

term spread

inflation

log(bank D/P)

Δ (bank credit / GDP)

0.028
0.007
957

‐0.032**
[‐2.146]

0.028
0.008
957

0.048
0.026
957

1 year ahead
‐0.034**
[‐2.295]
0.040**
0.042**
[2.158]
[2.257]

OLS estimation of the bank equity index

0.057
0.031
957

‐0.035***
[‐2.985]
0.042*
[1.840]
‐0.184
[‐0.970]
0.019
[0.718]
0.030
[0.792]
0.015
[0.641]
0.064
0.023
480

‐0.060***
[‐3.455]

0.06
0.019
480

0.097
0.055
480

0.104
0.055
480

2 years ahead
‐0.061*** ‐0.057***
[‐3.355]
[‐3.150]
0.069**
0.070**
0.067**
[2.468]
[2.568]
[2.236]
‐0.011
[‐0.040]
0.024
[0.742]
0.046
[0.782]
0.002
[0.075]
0.131
0.072
316

‐0.114***
[‐3.655]

0.102
0.041
316

0.194
0.137
316

0.233
0.167
316

3 years ahead
‐0.119*** ‐0.106***
[‐3.609]
[‐3.226]
0.111*** 0.117*** 0.115***
[3.818]
[4.682]
[3.842]
0.015
[0.042]
0.099*
[1.783]
0.083
[1.037]
0.016
[0.307]

This table reports estimates from the panel regression with fixed effects model specified in equation (2) for the bank equity index. The dependent
variable is log excess total returns, which is regressed on ∆(bank credit/GDP) and several subsets of control variables known to predict the equity
premium. Explanatory variables are in standard deviation units. Returns are non-overlapping at 1, 2, and 3 year ahead horizons. A coefficient of -0.032
means that a one-standard deviation increase in ∆(bank credit/GDP) predicts a 3.2 percentage point decrease in subsequent returns. Analogous results
for the non-financials equity index are reported in Appendix Table 3. T-statistics in brackets are computed from standard errors dually clustered on
country and time. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 4: Credit expansion predicts lower mean returns of the bank equity index

3 year ahead returns

2 year ahead returns

1 year ahead returns

# obs. meeting threshold

Adj. R2

[t-stat]

E[r - rf]

# obs. meeting threshold

Adj. R2

[t-stat]

E[r - rf]

# obs. meeting threshold

Adj. R2

[t-stat]

E[r - rf]

Threshold in percentiles:
<5%

.126**
[2.216]
0.009
72
.19**
[2.575]
0.011
35
.283***
[3.644]
0.018
25

<2%

0.074
[1.185]
0.002
51
.146*
[1.697]
0.004
24
.232**
[2.298]
0.008
18

.264***
[2.846]
0.023
36

.164***
[3.958]
0.012
54

.077**
[1.987]
0.005
110

<10%

.208***
[4.406]
0.03
73

.128***
[3.018]
0.016
118

.059**
[2.256]
0.006
235

<25%

Bank equity index returns subsequent to large credit expansions and contractions

.179***
[3.022]
0.059
147

.092**
[2.52]
0.017
227

.049**
[2.058]
0.01
464

<50%

-0.075
[-0.841]
0.059
169

-0.021
[-0.325]
0.017
253

-0.016
[-0.385]
0.01
493

>50%

-0.125
[-1.215]
0.047
99

-0.077
[-0.904]
0.027
139

-0.042
[-0.767]
0.012
271

>75%

-.24**
[-2.384]
0.04
38

-.155*
[-1.729]
0.028
60

-0.073
[-0.812]
0.011
121

>90%

-.373**
[-2.522]
0.041
19

-.179**
[-2.021]
0.022
40

-0.094
[-0.918]
0.01
80

>95%

-.561***
[-2.857]
0.048
11

-.133*
[-1.951]
0.008
23

-0.081
[-1.292]
0.004
44

>98%

This table reports average log excess returns of the bank equity index subsequent to large credit expansions (when ∆(bank credit/GDP) exceeds a given
percentile threshold) and subsequent to large credit contractions (when ∆(bank credit/GDP) falls below a given percentile threshold). Estimates, along
with corresponding t-statistics and adjusted R2 values, are computed using regression models (3) and (4) with non-overlapping 1, 2, and 3 years ahead
returns. To avoid any future-looking bias, percentile thresholds are calculated for each country and each point in time using only past information.
T-statistics in brackets are computed from standard errors dually clustered on country and time. Analogous results for the non-financials equity index
are reported in Appendix Table 3. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Observations are over the
sample of 20 countries, 1920–2012.

Table 5: Large credit expansions predict negative returns of the bank equity index

R2
Adj. R2
N

(bank D/P 5th quintile dummy)

(bank D/P 4th quintile dummy)

(bank D/P 3rd quintile dummy)

(bank D/P 2nd quintile dummy)

Δ(bank credit / GDP) x …
(bank D/P 1st quintile dummy)

Δ(bank credit / GDP) x log(bank D/P)

log(bank D/P)

Δ(bank credit / GDP)

0.048
0.026
957

0.049
0.026
957

0.052
0.027
957

-0.039*
[-1.786]
-0.046
[-1.438]
-0.030
[-1.051]
-0.035*
[-1.690]

-0.033** -0.005
[-2.150] [-0.296]
0.043** 0.043**
[2.242] [2.222]
0.005
[0.855]

1 year ahead
-0.034**
[-2.295]
0.042**
[2.257]

OLS estimation of the bank equity index

0.097
0.055
480

0.100
0.056
480

-0.061***-0.058***
[-3.355] [-3.291]
0.070** 0.071**
[2.568] [2.564]
0.013
[1.186]

0.107
0.058
480

-0.062
[-1.539]
-0.058
[-1.337]
0.015
[0.403]
-0.031
[-0.953]

-0.034
[-1.373]
0.070**
[2.493]

2 years ahead

0.194
0.137
316

0.218
0.159
316

0.220
0.153
316

-0.144**
[-2.244]
-0.069
[-0.676]
-0.032
[-0.745]
0.025
[0.736]

-0.119***-0.105*** -0.068*
[-3.609] [-3.271] [-1.841]
0.117*** 0.125*** 0.123***
[4.682] [4.946] [5.289]
0.042***
[2.725]

3 years ahead

This table reports estimates from the panel regression with fixed effects model specified in equation (2) and is similar to Table 4 but analyzes the interaction of ∆(bank credit/GDP) and bank dividend yield. Returns are non-overlapping at 1, 2, and 3 year horizons. The regressors are ∆(bank credit/GDP),
log bank dividend yield, and various interactions of those variables: specifically, ∆(bank credit/GDP) interacted with log(bank D/P) or interacted with
dummies indicating whether bank dividend yield is in each of its five quintiles. The 5th dividend yield quintile is omitted from the regression, so that
the coefficient on ∆(bank credit/GDP) captures the highest quintile and the coefficients on the other quintile dummies effectively test the difference
between the other quintiles and the highest quintile. Analogous results for the non-financials equity index are reported in Appendix Table 3. T-statistics
in brackets are computed from standard errors dually clustered on country and time. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively. Observations are over the sample of 20 countries, 1920–2012.

Table 6: Credit expansion has strongest predictability when dividend yield is low

Table 7: Clustering expansions by historical episodes
This table presents an alternative method of calculating average bank equity returns subsequent to large credit expansions, along with
standard errors, taking into account correlations across countries and over time. First, this table lists 1-, 2-, and 3-year-ahead returns
of the bank equity index subsequent to the initial quarter of all large credit expansions, defined as ∆(bank credit/GDP) exceeding a
95th percentile threshold within each country. To avoid any future-looking bias, percentile thresholds are calculated at each point in
time using only past information. Then, concurrent observations of large credit expansions across countries are clustered into distinct
historical episodes (e.g., the Great Depression, the East Asian crisis, the 2007–8 global financial crisis). Returns from the resulting
historical episodes are first averaged within each historical episodes; then, an average and t-statistic is calculated across historical
episodes, taking each distinct historical episode as a single, independent observation. Observations are over the sample of 20 countries,
1920–2012.
Large credit expansions (credit growth > 95th percentile by country) grouped by episodes
Episode Name of associated crisis
Year:qtr Country
Returns on bank equity
1 yr
2 yr
3 yr
ahead
ahead
ahead
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Great Depression

Secondary banking crisis

10

11
12

S&L crisis
Scandinavian financial crises

13
14
15
16
17

Japanese financial crisis

18
19

East Asian crisis
Great Recession

1929:1
1932:4
1958:4
1960:4
1962:4
1969:2
1972:4
1974:1
1977:4
1979:2
1980:4
1981:1
1981:3
1982:4
1986:4
1986:3
1986:4
1987:4
1987:2
1987:3
1989:1
1994:3
1997:1
1997:2
1998:3
1999:2
1997:4
2004:1
2004:3
2005:2
2006:3
2006:4
2007:2
2007:3
2007:3
2007:4
2008:4

France
US
Japan
UK
Japan
Sweden
UK
US
Switzerland
Belgium
Netherlands
Ireland
Canada
UK
US
Denmark
Sweden
Norway
Japan
Australia
Belgium
Korea
Netherlands
Ireland
Portugal
Spain
Korea
Spain
Ireland
Denmark
Australia
US
Canada
France
Sweden
Italy
Portugal

-0.119
-0.353
0.105
0.243
0.268
-0.405
-0.453
-0.384
-0.044
-0.271
-0.211
-0.429
-0.181
0.305
-0.273
0.004
-0.170
-0.253
-0.105
0.108
-0.124
-0.162
0.408
0.661
0.074
0.096
-0.119
0.130
0.263
0.234
0.136
-0.253
-0.234
-0.401
-0.465
-0.813
0.164

-0.338
-0.173
0.211
0.141
0.243
-0.177
-1.457
-0.147
0.105
-0.656
-0.250
-0.245
0.237
0.453
-0.108
-0.116
0.197
-0.062
-0.062
0.034
-0.231
-0.502
0.304
0.533
0.282
0.071
-0.225
0.415
0.430
0.330
-0.243
-0.727
-0.184
-0.476
-0.392
-0.566
-0.165

-0.632
0.244
0.135
0.097
0.461
-0.193
-0.708
-0.140
0.158
-0.498
-0.024
0.269
0.057
0.587
0.012
-0.141
0.215
-0.734
-0.206
-0.287
-0.211
-1.096
0.464
0.293
-0.026
-0.143
-0.923
0.542
0.279
-0.156
-0.006
-0.701
-0.045
-0.574
-0.254
-0.896
-1.123

Averages across historical episodes

Years ahead:
Average over episodes:
T-STAT
S.E.
N (episodes)

Returns on bank equity
1 yr
2 yr
3 yr
ahead
ahead
ahead
-0.099
-1.945
0.051
19

-0.136
-1.524
0.089
19

-0.180
-1.993
0.090
19

0.046***
[3.11]
316

Δ (bank credit / GDP)
T-STAT
N

0.037
[0.00]
24

0.112
[1.06]
24
0.003
[0.00]
87

0.070**
[2.33]
87

2

Adj. R
N

2

Δ (bank credit / GDP)
T-STAT

Adj. R
N

Δ (bank credit / GDP)
T-STAT

0.167
316

-0.106***
[-3.226]

0.072
316

0.311
24

0.060
[0.859]

0.058
24

-0.114*** -0.090
[-3.655] [-1.553]

0.172
87

-0.037
[-1.032]

0.021
87

-0.055*
[-1.809]

S.
Europe

Scandinavia

0.038
[0.01]
57

0.041
[0.05]
57

Scandinavia

0.127
32

0.232
57

0.176
218

0.116
32

0.333
57

-0.123*** -0.276* -0.207***
[-2.755] [-1.923] [-3.911]

0.080
218

-0.135*** -0.193** -0.194***
[-3.484] [-2.705] [-3.040]

S.
Europe

0.039** 0.200***
[2.31]
[5.64]
218
32

0.049*** 0.102**
[3.59]
[2.22]
218
32

Panel B: OLS estimation of 3-year-ahead bank index returns
EnglishW.
All
US
speaking Europe

0.054***
[4.27]
316

Δ (bank credit / GDP)
T-STAT
N

Panel A: Probit estimation of 3-year-ahead bank index returns
EnglishW.
All
US
speaking Europe

0.231
218

-0.091***
[-2.301]

0.134
218

-0.114***
[-2.880]

All,
1950-2003

0.038*
[1.75]
218

0.045**
[2.29]
218

All,
1950-2003

This table demonstrates that the estimates reported in Tables 3, 4, and 5 for the probit (Panel A), OLS (Panel B), and non-parametric (Panel C) regression
models are robust within various geographical and time subsets. Time subsets are: 1920–2012 (the full sample) and 1950–2003 (i.e. excluding both
the 2007–08 financial crisis and the Great Depression). The table reports estimates — using the same methodology as in Tables 3, 4, and 5 — of future
log excess returns of the bank equity index. In Panels A and B, the probit and OLS coefficients are estimated with (top) or without (bottom) the five
standard controls. Coefficients reported in this table are on ∆(bank credit/GDP); coefficients on control variables are omitted. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 8: Robustness in geographical and time subsamples

Panel C: 3-year-ahead bank index returns subsequent to large credit expansions
Panel C: 3-year-ahead bank index returns subsequent to large credit expansions
Credit boom percentile:
>90th
>95th
>98th
All
E[r - rf]

-.24**

-.373**

-.561**

T-STAT

-2.384

-2.522

-2.857

0.04
38

0.041
19

0.048
11

US
E[r - rf]

-0.435

-0.701

T-STAT

-1.527

-1.741

R
N

0.126
2

0.146
1

0

English speaking countries
E[r - rf]

-0.011

-0.164

-.298***

T-STAT

-0.087

-0.73

-12.843

0.021
12

0.042
5

0.036
2

Western Europe
E[r - rf]

-.302**

-.369**

-.561**

T-STAT

-2.194

-2.314

-2.808

R
N

0.046
25

0.038
15

0.059
11

Southern Europe
E[r - rf]

-0.235

-.282**

-.282**

T-STAT

-1.082

-3.172

-3.172

0.033
7

0.018
3

0.018
3

Scandinavia
E[r - rf]

-.353**

-.474***

-.783**

T-STAT

-2.647

-5.877

-14.362

0.068
8

0.055
4

0.071
2

1950-2003, all countries
E[r - rf]

-.187**

-.174*

-.297***

T-STAT

-2.345

-1.775

-4.198

0.042
22

0.022
13

0.027
8

2

R
N

2

2

R
N

2

2

R
N

2

R
N

2

R
N

Table 9: Quantile regressions as an alternative measure of crash risk
This table reports estimates from two alternative measures of crash risk for the bank equity index. The first
measure is βdi f f erence = (βmedian − βmean ), the different between the coefficients from mean and median regressions of bank index returns regressed on ∆(bank credit/GDP); a larger difference between the coefficient
corresponds to increased negative skewness in future returns. The second measure is derived from quantile
regression estimates of bank index returns regressed on ∆(bank credit/GDP); it captures the left-tail of subsequent returns becoming more extreme than the right-tail and is also a measure of increased negative skewness
in future returns. This measure is calculated as βnegative skew = (βq=50 − βq=5 ) − (βq=95 − βq=50 ), where βq=5 ,
βq=50 , βq=95 are coefficients from jointly-estimated quantile regressions with quantiles q. Starting from the top
row and working down, the table reports the following estimates (together with their associated t-statistics or
p-value): βmean , the coefficient from estimating the OLS regression model (2), βmedian , the coefficient from a median regression (50th quantile regression), the difference (βmedian − βmean ), the coefficients from jointly-estimated
quantile regressions, βq=5 , βq=50 , βq=95 , and lastly the conditional negative skewness coefficient βnegative skew =
(βq=50 − βq=5 ) − (βq=95 − βq=50 ). ∆(bank credit/GDP) is in standard deviation units within each country, but is
standardized at each point in time using only past information to avoid any future-looking bias. T-statistics and
p-values are computed from standard errors that are block bootstrapped and dually clustered on country and time.
*, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Observations are over the
sample of 20 countries, 1920–2012.

Explanatory variables:
Δ (bank credit / GDP)

Mean
(t stat)
Median
(t stat)
Difference
(p-value)

Bank index returns
1 yr ahead 2 yr ahead 3 yr ahead
-.032**
-.06***
-.124***
(-2.14)
(-3.45)
(-3.64)
-.019***
-.041**
-.086***
(-2.76)
(-2.47)
(-3.84)
.014***
.019*
.038*
(.001)
(.066)
(.089)

Q5
(t stat)
Q50
(t stat)
Q95
(t stat)

-.104***
(-20.59)
-.019***
(-2.76)
-.021
(-1.02)

-.071**
(-2.14)
-.041**
(-2.47)
-.064**
(-2.44)

-.271***
(-5.74)
-.086***
(-3.84)
-.072*
(-1.88)

Negative skew
(t stat)

.088***
(3.24)

.053**
(2.08)

.172***
(3.04)

957

480

316

N

