NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

QUANTITATIVE TRADE MODELS:
DEVELOPMENTS AND CHALLENGES
Timothy J. Kehoe
Pau S. Pujolas
Jack Rossbach
Working Paper 22706
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22706

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016, Revised May 2017

We thank Kim Ruhl for extensive discussions of the issues addressed in this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. An
online data appendix is available at http://www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Timothy J. Kehoe, Pau S. Pujolas, and Jack Rossbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Quantitative Trade Models: Developments and Challenges
Timothy J. Kehoe, Pau S. Pujolas, and Jack Rossbach
NBER Working Paper No. 22706
September 2016, Revised May 2017
JEL No. F11,F13,F14,F17
ABSTRACT
Applied general equilibrium (AGE) models, which feature multiple countries, multiple industries,
and input-output linkages across industries, have been the dominant tool for evaluating the impact
of trade reforms since the 1980s. We review how these models are used to perform policy
analysis and document their shortcomings in predicting the industry-level effects of past trade
reforms.
We argue that, to improve their performance, AGE models need to incorporate
product-level data on bilateral trade relations by industry and better model how trade reforms
lower bilateral trade costs. We use the least traded products methodology of Kehoe et al. (2015)
to provide guidance on how improvements can be made. We provide further suggestions on how
AGE models can incorporate recent advances in quantitative trade theory to improve their
predictive ability and better quantify the gains from trade liberalization.

Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
tkehoe@umn.edu

Jack Rossbach
Georgetown University Qatar
Department of Economics
Doha, Qatar
Jack.Rossbach@georgetown.edu

Pau S. Pujolas
Department of Economics
McMaster University
1280 Main Street West
Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4M4
Canada
pau@pujolasfons.com

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22706

1. Introduction
Since the 1980s, applied general equilibrium (AGE) models — sometimes referred to as
computable general equilibrium models — have served as the tool of choice for evaluating the
economy-wide impact of changes in trade policy. Originally defined as any general equilibrium
model that researchers solve numerically after calibrating its parameters to data, AGE models now
distinguish themselves from other common quantitative trade models — most of which now fit the
prior definition — by their multi-industry and multi-country nature and by their focus on inputoutput (IO) linkages across industries.
In recent decades, improvements in computation capability and increases in data
availability have lowered the cost of building and using these models. This has played a substantial
role in cementing the status of AGE models as the standard methodology for evaluating the impact
of trade policy. Furthermore, the detailed production structure and linkages featured in AGE
models allow them to predict changes in industry-level production and trade flows in response to
trade reforms, and these industry-level changes are typically the focus of policy discussion
surrounding the desirability of different trade policies.
Although AGE models have remained prominent in policy analysis, their theoretical
development has slowed significantly in recent years, as the academic trade literature has shifted
its attention to firm-level data and models that focus on them. We intend this paper as a guide to
where and why AGE models demand more attention among researchers. Despite their widespread
use in policy analysis, AGE models do not have a good track record in predicting the impact of
trade reforms on production and trade flows by industry. We hypothesize that the performance of
AGE models can be substantially improved by making two major modifications, each of which
requires improvements in both theory and measurement. First, we need to improve the theoretical
mechanism by which imports and domestic outputs substitute for each other and use micro data to
measure the degree of substitutability. In the language of AGE modeling, we need better estimates
of Armington elasticities. We use the least traded products (LTP) methodology of Kehoe et al.
(2015), which focuses on product-level data on bilateral trade relations by industry, to provide
guidance on how improvements can be made. Second, we need to improve our theory and
measurement of how trade reforms lower bilateral trade costs.
We have organized the paper around three themes. First, in Sections 2 and 3, we review
the development and use of AGE models and outline how researchers can use these models to
1

evaluate the economic impact of trade policy reforms. Second, in Section 4, we review and expand
on research that evaluates the performance of AGE models in predicting the effects of past trade
reforms, and argue that these models have performed poorly in predicting changes in industrylevel production and trade patterns. In particular, we find that industries composed of products
that are traded in small yet positive amounts expanded much more following trade liberalization
than was predicted by the models.

Third, in the remaining sections, we discuss recent

developments in the academic trade literature and evaluate the extent to which incorporating these
advances into AGE models can overcome the shortcomings identified in our paper.
We intend the message of our paper to be hopeful. Although our results suggest that AGE
models have not performed well in identifying which industries will expand the most following
trade liberalization, the trade literature has advanced significantly since the development of AGE
models in the 1980s. We hypothesize that incorporating recent advances in the literature into AGE
models will allow us to develop models with improved accuracy and reliability for trade policy
analysis. It is essential that AGE modelers continuously reevaluate the performance of their
models using the sort of methodology we employ in this paper. Doing so will allow AGE modelers
to identify where their models perform well and where additional research is needed.
2. Development and Use of Applied General Equilibrium Models
AGE models enjoyed a golden age in the academic international trade literature that lasted from
the early 1980s until the mid-1990s. As Kehoe & Prescott (1995) explain, “Applied general
equilibrium analysis is defined to be the numerical implementation of general equilibrium models
calibrated to data: An applied GE model is a computer representation of a national economy or a
group of national economies, each of which consists of consumers, producers, and possibly a
government.” In international trade, AGE models are used extensively to provide quantitative
estimates on the economic impact of policy reforms, particularly trade liberalization. Dervis et al.
(1982) and Shoven & Whalley (1984) provide surveys of the early AGE literature, whereas
Whalley (1985), Shoven & Whalley (1992), and Kehoe & Kehoe (1994a) provide guidance on
how AGE models can be used to evaluate the impact of trade liberalizations.
A typical AGE model of international trade consists of multiple countries that trade with
each other; each country contains multiple industries, all of which are linked through an IO
structure.

In each industry, capital and labor are combined, often using a Cobb-Douglas

technology, to produce the industry’s value added. This is then combined with intermediate inputs
2

from other industries, often via a fixed coefficients technology, to produce the industry’s gross
output.

A representative household in each country maximizes a utility function, usually

homothetic, defined over the consumption of goods from each industry, as well as over public
consumption and investment goods. The household purchases goods using the income received
from renting its labor and capital to firms and from the resources generated by tariffs on imported
goods. Finally, models have market clearing conditions that pin down all wages and prices in the
model.
AGE models are designed from the ground up to be able to reproduce key features of the
data for the countries of interest. Introducing investment goods into the utility function, for
example, makes a static model consistent with the investment that appears in the IO tables.
Likewise, models must be consistent with the fact that goods in most industries are both imported
and exported simultaneously; introducing individual preferences and production function
specifications consistent with the Armington specification (named after Armington (1969)) allows
the model to deliver this desired pattern while remaining tractable enough to allow for differing
elasticities of substitution across industries.
While AGE models were being developed, the trade literature as a whole was experiencing
a renaissance. After Grubel & Lloyd (1971) pioneered the analysis of intra-industry trade, trade
theory evolved from featuring perfectly competitive environments to accommodating imperfect
competition and scale economies.

Krugman (1980) developed the first monopolistically

competitive model to rationalize intra-industry trade using Dixit & Stiglitz (1977) preferences.
These advances were adapted into AGE models by Harris (1984) in a small open economy model
of Canada and were later expanded by Smith & Venables (1988) to study the impact of removing
trade barriers in the European Community in a preliminary assessment of what would become the
Single Market in Europe. These studies highlight the long-standing tradition of embedding
advances from trade theory into AGE models to better understand the impact of policy reform and
answer the questions that are important to policy makers.
Many significant advancements in AGE models were developed by researchers analyzing
the impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the largest free trade area in
the world at the time it was enacted in 1994. For instance, the first AGE model to incorporate
Dixit & Stiglitz (1977) preferences was developed by Brown & Stern (1989), who used the model
to evaluate the impact of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA, precursor of NAFTA)
3

on consumers’ welfare, focusing their analysis on the expanded set of varieties available to
consumers. That NAFTA led to a significant leap forward for the AGE literature is highlighted
by Kehoe & Kehoe (1994b), who compare and summarize the contributions and modeling choices
behind several studies, including those of Brown et al. (1992), Cox & Harris (1992), Markusen et
al. (1995), and Sobarzo (1995), all of whom use AGE models to study the impact of NAFTA.
Following NAFTA, the number of articles published in peer-reviewed journals by
academic researchers using AGE models to assess the impact of trade reforms has diminished.
[Recent exceptions include Li & Whalley (2014), who study the impact of the Trans-Pacific
Partnership (TPP) on China, and Caliendo & Parro (2015), which we discuss in detail in Section
5.2.] Despite the decline in academic research on AGE models, they have remained heavily used
in policy work.1 For example, Narayanan et al. (2016) review the modeling strategies used by
policy makers to evaluate a number of recent trade agreements and show that AGE models remain
the dominant methodology that policy makers use to evaluate the impact of a wide range of policy
reforms.
The tension between the prevalence of AGE models in policy work and their relative
absence in academic research is what drives us to write this paper. One interpretation of the lack
of research combined with their widespread use in policy could indicate that AGE models have
succeeded and do not require additional development; they work for their intended uses. As we
argue starting in Section 4, however, this is not true. Kehoe et al. (2015) show that AGE models
fall short when it comes to correctly identifying the industries in which we should expect the
positive gains from trade to materialize, one of the primary purposes of using AGE models in the
first place. We do not think this indicates that policy makers should move away from AGE models.
Indeed, there do not appear to be any realistic alternatives for answering the types of policy
questions that AGE models are designed to address. Rather, our claim is that the way forward
should be a return to the tradition of bringing advances from other areas of trade theory into AGE

One area in the academic literature in which AGE models have thrived is environmental economics. This literature
was pioneered by Hazilla & Kopp (1990), who assessed the regulations mandated by the Clean Air Act and the Clean
Water Act, and Grossman & Krueger (1994), who assessed the environmental impact of NAFTA by combining an
AGE model with industry-level pollution estimates. Since then, a number of AGE models of international trade and
the environment have been developed to study the impact of various environmental reforms, especially multilateral
environmental agreements involving many countries. Examples include the work of Burniaux & Truong (2002),
Peterson et al. (2011), and the survey by Böhringer & Löschel (2006).
1

4

modeling. In the sections that follow, we describe how AGE models are used in practice, how
their performance can be evaluated, and how we hypothesize that they can be improved.
3. Using AGE Models to Predict the Industry-Level Impact of Trade Reform
Before discussing the construction and calibration of AGE models, it is important to recognize that
researchers have a wide range of modeling choices, as well as different calibration strategies,
within the umbrella of AGE models. Given this flexibility, it is not always clear how much these
choices matter for the performance of AGE models. Kehoe et al. (1995) evaluate the impact that
various modeling choices have on the performance of AGE models in predicting a Spanish tax
reform and find that the results are largely unchanged across common alternative specifications.
This finding is consistent with the evaluation of several different NAFTA studies by Kehoe (2005),
who finds that they perform similarly despite different modeling assumptions and calibration
strategies.
This finding is important for our argument because it implies that, when we evaluate the
performance of AGE models, we should expect our evaluation to apply to a large class of these
models rather than to only the individual models that we consider. This begs the question: How
can we hope to improve the performance of AGE models if different implementations perform
similarly? The answer is that two elements are essential to the success of AGE models: To use
AGE models in a predictive sense, we need to make sure we have the correct specification of how
parameters change with trade reforms, that is, the correct specification of the shocks to introduce
into the model and the correct elasticities to evaluate a given change in parameters. Because we
need to understand the mechanics behind AGE models to estimate shocks and elasticities, we first
discuss the structure of AGE models and the calibration of their other parameters.
3.1. Construction and Calibration of AGE Models
The standard procedure for calibrating the parameters of an AGE model (with the exception of
policy shocks and elasticities, the calibration of which we discuss in later sections) relies on using
equilibrium relationships that hold in the model to pin down parameter values using the data for a
given base period. This means that the model exactly matches the data in the base period and that
many of the parameters of AGE models can be estimated in a straightforward way from the
national accounts and IO data. Total supplies of factors are determined by normalizing the base
year prices of each factor to one and then setting total supplies of labor, capital, and intermediate
5

inputs equal to their factor payments from the national accounts. Utility functions and production
functions are frequently assumed to have Cobb-Douglas or fixed-coefficient forms, which makes
it easy to calibrate factor and demand intensities directly from IO tables. As a simple example,
Kehoe & Kehoe (1994a) show how to calibrate a small AGE model using a three-industry IO table
under different specifications of competition and returns to scale.
Traditional sources for IO tables include individual countries’ national accounts (the
Bureau of Economic Analysis produces a set of IO tables for the United States, for example) and
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Structural Analysis
(STAN) Input-Output Database for OECD member countries.

These sources come with

limitations in their coverage of countries, and, when using nationally constructed IO tables,
differences in the methodologies used to construct the tables limit the ease with which the national
IO tables can be compared and combined for use in calibrating AGE models. More recently, the
World Input-Output Database (WIOD), described by Timmer et al. (2015), and the Global Trade
Analysis Project (GTAP), described by Hertel (2013), have greatly increased the number of
standardized IO tables available to researchers. The WIOD is a publically available dataset that
currently covers 40 countries and 35 industries over the period 1995–2011. The GTAP database
has the largest coverage of countries, with the GTAP 9 database covering 140 countries and 57
industries for 2004, 2007, and 2011; however, unlike the other sources, the most recent version of
the database is not freely available and must be purchased for use. (GTAP databases that are at
least two releases old become freely available for download.) We are not aware of any evidence
that one of the databases should be preferred to the other. We therefore expect that differences in
cost and coverage should dictate which database a researcher should use.
The Armington specification of AGE models, according to which output in each industry
is differentiated by country of origin (cars produced in Germany, for example, are different from
cars produced in Japan), ensures that production of final outputs uses both domestic and foreign
intermediate inputs and that consumers consume both domestic and foreign final output goods. IO
data are typically not able to distinguish between countries of origin on an industry-use basis. To
give an example, we know how much machinery is imported from Canada in the United States,
but we do not know in which industries this machinery is then used. To get around this limitation
and reduce the scale of the model, we assume that the aggregation takes place at the border, or
before the inputs are used in the production of other industry outputs. This means that U.S. imports
6

of machinery from Canada are combined with machinery from other countries via an Armington
aggregator to get a U.S. machinery aggregate, which is then used in the production of output for
other industries in the United States according to the production functions specified above.
Although the assumption that industry output is differentiated by country of origin may appear ad
hoc, the Armington assumption leads to a parsimonious model that is easy to calibrate and, as we
discuss below, shares many properties with a wide class of models.
The Armington aggregator, which combines output from each source country into a single
industry aggregate, is a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function
y jk   jk



 i1 aijk yijkk
m



1/ k

.

(1)

In this equation, yijk is the imports by country j of the output of industry k from country i , y jk
is the aggregate amount of output of industry k available in country j for consumption or use as
an intermediate input in production, and aijk are non-negative parameters that govern the relative
demand for each good. The elasticity of this CES function, 1/ (1   k ) , referred to as the
Armington elasticity, determines the degree of differentiation across origins and, as we mention
above, plays a crucial role in determining the response of trade flows and consumption patterns to
changes in productivity parameters and trade costs. AGE models typically take Armington
elasticity estimates from elsewhere in the trade literature because they cannot be calibrated using
IO tables and national accounts data but instead require intertemporal data on how trade flows
respond to changes in trade costs. Given any elasticity estimate, the share parameters, aijk , can
then be calibrated by forcing the model to match observed foreign and domestic expenditure
shares.
Armington elasticities can be calibrated or estimated via several methods, including
strategies based on models that are similar to an Armington model yet come with alternative
interpretations for the elasticity. As shown by Feenstra et al. (2014), Armington elasticity
estimates can be sensitive to the choice of estimation strategy.

Despite improvements in

understanding the role that the Armington elasticity estimates play in determining the effects of
policy reforms in the model, the literature has yet to converge to a single calibration or estimation
strategy.

In Section 4.2, we evaluate an AGE model that uses standard Armington elasticity

estimates from the literature and show that it performs poorly in predicting the industry-level
7

changes in trade flows following liberalization. We also provide evidence that improved elasticity
estimates could improve the performance of AGE models, and, in Section 5, we discuss how recent
advances from the theoretical trade literature might be used toward this end.
Because most AGE models are static, aggregate trade imbalances are imposed as an
exogenous parameter to match observed aggregate trade imbalances. Whereas overall trade
imbalances are exogenously imposed, the industry and bilateral compositions of these trade
imbalances arise endogenously and will change in response to policy reform. That is, an AGE
model of the United States would impose an overall trade deficit, but it would not impose the
individual countries that the United States has bilateral deficits with, nor would it impose the
industries in which net exports are negative. Although it is difficult to endogenize aggregate trade
imbalances in static models (or current account imbalances in models that feature international
lending), Dekle et al. (2008) and Kehoe et al. (2013) show that removing aggregate current account
imbalances is likely to lead to large redistributional effects across traded and nontraded industries
despite a muted overall impact on real GDP.
A robust empirical observation is that countries tend to disproportionately consume
domestic output compared with consumption of foreign varieties of the same goods, as well as
disproportionately using domestic intermediate inputs in production. Although this home bias is
commonly thought to arise because of trade costs and barriers that limit international trade (see
Obstfeld & Rogoff (2001)), these elements are often not modeled explicitly in AGE models.
Standard AGE models instead rationalize observed home bias through the share parameters aijk
of the Armington aggregators in the model, effectively assuming home bias exists solely because
of preferences and production technologies. A shortcoming of this strategy is that it fails to leave
open the possibility that the degree of home bias may change in response to changes in trade policy.
For that reason, recent studies have focused on better understanding the possible origins of home
bias. Two recent and influential studies discussing the home bias puzzle are those of Hanson &
Xiang (2004), who present a model of endogenous product differentiation where home bias is
generated by variation in transportation costs across industries, and Yi (2010), who investigates
the role of vertical linkages and fragmentation of production in generating home bias. Wolf (2000)
additionally points out that home bias (or local bias) also exists on a subnational level.
As home bias has become better understood, researchers have continued to shift away from
using the Armington specification to capture home bias, instead opting to explicitly model the
8

trade costs that lead to a home bias pattern. Corsetti et al. (2007) provide an example in which
incorporating home bias through trade costs is quantitatively important for the transmission and
welfare impact of macroeconomic shocks. It is worth noting, however, that current methods for
estimating model-derived trade costs do not completely resolve the shortcomings of embedding
home bias in preferences and production functions. The reason for this is that these methods are
typically not able to identify the exact components of these trade costs or the degree to which these
trade costs will change in response to changes in trade policy. Therefore, although model-derived
trade costs are a step in the right direction, more work must be done to make estimates of these
costs useful in AGE modeling.
The final set of parameters that must be calibrated is the policy parameters. These
parameters are the most important ones in the model: Dhanging these parameters is what allows
the model to perform counterfactuals. Although, in principle, any of the exogenous parameters
can be changed, in the context of international trade, the most common choices of policy
parameters are taxes, trade costs, and industry productivity parameters. Kehoe et al. (2013)
evaluate a policy reform that falls outside of those choices, in which the U.S. trade deficit is the
policy parameter itself. In the AGE models that are used to evaluate the potential impacts of trade
reform, the central policy parameters are typically tariffs and trade costs, the calibration of which
we devote the next subsection to. Common trade reforms studied in AGE frameworks include the
uniform lowering of all tariffs by a set amount; the complete removal of all tariffs; and, when
available, changing tariffs from calibrated initial pre-reform levels to proposed post-reform levels.
Although changes in trade policy are taken as exogenous in AGE models, there is a large
body of literature studying the endogeneity of tariffs and trade policy, as well as the political
economy of international organizations such as the World Trade Organization (WTO). Bagwell
& Staiger (1999) show how two key elements of the WTO, reciprocity and nondiscrimination, can
act to offset the terms-of-trade externality and resulting prisoner’s dilemma that causes high tariff
rates to arise endogenously when nations set tariffs unilaterally. There is also a large body of
theoretical literature examining how tariffs and subsidies interact with the industrial structure of
countries. For example, Broda et al. (2008) discuss how market power and concentration can
affect optimal tariffs for a country, and Costinot et al. (2015) develop a framework to study how
comparative advantage might influence optimal tariffs. In the other direction, Demidova &
Rodriguez-Clare (2009) show that export subsidies generate productivity increases. These and
9

related studies suggest that observed tariffs contain information beyond just the tariff rates
themselves. Baier & Bergstrand (2007) show that accounting for the endogeneity of trade policy
quintuples the estimated impact of free trade agreements on trade flows in a gravity framework.
AGE models, however, rarely incorporate this type of information, which is a shortcoming that
future research on AGE models should seek to address.
3.2. Tariffs and Trade Costs for Evaluating Trade Reforms
Tariff parameters in AGE models can be calibrated in two standard ways. The first is to
use observed tariff revenues, as Kehoe & Kehoe (1994a) do, to back out implied tariff rates. This
has the benefit of generating tariff revenues that are consistent with the national accounts. Despite
a large literature predicting that countries should impose tariffs uniformly across products (see
Opp (2010) for a recent example and Costinot et al. (2015) for a notable exception), in practice,
tariff rates are rarely set uniformly. To account for this empirical regularity, we can alternatively
calibrate product- or industry-level tariff rates in the model to match tariff rate measures provided
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) Trade Analysis
Information System (TRAINS) database. The TRAINS database contains reported bilateral tariff
rate information for products categorized at the six-digit Harmonized System (HS) level and
constructs estimated tariff rates for other classification systems and levels of aggregation.
Tariff agreements organized through the WTO, as well as other bilateral and multilateral
trade agreements, typically take the form of caps set on the maximum level of tariff rates that can
be applied. In practice, these caps are often nonbinding. Maggi & Rodríguez-Clare (2007)
rationalize that trade agreements set caps instead of tariff rates themselves because this allows for
large immediate cuts in tariff rates followed by further gradual reductions. When calibrating tariff
rates in an AGE model, we therefore use effectively applied tariff rates, which are estimates of the
tariff rates actually applied (typically the lowest of several caps governed by different trade
agreements). Because effectively applied tariffs are reported as ad valorem equivalents, these rates
can be inserted directly into the AGE model in the form of tax wedges for consumers and
producers.
Most of the countries in the world are now members of the WTO, and significant gains
have been made in lowering tariff rates over the past 30 years. Because of this decline in tariffs,
many of the quantitative trade models in the literature, with the exception of AGE models, have
moved away from using tariffs as the object of policy reform and focused more generally on trade
10

costs. Iceberg trade costs, as modeled by Samuelson (1954), enter into the AGE framework almost
identically to tariffs, with the exception that tariffs produce revenue that is rebated to consumers
or used to fund government expenditures, whereas iceberg trade costs are lost completely. This
means that there are larger gains from reducing trade costs than there are from reducing tariffs, an
implication that is explored quantitatively by Felbermayr et al. (2015).
Relative to tariffs, nontariff trade costs are a less well-defined concept and more difficult
to observe directly in the data. One exception is data on freight costs charged by shipping providers
to transport goods internationally. Recent papers have begun making use of this data (see, for
example, the studies by Adao et al. (2015) and Shapiro (forthcoming)). Other papers, however
(e.g., by McCallum (1995) and Wolf (2000)), show that freight costs do not appear to make up a
large fraction of observed trade costs. Recent research has also highlighted the fact that freight
costs are endogenous and should change in response to changes in tariffs. Further, this line of
research, for example by Kleinert & Spies (2011) and Asturias (2016), has shown that there is little
correlation between traditional trade cost measures, which use distance as a proxy, and freight
costs themselves.
Additional components of trade costs include nontariff trade barriers and regulatory
policies (Dean et al. (2009), Goldberg & Pavcnik (2016)), marketing costs involved in serving
additional markets (Arkolakis (2010)), transportation costs

(Limão & Venables (2001)),

transportation time (Hummels & Schaur (2013)), exchange rate hedging costs (Allayannis & Ofek
(2001)), and fixed costs associated with gaining access to foreign markets (Krugman (1980),
Melitz (2003)). Other costs are less obviously trade costs but can nonetheless function as such in
trade models; recently proposed examples are information frictions (Allen (2014)) and credit
constraints (Manova (2013), Leibovici (2015), Kohn et al. (2016)). The trade costs mentioned
here are far from exhaustive — Anderson & van Wincoop (2004) provide a survey of the literature
surrounding trade costs — yet they reinforce our point that constructing nontariff trade costs
directly from data is a challenging endeavor, prohibitively so for many early AGE applications.
For this reason, rather than directly calibrating trade cost parameters from the data,
researchers often calibrate them indirectly using the same model-implied equilibrium relationships
used to estimate production function intensities. Anderson & van Wincoop (2003) show that, with
Armington models, implied ad valorem trade costs can be recovered from a gravity regression.
Structurally connecting the results from the gravity regression to the Armington framework, they
11

estimate the implied trade costs generated by the border between the United States and Canada
and show that the naïve gravity regression estimates of McCallum (1995) are biased and
significantly overstate the trade costs implied by the border. Using model-implied trade costs
rather than direct data on observed trade costs has allowed researchers to better understand the
effects of economic integration, as surveyed by Donaldson (2015). As recent examples of this
approach, Comerford & Rodriguez-Mora (2015) apply this strategy to study the potential costs of
secession and independence for Scotland and Catalonia, and Ottaviano et al. (2014) evaluate the
potential impact on the United Kingdom of leaving the European Union. In these types of studies,
the predicted changes in trade costs resulting from changes in economic integration are typically
estimated using coefficients from a gravity regression with an indicator variable for economic
integration. This method of estimation, however, fails to take into account the endogeneity of
economic integration, and, because there are few examples of such disintegration happening in
developed economies, it is difficult to validate whether the predicted changes in trade costs are
reasonable estimates of the changes that would occur given dissolution.
Over the past decade, significant improvements have been made in the ability of
researchers to calibrate model-implied trade costs and elasticities through gravity regressions.
Projects such as the Centre d’Études Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales (CEPII)’s
Gravity Database, described by Head et al. (2010), have increased the availability of much of the
data necessary for running these gravity regressions. Simultaneously, advances have been made
in understanding how to estimate the model-implied equilibrium equations. Egger (2000) shows
that these gravity relationships are best estimated using panel data, and Santos Silva & Tenreyro
(2006) provide an alternative estimation procedure that estimates the relationship without taking
logs and avoids the bias arising from Jensen’s inequality. Head & Mayer (2014) provide a survey
of the advances related to estimating gravity regressions. Although the typical approach is to
derive implied trade costs using aggregate trade flows, Irarrazabal et al. (2015) provide microlevel estimates of trade costs using firm-level trade data while exploring the quantitative
implications of modeling additive trade costs as multiplicative trade costs. Additionally, although
bilateral symmetry in trade costs is often imposed, Hummels et al. (2009) and Waugh (2010) argue
that trade costs are in fact asymmetric and vary systematically depending on the income of the
trading partners.

12

Economic historians have shown that traditional measures of trade costs have declined
significantly over time. Model-implied trade costs, however, have remained substantial even as
tariffs have decreased to near zero for many countries and products. Jacks et al. (2008) provide
estimates of bilateral trade costs between 1870 and 2000, and Jacks et al. (2011) show that changes
in trade costs over this period correlate strongly with aggregate changes in trade flows.
Estevadeordal et al. (2003) investigate the extent to which transportation costs, tariffs, and the gold
standard explain the rise and subsequent decline in world trade from 1870 to 1939. More recently,
Donaldson (forthcoming) studies the reduction of transportation costs associated with railroad
construction in colonial India using inter-district price differences as a proxy for trade costs.
Although advances in recovering and calibrating trade costs have expanded the usefulness
of AGE models in an evaluative sense, challenges remain in incorporating these advances into
AGE models used to predict the impact of trade reforms. Following a policy implementation,
post-reform trade costs can be recovered using the gravity approach and inserted into the model to
evaluate how well the framework can capture observed changes. It may not be possible, however,
to predict the resulting changes in trade costs prior to the policy reform. Overall, although some
changes in trade costs, such as changes in tariff schedules, are easily predictable and other changes
in trade costs can be inferred by predictable changes in gravity regression variables, much work
remains to be done to adapt the calibration methods described above for use in AGE models to
yield the predictions that policy questions require.
4. Evaluating the Performance of AGE Models
For AGE models to be useful as predictive tools for policy analysis, it is essential that the models
be able to forecast the effects of policy reforms with some degree of accuracy. To evaluate the
accuracy of AGE models, we can look at the pre-reform predictions that researchers have produced
using AGE models, or the predictions that AGE models would have yielded had they been used
pre-reform, and compare them with what actually happened post-reform.
When evaluating the accuracy of predictions of the impact of trade reforms, a key question
is how we should account for the many unrelated (to the reform) changes that occur post-reform
that influence the data and are not considered in the model predictions. One possibility is to
decompose observed changes in the data by source and then compare changes in the data attributed
to the trade reform with the predicted impact of the trade reform. The shortcoming of this strategy
is that it is not always clear how to decompose the data, particularly if the external shocks to be
13

accounted for are not clearly identified. If the external shocks are well known, another possibility
is to modify the predictions of the model by feeding these shocks into the model along with the
original counterfactual. This is the strategy that Kehoe et al. (1995) follow when evaluating the
performance of the AGE model used by Kehoe et al. (1988) to predict the impact of a tax reform
in Spain. They show that accounting for two external shocks, a worldwide drop in the price of
petroleum and a negative shock to domestic agricultural productivity due to a draught, improves
the performance of the model predictions in matching observed changes in industry-level output.
An alternative strategy when evaluating model performance is to leave the data and model
predictions as they are, but to adjust the baseline for what is considered to be success or failure. A
natural way to adjust the baseline is by providing benchmark predictions that can be contrasted
with those from the model; then success or failure can be determined by running a horserace
between the model under evaluation and the benchmark predictions. This is the approach followed
by Kehoe et al. (2015) and is the strategy that we follow in this paper. Although there are potential
complications in evaluating models this way, particularly if the changes that occur post-reform are
large relative to the reform considered in the model, we choose this method of evaluation because
it allows us to show clearly that it is possible to build models that are better able to predict the
industry-level impact of trade reform.

Furthermore, the benchmark predictions help us to

understand where AGE models fall short and how they can be improved.
4.1. Previous Evaluations of AGE Models
A natural test case for evaluating the AGE framework is NAFTA. NAFTA was a
significant policy reform between countries that continue to trade heavily with each other, and it
attracted a large amount of attention from economists both pre- and post-reform. The effectively
applied tariff rates between NAFTA countries fell from an average of almost 9 percent in 1989,
before the implementation of both NAFTA and CUSFTA, to near zero shortly after the
implementation of NAFTA. At the same time, each of the NAFTA countries has remained as one
of the top three trading partners of the other NAFTA countries. NAFTA is also an ideal test case
for the accuracy of AGE models because AGE models were the primary models used to inform
policy makers on how NAFTA would affect the United States, Canada, and Mexico.
Fox (1999), Kehoe (2005), Shikher (2012), and Kehoe et al. (2015) evaluate how the AGE
models originally used to predict the effects of NAFTA did in matching actual changes in bilateral
industry-level trade flows, and show that the models did poorly. The models did so poorly, in fact,
14

that the predictions of the models were often negatively correlated with the actual changes
observed post-NAFTA. This finding is concerning, because if AGE models cannot get one of the
largest and most significant trade reforms in recent history correct, then there may be reasons to
doubt the reliability of the AGE models currently being used for evaluating trade policy. An
important caveat is that these evaluations are concerned only with the accuracy of AGE models in
predicting changes in industry-level trade flows following the implementation of NAFTA and do
not discuss the arguments for and against NAFTA, which are reviewed and evaluated by Burfisher
et al. (2001).
Why did AGE models do so poorly in predicting the impact of NAFTA? Although we do
not know for certain, we investigate this question by examining how AGE models perform in
predicting the impact of other trade liberalizations. Further, we search for shortcomings in the use
of AGE models by examining features of the data that have yet to be fully incorporated into the
models. It is worth noting that the failure of AGE models is potentially limited to their application
in evaluating the impact of trade reforms. AGE models have been found to perform well for certain
other policy reforms; for example, Kehoe et al. (1995) find that the AGE model used by Kehoe et
al. (1988) performed well at predicting the impact on industry-level output and prices of a tax
reform in Spain. We argue that one reason for the models’ poor performance is due to failing to
account for product-level trade within industries, in particular, measures of extensive margin
growth.
Several papers suggest that information on disaggregated trade flows may be necessary to
match aggregate trade flows. Using an AGE framework as an evaluative tool, Romalis (2007)
shows that a significant amount of growth in trade between NAFTA countries occurred by
displacing trade from non-NAFTA countries. Romalis also emphasizes that, to accurately predict
the impact of trade reforms, it is essential to correctly identify the shocks associated with trade
reforms and to correctly estimate the trade elasticities and, moreover, that the use of disaggregated
trade data can help along both margins. Trefler (2004) shows that plant-level productivity rose
significantly in the industries experiencing the largest tariff cuts following the CUSFTA signed in
1988, whereas low productivity plants reduced employment following the trade liberalization.
Hillberry & McDaniel (2002) show that a significant portion of growth in trade between the United
States and Mexico occurred in products that were previously not traded. Kehoe et al. (2015) show
that using the extensive margin could have led to better predictions than those of the models
15

originally used, a finding we explore further in this paper. One reason that extensive margin
growth was not initially built into AGE models is because of a historical lack of theoretical
underpinnings. As we discuss in subsequent sections, the significant theoretical advances over the
past 15 years have allowed researchers to better understand how the extensive margin is affected
by trade policy. Much progress has also been made in understanding how changes in the extensive
margin can be mapped into elasticities that allow AGE models to capture these effects.
Before jumping to the conclusion that current AGE models perform badly because AGE
failed to predict the effects of NAFTA, it is fair to ask whether this inaccuracy was a shortcoming
only with the particular models used at the time and whether the AGE models currently used in
policy evaluation have overcome this shortcoming. AGE models may perform better now, for
example, because of improvements in the econometric foundations underlying how elasticities for
AGE models are estimated. McKitrick (1998) raises econometric concerns over how functional
form assumptions were imposed by the early applications of AGE models, whereas Hertel et al.
(2007) discuss improvements in the AGE modeling framework that partially or fully alleviate
several related econometric concerns.
4.2. Evaluation of the GTAP Model
To evaluate whether AGE models currently used for policy analysis have improved, we
use the GTAP model and database described by Hertel (2013) to evaluate several recent bilateral
trade agreements and compare the predictions from the GTAP AGE model with observed changes.
We choose the GTAP framework because it is widely used for policy work and targeted toward
researchers in policy-oriented institutions such as the WTO and World Bank.
We evaluate the GTAP framework for the following bilateral trade agreements (the year in
which the trade agreement began implementation is in parentheses): United States–Australia
(2005), United States–Chile (2004), China–Chile (2006), and China–New Zealand (2008). It is
worth mentioning that the GTAP framework and its extensions were, in fact, used by policy makers
to evaluate the potential impact of many of these free trade agreements prior to implementation
[see, e.g., reports by the US International Trade Commission (2003) and New Zealand Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Trade and China Ministry of Commerce (2004)] and they continue to be used
by both member and nonmember nations to evaluate bilateral and multilateral trade agreements
such as the TPP (see, for example, Burfisher et al. (2014)). To allow for a consistent evaluation
of the GTAP framework for all of the above trade agreements, we generate predictions for the
16

impact of the policy reform in a standardized way for each reform using the GTAP 9 database and
standard GTAP model described by Hertel (2013).
The standard version of the GTAP model is an AGE model with perfect competition and
constant returns to scale and makes use of multi-industry, multi-country, production, tariff, and IO
data to generate predictions for shocks to exogenous parameters. The GTAP database, which we
use to calibrate the model, is designed to allow for easy aggregation of industries and countries.
For each trade reform, we aggregate the base data into three countries: the two partner countries
involved in the bilateral trade agreement and a rest-of-world (ROW) aggregate. The industry-level
Armington elasticities in the GTAP model are taken from the literature, specifically Hertel et al.
(2007), and range from 1.8 for Minerals Not Elsewhere Classified to 34.4 for Gas, with an average
elasticity of approximately 7. To evaluate the accuracy of the GTAP models, we generate
counterfactual predictions from the model and compare them with actual changes observed in the
data.
We generate counterfactual predictions for each trade reform using 2004 as our reference
year for calibration, and we consider the impact of setting tariffs to zero for all commodities traded
between the two partner countries while leaving the tariff rates between each country and the ROW
aggregate unchanged. A minor shortcoming of setting all tariffs to zero is that, in practice, tariffs
and trade barriers are often not fully eliminated for all products following liberalization. Despite
these few exceptions, however, the vast majority of products do experience complete or significant
reduction. Table 1 reports the simple average (in percent) across six-digit Harmonized System
products of effectively applied tariff rates between each country pair in 2002 and 2015 (collected
from TRAINS) under the columns titled “Average 2002 tariffs” and “Average 2015 tariffs.” As
we can see, tariffs significantly declined for each of the trade liberalizations, with post-reform rates
near or at zero for all of the countries. A more significant concern is that many of these countries
signed multiple bilateral trade agreements over the same period, and so holding tariffs fixed with
the ROW is an unrealistic assumption and may be the source of inaccuracies. As we discuss in
Section 5.2, however, including all tariff changes leads to only minor improvements in accuracy
for the AGE models that predict the impact of NAFTA.
To evaluate the accuracy of the GTAP models, we compare the counterfactual predictions
of the model with actual growth observed in the data. The GTAP model generates predictions for
the percentage change in the value of exports for each industry following the removal of tariffs.
17

To compute the actual changes in growth for each industry, we use trade data collected from the
United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database (UN Comtrade) at the six-digit Harmonized
System (HS2002) level and aggregate this product-level trade into trade flows for GTAP industries
using a concordance provided by GTAP. Trade data are available for 42 of the 57 GTAP
industries, although not all industries report positive trade for all importer-exporter pairs and all
t ,t '
years. Using the trade data, we compute the percentage changes, zijk
, for exports from country i

to country j in industry k between periods t and t ' as

 xt '

t ,t '
zijk
 100   ijkt  1 ,
x

 ijk


(2)

t
where xijk
is exports from country i to country j in industry k in period t , reported in current

price USD. Although it is common to also deflate trade flows, for example, by the GDP of the
exporter, deflating makes no difference for our results, because we focus on correlations to
evaluate how the model does in predicting which industries experience the most growth following
the trade reforms. Following Kehoe (2005), we set the base period as two years before our base
period for tariffs, because significant changes in trade flows often take place prior to the actual
implementation of trade agreements due to announcement effects.
We evaluate the GTAP framework using the weighted correlation between the predicted
changes from the model and the observed changes in the data, where we weight using each
industry’s exports, averaged across the base and final period. The weighted correlation tells us to
what extent the GTAP model is able to accurately predict the industries that experience the most
growth following liberalization. We use weighting to take into account the fact that policy
discussion is typically focused around the impact of liberalization on large industries, and so our
evaluation should put more weight on whether the model’s predictions are accurate for these large
industries. The results we show, however, are qualitatively robust to several other weighting
schemes based on pre- and post-reform trade values as well as to using the unweighted correlation
that factors deviations the same even for industries that account for very little trade.
Computing the weighted correlation requires the weighted average growth rates for both
t ,t '
the actual changes in trade flows, zijk , and the predicted changes in trade flows from the GTAP
t ,t '
model counterfactuals, zˆijk , as well as their weighted variances and the weighted covariance

18

between them. The formula for the weighted average growth rate for actual changes in trade flows
is given by
57

mean( z )  ijkt ,t  zijkt ,t
t ,t 
ijk

(3)

k 1

and is used in the calculation of the weighted covariance between actual and predicted changes:
57







t ,t '
t ,t 
t ,t 
cov(z, zˆ )ijk
 ijkt ,t  zikjt ,t   mean( z )ijk
zˆikjt ,t   mean( z )ijk
,
k 1

(4)

where the weight used for each industry is the industry’s share of exports averaged across the base
period ( t  2004) and the end period ( t '  2015). Specifically, the weights are
t ,t 
ijk





x

t
ijk

t
 xijk

 x
57

k '1

t
ijk '



t
 xijk
'



.

(5)

The weighted correlation, which serves as our metric for evaluating model performance, is then
given by

 ( z, zˆ) 
t ,t '
ijk

cov( z, zˆ)tijk,t '
t ,t '
cov( z, z )tijk,t ' cov( zˆ, zˆ)ijk

.

(6)

These weights imply that, when actual growth deviates from predicted growth, the deviation
factors more heavily into the weighted correlation for industries that are traded more heavily.
Table 1 reports the weighted correlation between the predicted and actual changes in trade
flows between 2002 and 2015 using (6) in the column titled “Correlation of GTAP with data” (the
last column, “Correlation of LTP with data,” is discussed below). When computing these weighted
correlations, for each importer-exporter pair, industries that report zero trade in either 2002 or 2015
are dropped from the sample (replaced with zeros in (5)). We also exclude, as outliers, U.S. exports
to Chile in the petroleum industry (due to fracking), and Australian exports of cattle meat to the
United States (due to mad cow disease). We explore the sensitivity of these results to the inclusion
of these outliers in the appendix.

19

Table 1: Comparisons of GTAP and LTP predictions
for recent trade liberalizations with data
Correlation
Average
Average
a
Exporter
Importer
of GTAP with
2002 tariffs
2015 tariffs
data
United States Australia
4.47
0.00
0.27
Australia
United States
3.86
0.72
–0.14
United States Chile
6.98
0.00
0.08
Chile
United States
2.83
0.07
0.03
China
Chile
7.00
0.13
0.14
Chile
China
11.68
0.49
0.04
China
New Zealand
4.06
0.04
–0.36
New Zealand China
11.72
0.45
–0.09
Simple average
5.40
0.24
–0.00
a

Correlation
of LTP with
data
0.55
0.53
0.55
0.48
0.61
0.07
0.61
0.48
0.49

Outliers in data excluded: U.S. exports of petroleum to Chile, Australian exports of beef to the United States.

As we can see from Table 1, the weighted correlations between the predicted changes from
the GTAP model counterfactuals and the actual changes in growth are low. A fair question to ask
when evaluating the GTAP framework is whether any alternative models could have been expected
to perform better. As evidence that we should be able to design AGE models that perform better,
we adapt the methodology of Kehoe et al. (2015) to show that including information along only a
single dimension — the share of exports of LTP in total exports of each industry — can lead to
predictions that outperform the AGE models that take into account information on taxes,
production, and IO linkages, yet lack this essential margin.
The motivation behind the use of the share of least traded products to predict the growth
of each industry is the observation of Kehoe & Ruhl (2013) that the products that experience the
most growth following trade reform and growth episodes are the products that were previously
traded, but in small amounts. Kehoe et al. (2015) show that the faster growth of LTP applies
broadly across industries and cannot be explained by greater changes in trade costs. This could,
for instance, indicate that the elasticity of trade flows with respect to changes in trade costs is
greater for LTP compared to non–LTP, a hypothesis motivated by models featuring extensive
margin growth.
To construct the share of LTP in each industry, sijkt , we use the same six-digit HS2002 data
and concordance that we use to construct the actual changes in industry trade for each trade reform.
We define the set of LTP by sorting all the products by their average trade value over 2002−2004,
starting with the products with the smallest average values of trade. For each product, we compute
20

the cumulative value of trade in 2002 of all products with less trade over the 2002−2004 period,
and we classify as the set of LTP the set of goods that accounts for exactly 10 percent of trade in
2002. Sorting over multiple years ensures that we are conservative when we compute the share of
growth due to LTP because goods that experience lumpy trade will not be classified as LTP.
Products that are not traded in 2002 do not enter into the share of LTP, and so the margin we are
focusing on is indeed the set of products that are traded in positive, but very small, amounts. As
Kehoe et al. (2015) show, this methodology is robust to using alternative cutoffs — for example,
5 percent or 20 percent of trade instead of 10 percent — as long as the cutoff is not so small that it
omits much of the margin we want to focus on or so large that it completely dilutes it. Note that,
although the overall share of least traded products is 10 percent of total trade flows by construction,
in any particular industry this share may be more or less than 10 percent because the set of LTP is
computed by ignoring industries.
The hypothesis for our exercise is that the industries that should experience the most
growth are those that are disproportionately composed of LTP. Kehoe et al. (2015) show how the
share of LTP in each industry can be combined with the change in tariffs and the trade elasticity
from a simple gravity regression to construct level predictions for industry-level changes in trade
flows. The predictions constructed using this methodology are linear functions of the share of
LTP in each industry, and are therefore perfectly correlated with the share of LTP in each industry
for each importer-exporter pair. Because we are only interested in the weighted correlations
between predicted and actual changes in industry-level trade flows, we do not need to actually
generate predictions to evaluate how they would perform; the share of LTP in each industry is
sufficient. In the online data appendix, we evaluate the AGE models according to an additional
criterion: the mean absolute percentage error, which requires us to generate the level predictions.
We do this following the work of Kehoe et al. (2015) and we show that our results are robust to
this alternative metric.
The weighted correlations between the share of LTP and actual changes in industry leveltrade are reported under the column titled “Correlation of LTP with data” in Table 1. These
t ,t '
weighted correlations are produced by substituting the share of least traded products, sijkt , for zˆijk

in equations (4)–(6). The LTP predictions outperform the GTAP predictions in terms of matching
actual changes in post-reform trade flows for each of the eight importer-exporter pairs. The GTAP
predictions perform the best for U.S. exports to Chile following the U.S.-Chilean free trade
21

agreement; however, even in this case, they perform worse than the average weighted correlations
between actual changes and the LTP predictions of 0.49, which is much higher than the average
weighted correlation of –0.00 for the GTAP predictions.
The superior performance of the LTP predictions can guide our thinking about what
changes might improve the performance of AGE models. In general, AGE models may fall short
for three broad reasons. The first is that the structure of the model could be incorrect; in other
words, that the Armington specification does not emphasize the relevant dimensions of
substitutability across products or that the IO structure does not accurately account for interindustry linkages. We hypothesize that the shortcomings of AGE models are not inherent and that
their structure is not the primary issue in large part because similar models have been found to
work well in analyzing reforms in other areas of economics such as public finance. The second
potential problem is that the shocks inserted into the models to perform counterfactuals do not
correctly identify the changes in trade costs associated with liberalization. We think that this is
likely a significant issue, because observable trade costs, such as tariffs and freight costs, have
little relationship to the main components of model-implied trade costs. Unfortunately, although
work must be done to better understand how changes in model-implied trade costs can be predicted
ex-ante, our benchmark predictions do not provide insight into how to resolve this issue. The third
potential issue, which our benchmark predictions do address, is that the elasticities could be
estimated incorrectly. Indeed, our results suggest that industries with more LTP are more elastic
— for instance, because of lower marginal marketing costs for firms with smaller market shares,
as theorized by Arkolakis (2010). If this is the case, then industry-level elasticities should differ
across bilateral country pairs, which is not the case in any existing applications of AGE models.
Overall, our results in this section show that the AGE models still commonly used to
predict trade reform likely suffer from the same accuracy problems that plagued the models that
originally performed so poorly for NAFTA. Despite this apparent lack of progress, we hypothesize
that several advances in trade theory over the past 15 years have not yet been fully integrated into
multi-industry AGE models, and these advances have the potential to improve the reliability of
AGE models for policy evaluation. In the sections that follow, we discuss advances in the
theoretical trade literature that are relevant to the shortcomings we identify for AGE models. We
evaluate a state-of-the-art AGE model that embeds some of these advances into its structure and

22

calibration, and we summarize our view of where the literature should focus in the future and the
reasons for our optimism.
5. The Extensive Margin Revolution in International Trade
Although it is not clear why the development of AGE models became less prominent within the
academic literature — we hypothesize that it was due to complacency based on the view that these
models perform well — it is clear that the emergence of detailed datasets on plants and firms in a
number of countries has played a pivotal role in the refocusing of the international trade literature
on firm heterogeneity. Early studies examined firms in Chile (Tybout et al. (1991); Pavcnik
(2002)), Colombia (Roberts & Tybout (1997)), and South Korea (Feenstra et al. (1999)) and were
useful for uncovering many important insights about the role of the firm in international trade.
These and related studies investigated, for instance, how firms make decisions about whether to
export and how firms respond to trade reforms. Furthermore, many patterns were discovered that
helped to guide the theoretical trade literature. For example, even for heavily export-oriented
economies, only a small fraction of firms are exporters. Moreover, firms that export tend to be
larger, tend to employ more educated workers, and tend to be more productive than firms that do
not export.
One of the findings that most directly influenced the development of the theoretical trade
literature is that of extensive margin growth and redistribution of inputs among firms. Specifically,
after a country undergoes a trade liberalization, some of the firms that previously served only the
domestic market begin exporting while others cease production entirely. Hummels & Klenow
(2005) measure the extensive margin for 126 exporting countries and find that it accounts for
approximately 60 percent of the greater exports of larger economies. Hillberry & McDaniel (2002)
find that most of the increase in trade in the United States after NAFTA consists of new varieties
coming from Mexico. Kehoe & Ruhl (2013) consider a product-level decomposition of the
extensive margin and show that large changes in trade are disproportionately driven by growth in
products that are initially traded in small amounts, which is the inspiration for our benchmark
predictions when evaluating the AGE models.
5.1. New Trade Models, New Trade Elasticities
Inspired by these empirical studies of how firms react to trade liberalization, the trade
literature developed theoretical models to help us understand the origins and implications of these
23

newly discovered patterns. The most influential of these new models were the Melitz (2003) model
of firm heterogeneity with monopolistic competition and trade, and the multidimensional Eaton &
Kortum (2002) model of perfect competition and international trade. Arkolakis et al. (2012) show
that these new models — as part of the wider class of gravity models, so named because they
generate trade flows that are consistent with the gravity regressions discussed in Section 3.2 — are
equivalent to the older Armington models in the sense that their welfare predictions depend only
on the trade elasticity and the change in domestic trade shares. Simonovska & Waugh (2014)
show, however, that despite identical predictions for changes in trade flows for a given fixed trade
elasticity and shock to trade costs, the models have different implications for how trade elasticities
should be estimated. Before discussing these new alternative methods, we review how Armington
elasticities were historically estimated for AGE models.
The earliest applications of AGE models often relied on reasonable guesses for trade
elasticities, such as those compiled by Stern et al. (1976). The first attempts to systematically
estimate elasticities relied on estimating partial equilibrium demand systems relating changes in
prices to changes in trade flows — for instance, the stock-adjustment model employed by Shiells
et al. (1986) — and generally delivered estimates in line with the earlier guesses. These early
estimates, however, were often considered to be too low, as they generated what some viewed as
unrealistically large terms of trade effects. As discussed by McDaniel & Balistreri (2003), these
methods for estimating trade elasticties were also inconsistent with the structure of AGE models,
because, for example, they ignored supply-side considerations.
To estimate elasticities consistent with the general equilibrium structure of AGE models,
Hummels (1999) exploits cross-sectional data, rather than relying on time-series data, as earlier
studies did. Hummels estimates trade costs using both data on freight rates and model-implied
estimates from a gravity equation, and then estimates elasticities using variation in imports and
trade costs across countries. This methodology led to higher elasticities than previous studies.
These higher elasticities were replicated in a study by Erkel-Rousse & Mirza (2002), who employ
an instrumental variable approach with time-series data to account for both demand- and supplyside considerations. These studies highlight the importance of estimating elasticities in a method
consistent with the model with which the elasticities were to be used with.
Ruhl (2008) emphasizes the importance of making sure the elasticities correspond to the
shocks being considered in the literature. Ruhl shows that temporary business cycle shocks imply
24

lower elasticities than permanent shocks to trade costs, so one cannot use short-run elasticities to
estimate the impact of trade reforms. Taken together, these and related findings emphasize the
importance of taking seriously the relationships among shocks, elasticities, and the structures of
models.

As users of AGE models became aware of these concerns, they updated their

methodologies for estimating trade elasticities. Hertel et al. (2007) provide estimated elasticities
for the GTAP model by building off the work of Hummels (1999) and exploiting cross-sectional
data on tariffs, trade flows, and other proxies for trade costs. Even with these improvements and
newly estimated elasticities, however, our evaluation of the GTAP models shows that the
performance of the models still has shortcomings.
The new trade models are promising because they bring along with them alternative
interpretations for the trade elasticities. Chaney (2008) shows that the trade elasticity for the Melitz
(2003) model of international trade, where the efficiency distribution across firms is Pareto, is
pinned down by the tail parameter of the Pareto distribution. Similarly, Eaton & Kortum (2002)
show that the trade elasticity in their model is given by the dispersion parameter from a Fréchet
distribution for product-level productivities. These advances are exciting because they create the
possibility of calibrating trade elasticities using methods that do not rely on cross-sectional or timeseries variation in industry-level trade flows and tariffs. That firm- or product-level data can be
useful in calibrating elasticities is supported by our evaluation comparison of the LTP predictions
with those of the GTAP model in the previous section.
In practice, however, elasticity estimates based on these new trade models [e.g., those by
Romalis (2007) and Caliendo & Parro (2015)] are still estimated using industry-level gravity
equations that relate changes in trade flows to changes in tariffs. These estimates often use
sophisticated differencing to avoid requiring data on domestic production and to eliminate the
influence of symmetric trade barriers. As Simonovska & Waugh (2014) point out, however, these
estimates do not depend on the specific structure of the model, and these gravity equations give
equivalent estimates for all gravity estimates (i.e., they likely suffer from the same problems as the
GTAP elasticities). Simonovska & Waugh also show, however, that when micro-level price
variation is combined with data on trade flows, the new trade models imply substantially different
trade elasticities from the earlier Armington models and from each other. For a given trade
elasticity, however, the behavior of the models is similar. This is why the calibration techniques
from these models can be useful for improving the performance of AGE models. Feenstra et al.
25

(2014) further investigate the tension between micro- and macro-estimates of trade elasticities and
find significant differences between the estimates yielded by the two methods for roughly half of
products, even when the estimates are carried out at the same level of disaggregation.
Related to our suggestion that the trade elasticity might depend on the product-level
composition of trade flows, recent studies in the theoretical trade literature have also questioned
the assumption of a constant trade elasticity. Fieler (2011) points out that different products have
different trade elasticities, so the overall trade elasticity should change with the trade composition.
Similarly, Simonovska (2015) examines data from an online retailer and provides evidence of nonhomothetic consumer preferences, implying that a country’s trade elasticity varies with its income
level. Along a similar line, Jung et al. (2015) show that to properly match salient features of the
data, we have to escape from the notion of having a constant trade elasticity. Our hope is that these
insights on nonconstant elasticities will be helpful for figuring out ways to estimate trade
elasticities that differ both by industry and by bilateral-country pair.
5.2. Evaluation of the Caliendo-Parro AGE Model
Although multi-industry, multi-country models featuring IO linkages across industries are
not incompatible with the recent advances in the theoretical trade literature, relatively little work
has been done to merge the two literatures. Recent exceptions are studies by Caliendo & Parro
(2015) (henceforth we refer to their study as CP), Heerman et al. (2015), and Shikher (2012).
These papers embed the framework of Eaton & Kortum (2002) into a multi-industry environment
featuring IO linkages. These studies depart from standard AGE models in that trade costs, as
opposed to variation in preferences or production functions, are the driving factor behind home
bias and expenditure shares. One of the key innovations of CP has to do with their calibration of
trade elasticities, which they are able to estimate at the industry level using asymmetries in tariffs,
trade costs, and trade flows across countries. These elasticities are essential for determining the
counterfactual trade response to changes in trade costs and tariffs and for translating this response
into welfare predictions. A benefit of merging AGE models with the Eaton & Kortum (2002)
framework is that the models deliver recognizable gravity-type equations and transparent
mappings to welfare predictions, which helps circumvent the criticism that AGE models act like
black boxes.

26

One question is whether these new models outperform the standard AGE models, such as
GTAP and the models originally used to predict NAFTA. To answer this question, we can look
at the model predictions from CP, who calibrate their model using pre-NAFTA data on trade flows,
production and IO linkages, and tariffs for the United States, Canada, Mexico, and 28 other
countries. They then use their models to generate counterfactual predictions resulting from tariffs
changing to their post-NAFTA levels. Although the focus of their study is on using their model
to disentangle the welfare implications of NAFTA, we can also evaluate the accuracy of the model
in matching actual changes in trade flows following the implementation of NAFTA.
We repeat the evaluation exercise from Section 4.2, computing the industry-weighted
correlation between changes in observed industry-level trade flows for several variations of the CP
model and for the share of LTP in each industry. Compared with our evaluation of GTAP models,
there are a few changes. The industries used in the CP model differ from the industries defined in
the GTAP. CP have 20 traded and 20 nontraded industries in their model, and we focus on the 20
traded industries, because we are evaluating only the accuracy in predicting changes in trade flows.
CP provide a full description of the industries and a concordance between their industries and twodigit ISIC Rev. 3 industry codes in their paper. To compute actual changes in trade flows, we
download trade data at the six-digit HS1988/1992 level, which we map into two-digit ISIC Rev. 3
industry codes using a concordance from the World Bank’s World Integrated Trade Solution
(WITS) database and then into our final industries using the concordance from CP. Unlike the
GTAP simulations, which produce percentage changes, CP considers changes to be in terms of log
differences (the results are similar regardless of whether log differences or percentage changes are
used; however, we use log differences to be consistent with the original CP framework). Note also
that unlike the GTAP models, CP considers NAFTA as the policy reform when computing their
counterfactuals. Therefore, instead of setting up and solving an equivalent model, we are able to
use the predicted changes generated by their own code, available in their data appendix (details in
our own online data appendix).
To evaluate how well the CP predictions perform, we now compute actual changes in
t ,t '
exports, zijk
, from country i to country j for each industry k between t = 1991 and t ' = 2006

using the log approximation of equation (2):





t ,t '
t'
zijk
 100  log  xijk
  log  xijkt  ,

27

(7)

t
where xijk
is exports from country i to country j in industry k in period t , reported in current

price USD. We provide an appendix that shows that our results are robust to calculated changes
in exports using either method and to excluding or including outliers. For the least traded exercise,
the share of LTP in each industry is computed in the same way as in Section 4.2, where, for each
importer-exporter pair, we sort products by their average trade value between 1991 and 1993 and
then count products as least traded until they cumulatively account for exactly 10 percent of trade
in 1991.
We report the results of these exercises in Table 2. The column titled “CP correlation with
data” refers to the weighted correlation between actual changes in trade flows and the predicted
changes of the full CP model, taking into account all tariff changes prior to 2006. This is computed
using equations (4)–(6), with the predicted changes for each industry taken from CP and the actual
changes computed using (7). The column titled “LTP correlation with data” provides the same
comparison benchmark of the weighted correlation between actual changes in trade flows and the
share of LTP in any industry, which we compute following the same methodology as we did for
Table 1.
So does the CP framework outperform standard AGE models? The answer is: It depends.
The average correlation across country pairs is near zero and slightly lower than the GTAP
correlations in Table 1; therefore, it may appear that there are little to no gains from incorporating
recent advances into AGE models. In contrast to the GTAP results in Table 1, however, the CP
framework outperforms the LTP methodology for half of the country pairs, whereas the GTAP
framework is uniformly beaten by the LTP methodology. Similarly, the correlations between
actual and CP predicted exports from the United States to Canada and Mexico are high and
significantly higher than any of the correlations between actual changes and predicted changes for
the GTAP model. This can be regarded as a partial success of the CP framework and the
improvements that are possible when incorporating insights from the new trade models. Although
it may initially appear unfair to compare the accuracy of the CP predictions, which take into
account all tariff changes, with the GTAP predictions, which take into account only changes in
tariffs between the member countries of the free trade agreement, CP also computes
counterfactuals taking into account only NAFTA tariff changes. The column titled “CP correlation
with data (only NAFTA tariffs)” in Table 2 shows that the results are nearly unchanged if tariff
changes in non-NAFTA countries are disregarded.
28

Table 2: Comparisons of CP and LTP predictions for NAFTA with data
Exporter

CP
CP correlation
CP correlation
correlation
with data
with data
with data (only NAFTA tariffs) (no IO structure)
Mexico
−0.46
−0.46
−0.50
United States
0.36
0.32
0.36
Canada
−0.68
−0.66
−0.71
United States
−0.17
−0.12
−0.21
Canada
0.35
0.05
0.14
Mexico
0.54
0.53
0.64
−0.01
−0.06
−0.05

Importer

Canada
Canada
Mexico
Mexico
United States
United States
Simple average

LTP
correlation
with data
0.27
0.19
0.83
0.33
0.28
0.16
0.33

Although the CP model shows considerable success for some country pairs, it also shows
considerable failure in producing accurate predictions for trade between other country pairs,
particularly trade between Canada and Mexico. Why does their model perform so poorly in these
cases? We hypothesize that it is because the CP methodology lacks the LTP margin. Caliendo &
Parro (2015) calibrate the crucial Fréchet parameters in their model using the same methodology
— one that relies on an industry-level gravity equation, albeit in a novel form — that other
researchers use to calibrate Armington elasticities. In other words, they do not exploit the features
that make their model different from an Armington model like the GTAP model. We should stress
that the extensive margin at the firm level in the Eaton-Kortum (2002) and Melitz (2003) models
as they are usually parameterized has little or nothing to do with the extensive margin at the
product-level studied by Kehoe et al. (2015).
To understand this point, note that trade between Canada and Mexico is exactly where the
LTP methodology performs best. Indeed, we find that, for exports from Mexico to Canada, LTP
grew by 206.0 percent more than GDP between 1992 and 2006, whereas non–LTP grew only 55.8
percent. Why do least traded products grow so much more than non–least traded products? The
baseline models of Eaton & Kortum (2002) and Melitz (2003) are incapable of reproducing this
observation, at least as they are usually parameterized. One model that is capable of capturing the
Kehoe & Ruhl (2013) extensive margin is that of Arkolakis (2010), in which acquiring new
customers is costly, and nonlinear marketing costs can explain why small firms grow faster than
large firms. Potentially in agreement with this theory, Ruhl & Willis (forthcoming) show that
exporters tend to start small and grow over time, whereas Schmeiser (2012) shows that the
expansion of exporters to new markets occurs slowly.

29

The column titled “CP correlation with data (no IO structure)” in Table 2 reports the
weighted correlation between actual changes in trade flows and the counterfactuals Caliendo &
Parro (2015) produce using their framework for NAFTA tariff changes only and discarding the
input-output structure of their model. It is disconcerting that the CP framework performs nearly
identically (and actually slightly better on average) when the IO structure of the model is left out.
Above, we argue that taking into account linkages across industries is essential if we want to
understand the industry-level impact of trade reforms. The fact that the IO structure does not
improve the performance of the CP model in general suggests that economists need to think more
carefully about the way in which input-output relationships are being built into AGE trade models
and to what extent these issues could be resolved with elasticity estimates that vary bilaterally.
Overall, the results in Table 2 suggest that merging recent trade advances with AGE models
shows promise in improving the performance of these models but that further improvements are
needed. Some of these improvements may be relatively easy to attain, for example, calibrating
elasticities in a way that delivers different estimates for different model structures, as do
Simonovska & Waugh (2014). The fact that the LTP methodology performs best precisely when
the CP model performs worse and vice versa hints at a likely pathway for improvement. Although
further research will need to confirm whether comparable findings hold for other trade
liberalizations, the fact that the LTP methodology performs better on average than the CP model
and uniformly outperforms the GTAP models in Section 4.2 suggests that the gains from
incorporating the LTP margin in AGE models are potentially large. Our benchmark predictions
suggest that estimating industry-level elasticities that are country-pair specific and depend on the
product composition of industries within each country is a promising avenue for future research.
6. Quantifying the Gains from Trade and Future Directions for AGE Models
As Shoven & Whalley (1984) put it, AGE models aim “to convert the Walrasian generalequilibrium structure […] from an abstract representation of an economy into realistic models of
actual economies” to “use these models to evaluate policy options by specifying production and
demand parameters and incorporating data reflective of real economies.” Ultimately, AGE models
are used to help researchers communicate the welfare implications of policy reforms. As we
mention above, one of the biggest breakthroughs in the recent trade literature is the formula derived
by Arkolakis et al. (2012) — which we refer to as the ACR formula — for computing welfare
gains from trade. They show that for a wide class of models, capturing the welfare impact of a
30

trade reform requires only the change in trade that the reform produces and the trade elasticity.
The basic formula derived in their study is

ŵ  ˆ1/ ,

(8)

where ̂ is the change in domestic expenditure share (or self-trade share) produced by the reform,

 is the trade elasticity (the degree to which imports respond to changes in trade costs), and ŵ is
the resulting change in welfare implied by this class of models.
This result has been widely used in recent studies because it allows for changes in welfare
to be computed easily, especially when comparing gains from moving away from autarky when
the self-trade share is one.

Costinot & Rodríguez-Clare (2014) use the ACR formula to

quantitatively evaluate the welfare implications of globalization. Relevant to evaluations of
NAFTA, this basic formula computes changes in welfare resulting from changes in iceberg trade
costs rather than in tariffs. Felbermayr et al. (2015) argue that this distinction has welfare
implications because tariff revenue is redistributed back to consumers. Goldberg & Pavcnik
(2016) further point out that, although tariffs are now relatively low for most of the world, there is
significant room for trade policy to address trade costs associated with nontariff barriers that may
more closely resemble iceberg trade costs. The insights from the ACR formula have also been
expanded, for instance, by Adao et al. (2015), who show how welfare gains from trade can be
measured in the absence of parametric specifications of functional forms, and by Brooks & Pujolàs
(2014), who develop a generalized version of the ACR formula for demand systems featuring a
nonconstant trade elasticity. Even before these developments, however, the literature was shifting
away from using AGE models to evaluate the gains from trade, as evidenced by Alvarez & Lucas
(2007), who study the welfare implications of the Eaton & Kortum (2002) model.
Why, then, do we still need multi-industry AGE models? First, many policy questions are
concern more than just simple welfare or changes in overall trade flows. Second, even if we were
only interested in welfare, and the models were able to correctly forecast changes in aggregate
bilateral trade, the composition of that trade matters for welfare gains because the aggregate trade
elasticity depends on the industry-level composition of trade. Ossa (2015) shows that accounting
for differences in elasticities across industries greatly increases estimates for welfare gains of trade
compared with single-sector models that do not differentiate between industries. Countries
experience large welfare gains from importing goods in low-elasticity industries, such as
31

automobiles, in which they are not efficient at producing domestically. French (2016) further
shows how the pattern of comparative advantage across industries affects welfare gains as well as
the aggregate impact of trade barriers, the insight being that multi-industry models are needed even
if the goal is only to capture changes in aggregate trade flows and not in welfare or disaggregated
trade flows.
Another distinguishing feature of AGE models is their focus on the IO structure of
economies. Taking the IO structure into account is essential for understanding the nature and
impact of trade flows because trade in intermediate goods makes up a large fraction of international
trade. As Yi (2003) and Ramanarayanan (2012) show, the impact of tariffs and other trade barriers
is amplified when there is trade in intermediate goods, as the trade costs apply both directly to
trade in final goods and indirectly through their embodied impact on intermediate goods. This
result is similar to the concept of double marginalization in the industrial organization literature.
Although trade in intermediate goods can be accounted for in single-sector models, as it is by
Eaton & Kortum (2002), incorporating IO linkages allows for the richer interactions that are
necessary to capture how tariff reductions in one industry affect trade and production in other
industries. In addition, the studies mentioned in this section suggest that AGE features, such as
IO linkages across industries and industry-level elasticity estimates, are undoubtedly important to
the welfare implications of trade.
Before concluding this study, it is important to bring attention to the fact that, as is the case
in much of the literature, our focus is on static AGE models. Although the focus of this paper is
therefore relatively narrow, the use of dynamic AGE models in policy-related applications (e.g.,
Diao et al. (1998), Ianchovichina (2012)) has increased. Despite this progress, however, many
features and implications of dynamic trade models have also yet to be fully explored in AGE
settings.
The potential impact of building dynamics into trade models is often nontrivial. As Bajona
& Kehoe (2010) show, a standard trade model such as the Heckscher-Ohlin model, when built into
a dynamic framework, implies that standard results in closed-economy dynamic models, such as
long-run convergence of income, disappear. Baldwin (1992) and Anderson et al. (2015) show that
there are large dynamic gains from trade because it encourages capital accumulation and human
capital accumulation. Building on this argument, Brooks & Pujolàs (2016) show that gains from
trade driven by capital accumulation can be large, even though, in the transition, they are
32

potentially negative. Studying the impact that trade reforms have on the creation of new firms,
Alessandria et al. (2014) and Alessandria & Choi (2015) show that gains during the transition can
be even larger. Although we need to first fix the problems with static AGE models, incorporating
these features about dynamics into AGE models should eventually provide us with better estimates
of the impact of trade liberalization.
7. Final Remarks
Throughout this paper, we have highlighted shortcomings of AGE models that must be
addressed if they are to continue to be used to evaluate the impact of a trade reform. We conclude
with some conjectures about the best path for research going forward.

First, despite the

performance issues we identify with AGE models, they are still the only models currently being
used that address the industry-level impact of changes in trade policy. We conjecture that, when
these shortcomings are addressed, they will remain the tool of choice for evaluating trade policy.
The issues we identify primarily have to do with important elements that are missing from AGE
models, such as the increased growth from LTP and not incorporating more nuanced measures of
gains from trade. The solution, therefore, should be to improve AGE models by embedding these
elements, not to shift to alternative methodologies that throw away the important features AGE
models have already successfully included. For instance, although our benchmark LTP predictions
were useful in showing the potential gains from introducing the LTP margin into AGE models,
they cannot legitimately be used to inform policy makers because they lack essential elements and
cannot, for example, be used to inform on how trade will affect wages, the impact of linkages
across industries, and spillover effects to countries not included in the liberalization.
Instead of encouraging disillusionment with AGE models, our goal is to spur their
improvement. For example, it appears likely that AGE models can be improved by embedding
the LTP margin. One of the possible methods for doing so could be to introduce a marketing cost
on firms, in the spirit of Arkolakis (2010), where firms have the potential to grow quickly after
entering markets through additional marketing that leads more consumers to become aware of their
products. In this model, the LTP margin appears naturally as the marketing costs necessary to
reach an additional consumer increase because fewer consumers remain unaware of the firm’s
product. We find it likely that there are other avenues by which the LTP margin can emerge as
well. The next step, therefore, is to find them and evaluate which ones perform best at matching
the observed patterns in the data. By repeating this process of identifying shortcomings and
33

addressing them, we expect that researchers will be able to deliver a new generation of AGE
models that are better able to predict the industry impact of trade reforms.
Although we are optimistic about the future of AGE models, it is also important to
comment on the past and present. Readers should not conclude from our results that, because AGE
models do not accurately predict which industries will grow the most and the least following trade
reforms, economists are ill informed on the welfare impact of trade. On the contrary, the
overwhelming consensus is that the welfare gains from trade are positive: Free trade reduces the
prices that consumers face, increases the varieties available, and expands the sales of productive
firms. Even in cases in which trade does not increase GDP, it can still be expected to increase
welfare (Kehoe & Ruhl (2010)). In fact, standard AGE models of trade are likely too conservative
on the predicted welfare gains from liberalization. To illustrate this, we calculate the additional
trade that occurred for each of the countries in our exercises because of the higher growth rates of
LTP. For the country pairs we used in our evaluation of the GTAP predictions, we find that, on
average, overall bilateral trade flows grew 18.9 percent more than they would have if LTP goods
had grown at the rates of non-LTP. For NAFTA countries, the number is even higher, with an
average increase of 27.2 percent. These results indicate that a model that is unable to capture the
LTP margin is likely to underestimate the increase in welfare gains from trade resulting from a
trade liberalization. This means, of course, that a substantial part of the benefit from trade
agreements — for example, the gains from NAFTA for the United States — has occurred in
industries in which such gains were not expected or predicted when the liberalizations were
implemented. Given the frequent disconnect between economists and laypeople on the impact of
trade policy, it is necessary for us to clearly and correctly identify and communicate the gains from
trade to policy makers and society. Improving AGE models will allow economists to do this.

34

Literature Cited
Adao R, Costinot A, Donaldson D. 2015. Nonparametric counterfactual predictions in
neoclassical models of international trade. NBER Work. Pap. 21401
Alessandria G, Choi H. 2015. The dynamics of the trade balance and the real exchange rate: the
J curve and trade costs? SED 2015 Meet. Pap. 1413
Alessandria G, Choi H, Ruhl KJ. 2014. Trade adjustment dynamics and the welfare gains from
trade. NBER Work. Pap. 20663
Allayannis G, Ofek E. 2001. Exchange rate exposure, hedging, and the use of foreign currency
derivatives. J. Int. Money Finance 20:273–96
Allen T. 2014. Information frictions in trade. Econometrica 82:2041–83
Alvarez F, Lucas Jr. RE. 2007. General equilibrium analysis of the Eaton–Kortum model of
international trade. J. Monet. Econ. 54:1726–68
Anderson JE, Larch M, Yotov YV. 2015. Growth and trade with frictions: a structural estimation
framework. NBER Work. Pap. 21377
Anderson JE, van Wincoop E. 2003. Gravity with gravitas: a solution to the border puzzle. Am.
Econ. Rev. 93:170–92
Anderson JE, van Wincoop E. 2004. Trade costs. J. Econ. Lit. 42:691–751
Arkolakis C. 2010. Market penetration costs and the new consumers margin in international trade.
J. Polit. Econ. 118:1151–99
Arkolakis C, Costinot A, Rodríguez-clare A. 2012. New trade models, same old gains? Am. Econ.
Rev. 102:94–130
Armington PS. 1969. A theory of demand for products distinguished by place of production. IMF
Staff Pap. 16:159–78
Asturias J. 2016. Endogenous transportation costs. Work. Pap., Georgetown Univ.
Bagwell K, Staiger RW. 1999. An economic theory of GATT. Am. Econ. Rev. 89:215–48
Baier SL, Bergstrand JH. 2007. Do free trade agreements actually increase members’ international
trade? J. Int. Econ. 71:72–95
Bajona C, Kehoe TJ. 2010. Trade, growth, and convergence in a dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin model.
Rev. Econ. Dyn. 13:487–513
Baldwin RE. 1992. Measurable dynamic gains from trade. J. Polit. Econ. 100:162–74

35

Böhringer C, Löschel A. 2006. Computable general equilibrium models for sustainability impact
assessment: status quo and prospects. Ecol. Econ. 60:49–64
Broda C, Limao N, Weinstein DE. 2008. Optimal tariffs and market power: the evidence. Am.
Econ. Rev. 98:2032–65
Brooks WJ, Pujolàs PS. 2014. Nonlinear gravity. McMaster Univ. Work. Pap. 2014-15
Brooks WJ, Pujolàs PS. 2016. Capital accumulation and the welfare gains from trade. McMaster
Univ. Work. Pap. 2016-03
Brown DK, Deardorff AV, Stern RM. 1992. A North American free trade agreement: analytical
issues and a computational assessment. World Econ. 15:11–30
Brown DK, Stern RM. 1989. U.S.-Canada bilateral tariff elimination: the role of product
differentiation and market structure. In Trade Policies for International Competitiveness,
ed. RC Feenstra, pp. 217–54. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Burfisher ME, Dyck J, Meade B, Mitchell L, Wainio JT, et al. 2014. Agriculture in the TransPacific Partnership. USDA-ERS ERR 176
Burfisher ME, Robinson S, Thierfelder K. 2001. The impact of NAFTA on the United States. J.
Econ. Perspect. 15:125–44
Burniaux J-M, Truong TP. 2002. GTAP-E: an energy-environmental version of the GTAP model.
GTAP Tech. Pap. 16
Caliendo L, Parro F. 2015. Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of NAFTA. Rev. Econ. Stud.
82:1–44
Chaney T. 2008. Distorted gravity: the intensive and extensive margins of international trade. Am.
Econ. Rev. 98:1707–21
Comerford D, Rodriguez-Mora JV. 2015. The gains from economic integration. SED 2015 Meet.
Pap. 569
Corsetti G, Martin P, Pesenti P. 2007. Productivity, terms of trade and the “home market effect.”
J. Int. Econ. 73:99–127
Costinot A, Donaldson D, Vogel J, Werning I. 2015. Comparative advantage and optimal trade
policy. Q. J. Econ. 130:659–702
Costinot A, Rodríguez-Clare A. 2014. Trade theory with numbers: quantifying the consequences
of globalization. In Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, ed. E Helpman, K
Rogoff, G Gopinath, pp. 197–261. Elsevier
36

Cox D, Harris RG. 1992. North American free trade and its implications for Canada: results from
a CGE model of North American trade. World Econ. 15:31–44
Dean JM, Signoret JE, Feinberg RM, Ludema RD, Ferrantino MJ. 2009. Estimating the price
effects of non-tariff barriers. BE J. Econ. Anal. Policy 9.
Dekle R, Eaton J, Kortum S. 2008. Global rebalancing with gravity: measuring the burden of
adjustment. IMF Staff Pap. 55:511–40
Demidova S, Rodriguez-Clare A. 2009. Trade policy under firm-level heterogeneity in a small
economy. J. Int. Econ. 78:100–112
Dervis K, de Melo J, Robinson S. 1982. General equilibrium models for development policy.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press
Diao X, Roe TL, Yeldan E. 1998. A simple dynamic applied general equilibrium model of a small
open economy: transitional dynamics and trade policy. J. Econ. Dev. 23:77–101
Dixit AK, Stiglitz JE. 1977. Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity. Am. Econ.
Rev. 67:297–308
Donaldson D. 2015. The gains from market integration. Annu. Rev. Econ. 7:619–47
Donaldson D. Forthcoming. Railroads of the Raj: estimating the impact of transportation
infrastructure. Am. Econ. Rev.
Eaton J, Kortum S. 2002. Technology, geography, and trade. Econometrica 70:1741–79
Egger P. 2000. A note on the proper econometric specification of the gravity equation. Econ. Lett.
66:25–31
Erkel-Rousse H, Mirza D. 2002. Import price elasticities: reconsidering the evidence. Can. J.
Econ. 35:282–306
Estevadeordal A, Frantz B, Taylor AM. 2003. The rise and fall of world trade, 1870–1939. Q. J.
Econ. 118:359–407
Feenstra RC, Luck PA, Obstfeld M, Russ KN. 2014. In search of the Armington elasticity. NBER
Work. Pap. 20063
Feenstra RC, Yang T-H, Hamilton GG. 1999. Business groups and product variety in trade:
evidence from South Korea, Taiwan and Japan. J. Int. Econ. 48:71–100
Felbermayr G, Jung B, Larch M. 2015. The welfare consequences of import tariffs: a quantitative
perspective. J. Int. Econ. 97:295–309

37

Fieler AC. 2011. Nonhomotheticity and bilateral trade: evidence and a quantitative explanation.
Econometrica. 79:1069–1101
Fox AK. 1999. Evaluating the success of a CGE model of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement.
Unpublished Manuscript, Univ. Michigan
French S. 2016. The composition of trade flows and the aggregate effects of trade barriers. J. Int.
Econ. 98:114–37
Goldberg PK, Pavcnik N. 2016. The effects of trade policy. NBER Work. Pap. 21957
Grossman GM, Krueger AB. 1994. Environmental impacts of a North American Free Trade
Agreement. In The Mexico-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, ed. PM Garber, pp. 13–56.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Grubel HG, Lloyd PJ. 1971. The empirical measurement of intra-industry trade. Econ. Rec.
47:494–517
Hanson GH, Xiang C. 2004. The home-market effect and bilateral trade patterns. Am. Econ. Rev.
94:1108–29
Harris R. 1984. Applied general equilibrium analysis of small open economies with scale
economies and imperfect competition. Am. Econ. Rev. 74:1016–32
Hazilla M, Kopp RJ. 1990. Social cost of environmental quality regulations: a general equilibrium
analysis. J. Polit. Econ. 98:853–73
Head K, Mayer T. 2014. Gravity equations: workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook. In Handbook of
International Economics, Vol. 4, ed. G Gopinath, E Helpman, K Rogoff, pp. 131–95.
Amsterdam: Elsevier
Head K, Mayer T, Ries J. 2010. The erosion of colonial trade linkages after independence. J. Int.
Econ. 81:1–14
Heerman KER, Arita S, Gopinath M. 2015. Asia-Pacific integration with China versus the United
States: examining trade patterns under heterogeneous agricultural sectors. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 97:1324–44
Hertel T. 2013. Global applied general equilibrium analysis using the global trade analysis project
framework. In Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling, Vol. 1, ed. PB
Dixon, D Jorgenson, pp. 815–76. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Hertel T, Hummels D, Ivanic M, Keeney R. 2007. How confident can we be of CGE-based
assessments of free trade agreements? Econ. Model. 24:611–35
38

Hillberry RH, McDaniel CA. 2002. A decomposition of North American trade growth since
NAFTA. Int. Econ. Rev. USITC Pub. No. 3527:1–6
Hummels D. 1999. Toward a geography of trade costs. 1162, Center for Global Trade Analysis,
Department of Agricultural Economics, Purdue University
Hummels D, Klenow PJ. 2005. The variety and quality of a nation’s exports. Am. Econ. Rev.
95:704–23
Hummels D, Lugovskyy V, Skiba A. 2009. The trade reducing effects of market power in
international shipping. J. Dev. Econ. 89:84–97
Hummels DL, Schaur G. 2013. Time as a trade barrier. Am. Econ. Rev. 103:2935–59
Ianchovichina E. 2012. Dynamic modeling and applications for global economic analysis.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press
Irarrazabal A, Moxnes A, Opromolla LD. 2015. The tip of the iceberg: a quantitative framework
for estimating trade costs. Rev. Econ. Stat. 97:777–92
Jacks DS, Meissner CM, Novy D. 2008. Trade costs, 1870–2000. Am. Econ. Rev. 98:529–34
Jacks DS, Meissner CM, Novy D. 2011. Trade booms, trade busts, and trade costs. J. Int. Econ.
83:185–201
Jung JW, Simonovska I, Weinberger A. 2015. Exporter heterogeneity and price discrimination: a
quantitative view. NBER Work. Pap. 21408
Kehoe PJ, Kehoe TJ. 1994a. A primer on static applied general equilibrium models. Fed. Reserve
Bank Minneap. Q. Rev. 18:2–16
Kehoe PJ, Kehoe TJ. 1994b. Capturing NAFTA’s impact with applied general equilibrium models.
Fed. Reserve Bank Minneap. Q. Rev. 18:17–34
Kehoe TJ. 2005. An evaluation of the performance of applied general equilibrium models on the
impact of NAFTA. In Frontiers in Applied General Equilibrium Modeling, ed. TJ Kehoe,
TN Srinivasan, J Whalley, pp. 341–77. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press
Kehoe TJ, Noyola PJ, Manresa A, Polo C, Sancho F. 1988. A general equilibrium analysis of the
1986 tax reform in Spain. Eur. Econ. Rev. 32:334–42
Kehoe TJ, Polo C, Sancho F. 1995. An evaluation of the performance of an applied general
equilibrium model of the Spanish economy. Econ. Theory 6:115–41
Kehoe TJ, Prescott EC. 1995. Introduction to the symposium: the discipline of applied general
equilibrium. Econ. Theory 6:1–11
39

Kehoe TJ, Rossbach J, Ruhl KJ. 2015. Using the new products margin to predict the industry-level
impact of trade reform. J. Int. Econ. 96:289–97
Kehoe TJ, Ruhl KJ. 2010. Why have economic reforms in Mexico not generated growth? J. Econ.
Lit. 48:1005–27
Kehoe TJ, Ruhl KJ. 2013. How important is the new goods margin in international trade? J. Polit.
Econ. 121:358–92
Kehoe TJ, Ruhl KJ, Steinberg JB. 2013. Global imbalances and structural change in the United
States. 19339, NBER Work. Pap. 19339
Kleinert J, Spies J. 2011. Endogenous transport costs in international trade. IAW Disc. Pap. 74
Kohn D, Leibovici F, Szkup M. 2016. Financial frictions and new exporter dynamics. Int. Econ.
Rev. 57:453–86
Krugman P. 1980. Scale economies, product differentiation, and the pattern of trade. Am. Econ.
Rev. 70:950–59
Leibovici F. 2015. Financial development and international trade. York Univ. Work. Pap. 2015–
3
Li C, Whalley J. 2014. China and the Trans-Pacific Partnership: a numerical simulation assessment
of the effects involved. World Econ. 37:169–92
Limão N, Venables AJ. 2001. Infrastructure, geographical disadvantage, transport costs, and trade.
World Bank Econ. Rev. 15:451–79
Maggi G, Rodríguez-Clare A. 2007. A political-economy theory of trade agreements. Am. Econ.
Rev. 97:1374–1406
Manova K. 2013. Credit constraints, heterogeneous firms, and international trade. Rev. Econ. Stud.
80:711–44
Markusen JR, Hunter L, Rutherford TF. 1995. Trade liberalization in a multinational-dominated
industry. J. Int. Econ. 38:95–117
McCallum J. 1995. National borders matter: Canada-U.S. regional trade patterns. Am. Econ. Rev.
85:615–23
McDaniel CA, Balistreri EJ. 2003. A review of Armington trade substitution elasticities. Econ.
Int. 23:301–13
McKitrick RR. 1998. The econometric critique of computable general equilibrium modeling: the
role of functional forms. Econ. Model. 15:543–73
40

Melitz MJ. 2003. The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
productivity. Econometrica 71:1695–1725
Narayanan GB, Ciuriak D, Singh HV. 2016. Quantifying the mega-regional trade agreements: a
review of the models. In TPP and India: Implications of Mega-Regionals for Developing
Economies, ed. HV Singh, pp. 93–131. New Delhi, India: Wisdom Tree
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and China Ministry of Commerce. 2004. A
joint study report on a free trade agreement between China and New Zealand
Obstfeld M, Rogoff K. 2001. The six major puzzles in international macroeconomics: is there a
common cause? In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Vol. 15, ed. BS Bernanke, K
Rogoff, pp. 339–412. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Opp MM. 2010. Tariff wars in the Ricardian model with a continuum of goods. J. Int. Econ.
80:212–25
Ossa R. 2015. Why trade matters after all. J. Int. Econ. 97:266–77
Ottaviano G, Pessoa JP, Sampson T, van Reenen J. 2014. The costs and benefits of leaving the EU.
CFS Work. Pap. 472
Pavcnik N. 2002. Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: evidence from
Chilean plants. Rev. Econ. Stud. 69:245–76
Peterson EB, Schleich J, Duscha V. 2011. Environmental and economic effects of the Copenhagen
pledges and more ambitious emission reduction targets. Energy Policy 39:3697–3708
Ramanarayanan A. 2012. Imported inputs and the gains from trade. SED 2012 Meet. Pap. 612
Roberts MJ, Tybout JR. 1997. The decision to export in Colombia: an empirical model of entry
with sunk costs. Am. Econ. Rev. 87:545–64
Romalis J. 2007. NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s impact on international trade. Rev. Econ. Stat. 89:416–
35
Ruhl KJ. 2008. The international elasticity puzzle. Work. Pap., Penn State Univ.
Ruhl KJ, Willis JL. Forthcoming. New exporter dynamics. Int. Econ. Rev.
Samuelson PA. 1954. The transfer problem and transport costs, ii: analysis of effects of trade
impediments. Econ. J. 64:264–89
Santos Silva JMC, Tenreyro S. 2006. The log of gravity. Rev. Econ. Stat. 88:641–58
Schmeiser KN. 2012. Learning to export: export growth and the destination decision of firms. J.
Int. Econ. 87:89–97
41

Shapiro JS. 2016. Trade costs, CO2, and the environment. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy. 8:220–54
Shiells CR, Stern RM, Deardorff AV. 1986. Estimates of the elasticities of substitution between
imports and home goods for the United States. Weltwirtschaftliches Arch. 122:497–519
Shikher S. 2012. Predicting the effects of NAFTA: now we can do it better! J. Int. Glob. Econ.
Stud. 5:32–59
Shoven JB, Whalley J. 1984. Applied general-equilibrium models of taxation and international
trade: an introduction and survey. J. Econ. Lit. 22:1007–51
Shoven JB, Whalley J. 1992. Applying general equilibrium. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press
Simonovska I. 2015. Income differences and prices of tradables: insights from an online retailer.
Rev. Econ. Stud. 82:1612–56
Simonovska I, Waugh ME. 2014. Trade models, trade elasticities, and the gains from trade. NBER
Work. Pap. 20495
Smith A, Venables AJ. 1988. Completing the internal market in the European community: some
industry simulations. Eur. Econ. Rev. 32:1501–25
Sobarzo HE. 1995. A general equilibrium analysis of the gains from NAFTA for the Mexican
economy. In Modeling North American Economic Integration, ed. PJ Kehoe, TJ Kehoe,
pp. 91–115. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Stern RM, Francis J, Schumacher B. 1976. Price elasticities in international trade: an annotated
bibliography. Macmillan for the Trade Policy Research Centre
Timmer MP, Dietzenbacher E, Los B, Stehrer R, de Vries GJ. 2015. An illustrated user guide to
the World Input–Output Database: the case of global automotive production. Rev. Int.
Econ. 23:575–605
Trefler D. 2004. The long and short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement. Am. Econ. Rev.
94:870–95
Tybout J, de Melo J, Corbo V. 1991. The effects of trade reforms on scale and technical efficiency:
new evidence from Chile. J. Int. Econ. 31:231–50
US International Trade Commission. 2003. U.S.-Chile Free Trade Agreement: potential economywide and selected sectoral effects. USITC Pub. 3605
Waugh ME. 2010. International trade and income differences. Am. Econ. Rev. 100:2093–2124

42

Whalley J. 1985. Trade liberalization among major world trading areas. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press
Wolf HC. 2000. Intranational home bias in trade. Rev. Econ. Stat. 82:555–63
Yi K-M. 2003. Can vertical specialization explain the growth of world trade? J. Polit. Econ.
111:52–102
Yi K-M. 2010. Can multistage production explain the home bias in trade? Am. Econ. Rev. 100:364–
93

43

A. Appendix
The following is a selection from our online appendix, which explores the robustness of our results.
A.1. Log Differences versus Percentage Changes
When evaluating the accuracy of the GTAP predictions in Table 1, we define growth in terms of
percentage changes. When evaluating the accuracy of the CP predictions in Table 2, we define
growth in terms of log differences. We choose to use a different definition for growth between the
two tables for two reasons. First, we choose each definition to be consistent with the definition
used by the original studies. GTAP studies use percentage changes, whereas CP uses log
differences. Second, the choice shows that the overall shortcomings of AGE models do not depend
on exactly how we define growth (percentage changes or log differences).
To explore the robustness of our results, we show that Tables 1 and 2 are similar overall
when the definitions of growth are switched between them. Note that we can move between
percentage changes and log differences with the following equations:

 percentage change 
log diff  100*log 
 1 ,
100



( .9)


 log diff  
percentage change  100*  exp 
  1 .
 100  


( .10)

Tables A.1 and A.2 show the results of this exercise.
Table A.1: Comparisons of GTAP and LTP predictions of recent trade
liberalizations with data (log differences)
GTAP
LTP
Exporter
Importer
correlation correlation
with data
with data
United States
Australia
0.63
0.49
Australia
United States
–0.18
0.45
United States
Chile
0.32
0.56
Chile
United States
0.15
0.44
China
Chile
0.51
0.78
Chile
China
–0.09
–0.08
China
New Zealand
–0.38
0.56
New Zealand
China
–0.17
0.30
Simple average
0.10
0.44
Overall, the LTP correlation in Table A.1 stays almost the same as that in Table 1. The
biggest changes are that GTAP appears to perform better for Chinese exports to Chile and for U.S.
44

exports to Australia when expressed in log differences, whereas Chilean exports to China perform
worse. Overall, the average LTP correlation is similar across the two tables (0.44 in Table A.1
compared with 0.49 in Table 1). The average GTAP correlation is slightly higher with log
differences (0.10 compared with –0.00). It still performs significantly worse than the LTP
methodology with both definitions, however.
Table A.2: Comparisons of CP and LTP predictions of
NAFTA with data (percentage changes)
CP
LTP
Exporter
Importer
correlation correlation
with data
with data
Canada
Mexico
−0.47
0.34
Canada
United States
0.63
0.05
Mexico
Canada
−0.46
0.76
Mexico
United States
−0.11
0.14
United States
Canada
0.38
0.20
United States
Mexico
0.96
−0.02
Simple average
0.16
0.28
The results in Table A.2 are similar to those in Table 2, with the LTP methodology
outperforming the CP predictions. By far the biggest change is for U.S. exports to Mexico, which
exhibit a negative correlation for LTP and a near perfect correlation for CP. This result is driven
entirely by growth in exports in the petroleum industry, which grew by over 1500 percent between
1991 and 2006 (the second highest growth was in chemicals, which grew by 200 percent). Despite
this huge growth, petroleum exports actually grew less than predicted. The CP model predicted
an increase in growth of nearly 3000 percent (the second highest predicted growth was in electrical
machinery, at nearly 200 percent). The CP model predicts this large increase because of a much
higher estimated trade elasticity for the petroleum industry than for any other industry (over 50;
no other industry was over 20). If the petroleum industry is dropped when evaluating the
performance of each methodology, then the results are as shown in Table A.3.

45

Table A.3: Comparisons of CP and LTP predictions of NAFTA with data
(percentage changes, U.S. petroleum exports to Mexico excluded)
CP
LTP
Exporter
Importer
correlation correlation
with data
with data
Canada
Mexico
−0.47
0.34
Canada
United States
0.63
0.05
Mexico
Canada
−0.46
0.76
Mexico
United States
−0.11
0.14
United States Canada
0.38
0.20
United States Mexico
−0.37
0.45
Simple average
−0.06
0.35
As we can see, simply excluding the petroleum industry changes the correlation between
the predictions of the CP model and actual growth for U.S. exports to Mexico from 0.96 to −0.37.
One of the effects of log differences is that it lessens the overall influence of extreme growth rates
for individual industries compared with using percentage changes.
A.2. Effects of Outlier Observations
When evaluating the GTAP predictions, we have excluded two industries: oil exports from the
United States to Chile and cattle meat exports from Australia to the United States. Although
excluding these industries does affect the correlations for each of those importer-exporter pairs,
removing them has little effect on the overall performance of the GTAP predictions and LTP
methodology. Table A.4 shows that LTP methodology performs substantially better than the
GTAP predictions even when these outlier industries are not excluded from the analysis.
Table A.4: Comparisons of GTAP and LTP predictions of recent trade liberalizations
with data (percentage changes, outliers not excluded)
GTAP
LTP
Exporter
Importer
correlation
correlation
with data
with data
United States Australia
0.27
0.55
Australia
United States
0.49
0.08
United States Chile
0.05
–0.05
Chile
United States
0.03
0.48
China
Chile
0.14
0.61
Chile
China
0.04
0.07
China
New Zealand
–0.36
0.61
New Zealand China
–0.09
0.48
Simple average
0.07
0.35

46

Note that including cattle meat exports from Australia to the United States makes the
GTAP predictions appear to perform much better for that pair. It is, however, a classic case of
getting things right for the wrong reason. GTAP predicts a large increase in the quantity of beef
exports because of a complete removal of the tariff quota in the simulation. In actuality, the trade
agreement between Australia and the United States left the quota largely intact, and the increase
in trade value was due to a worldwide increase in the price of beef. If we instead ran GTAP without
simulating a complete elimination of all trade barriers (a complete removal is a reasonable
approximation for the other industries and trade agreements we evaluate), the GTAP model would
be unable to capture the increased value of exports of cattle meat. Because it is questionable
whether any trade model should be expected to capture such an increase in the worldwide price,
we exclude the industry from our main analysis in the paper.
Although our robustness appendix shows that our overall results are largely unchanged by
outliers, base years, weighting schemes, and how we define growth, it also shows that for some
individual country pairs, these choices substantially alter the apparent accuracy of various
predictions and methodologies. Thus, researchers and policy makers need to think carefully about
how the performance of their models should be evaluated. Beyond that, we need to actually carry
out such evaluations, so that shortcomings can be identified and our models can continue to
improve.

47

