                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   VALUING ALTERNATIVE WORK ARRANGEMENTS

                                       Alexandre Mas
                                       Amanda Pallais

                                     Working Paper 22708
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22708


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2016




We would like to thank Joshua Angrist, David Autor, David Card, Henry Farber, Edward
Freeland, Claudia Goldin, Nathan Hendren, Lawrence Katz, Patrick Kline, Alan Krueger, Claudia
Olivetti, Jesse Shapiro, Basit Zafar, and seminar participants at the Advances with Field
Experiments conference, CEPR/IZA Annual Labour Economics Symposium, NBER Summer
Institute, and Wellesley College for their many helpful comments and suggestions. We would
also like to thank Jenna Anders, Stephanie Cheng, Kevin DeLuca, Jason Goldrosen, Disa Hynsjo,
and Carl Lieberman for outstanding research assistance. This project received IRB approval from
Princeton (#0000006906) and Harvard (#15-0673). This study can be found in the AEA RCT
Registry (AEARCTR-0001250). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Alexandre Mas and Amanda Pallais. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements
Alexandre Mas and Amanda Pallais
NBER Working Paper No. 22708
September 2016
JEL No. J16,J24,J31,J38,M50

                                           ABSTRACT

We use a field experiment to study how workers value alternative work arrangements. During the
application process to staff a national call center, we randomly offered applicants choices
between traditional M-F 9 am – 5 pm office positions and alternatives. These alternatives include
flexible scheduling, working from home, and positions that give the employer discretion over
scheduling. We randomly varied the wage difference between the traditional option and the
alternative, allowing us to estimate the entire distribution of willingness to pay (WTP) for these
alternatives. We validate our results using a nationally-representative survey. The great majority
of workers are not willing to pay for flexible scheduling relative to a traditional schedule: either
the ability to choose the days and times of work or the number of hours they work. However, the
average worker is willing to give up 20% of wages to avoid a schedule set by an employer on a
week’s notice. This largely represents workers’ aversion to evening and weekend work, not
scheduling unpredictability. Traditional M-F 9 am – 5 pm schedules are preferred by most
jobseekers. Despite the fact that the average worker isn’t willing to pay for scheduling flexibility,
a tail of workers with high WTP allows for sizable compensating differentials. Of the worker-
friendly options we test, workers are willing to pay the most (8% of wages) for the option of
working from home. Women, particularly those with young children, have higher WTP for work
from home and to avoid employer scheduling discretion. They are slightly more likely to be in
jobs with these amenities, but the differences are not large enough to explain any wage gaps.


Alexandre Mas
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
amas@princeton.edu

Amanda Pallais
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
apallais@fas.harvard.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1250
1     Introduction

Alternative work arrangements, such as flexible scheduling, working from home, and part-time work are a
common and by some measures a growing feature of the U.S. labor market.1 While these arrangements may
facilitate work-life balance, they are not necessarily worker-friendly. Many jobs have irregular schedules,
whereby workers cannot anticipate their work schedule from one week to the next; many workers are on-call
or work during evenings, nights and weekends. The emergent gig economy, while still small (Ferrell and
Greig, 2016), has put these trade-offs into focus. Workplace flexibility has been touted as both one of the
benefits and costs of the fragmentation (or “Uberization”) of the workplace.2
     There is a policy debate as to whether and how government should encourage alternative work ar-
rangements that promote work-life balance (Council of Economic Advisors, 2010). This debate extends
to regulation of overtime in the Fair Labor Standards Act, flexibility options in the Family Medical Leave
Act, and initiatives to promote telecommuting. Scheduling policy is a key decision for employers. There
is a well-established belief among human resource consultants that workplace flexibility policies (broadly
defined) help attract and retain employees.3 Recently, prominent companies have announced moves away
from irregular scheduling. In 2016, Walmart shifted from giving managers discretion on shift scheduling to
offering some workers predictable fixed shifts and the ability to make their own schedules (DePillis, 2016).
Starbucks announced that it was revising its policies to end irregular schedules to promote “stability and
consistency” in scheduling (Kantor, 2014). These changes came during increasing legal scrutiny of irregular
scheduling work practices (Weber, 2015).
     Despite this active debate on how alternative work arrangements should be promoted and regulated,
very little is known about how workers actually value different arrangements. Efficient public and corporate
policies on alternative work arrangements require an understanding of these valuations. One approach is
estimating compensating wage differentials on workplace amenities, building on the theoretical framework
for hedonic pricing in Rosen (1974) and Rosen (1986). An enormous literature has sought to do this using
cross-sectional and longitudinal data, but it is well known that estimates from these approaches are unstable
to adding person or workplace controls, and are often wrong-signed.4 This fragility of compensating differ-
    1 Katz and Krueger (2016) document a significant rise in alternative work arrangements between 2005 and 2015. They consider
temporary help agency workers, on-call workers, contract company workers, and independent contractors or freelancers as workers
with alternative arrangements.
    2 For examples, see “Uber’s Business Model Could Change Your Work,” New York Times, January 28, 2015.
    3 See,   for example, http://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/HumanCapital/dttl-humancapital-
trends5-workplaces-no-exp.pdf.
    4 Papers in this literature include those that estimate the value of statistical life, summarized in Viscusi and Aldy (2003), studies

reviewed in Smith (1979), Brown (1980), Goddeeris (1988), Lanfranchi et al. (2002), Kostiuk (1990), and Oettinger (2011). Hall
and Mueller (2015), Sorkin (2015), and Taber and Vejlin (2016) use worker flows to infer the importance of non-wage amenities.



                                                                   1
entials estimates may be due to the presence of unmeasured worker and firm characteristics, measurement
error, or the presence of search frictions in the labor market (Hwang et al., 1998; Lang and Majumdar, 2004;
Bonhomme and Jolivet, 2009). Additionally, in standard models of equalizing differences, such as Rosen
(1986), compensating wage differentials are set to equate the utility of marginal workers in jobs with and
without an amenity, providing only limited information on valuations for other workers.
    In this paper we report estimates of worker valuations over alternative work arrangements from a field
experiment with national scope. The experiment elicits preferences on work arrangements by building a
simple discrete choice experiment into the application process for a national call center. In this way we
employ a method that can flexibly back out a willingness to pay distribution from (effectively) real market
transactions.5 We consider a number of commonly-discussed arrangements, including flexible scheduling,
working from home, and irregular schedules.
    We carried out a large scale recruitment drive to staff a national call center. The purpose of the call center
was to implement telephone surveys, unrelated to this project. We posted job ads on a major electronic job
board in 68 metro areas for telephone interviewer positions. The job ads described the position and several
required qualifications, but did not include any additional information about the nature of the job such as the
schedule or whether the job was on-site. During the application process, we asked applicants their preference
between two positions: a baseline position offering a traditional 40 hour 9 am – 5 pm Monday-Friday
on-site work arrangement (in the applicant’s local area) and a randomly-chosen alternative arrangement.
The alternatives included flexible scheduling, working from home, and positions that gave the employer
discretion over scheduling. We also randomly varied the wage difference between these two options.6 In the
experimental portion of the application we were silent on whether these were actual positions; we simply
asked applicants to tell us their preference over two job descriptions. This gave us latitude to vary the
parameters of the position descriptions. However, the positions were fully consistent with the type of job
In a novel approach to estimating market compensating differentials, Stern (2004) uses multiple job offers for PhD job candidates
in biology to estimate the tradeoff between starting pay and the opportunity to conduct research.
    5 Discrete choice experiments are an extension of the contingent valuation literature whereby rather than directly asking people

for valuations over an attribute (the stated preference method), people are given the choice of two or more scenarios and are asked
to choose their preferred option. These scenarios usually vary the attributes and the prices and WTP can be estimated using random
utility models (McFadden, 1973; Manski, 1977). Choice experiments have been shown to have better properties relative to stated
preference valuation methods (Hanley et al., 1998). A question is whether these experiments, which are usually survey-based,
correspond to actual market behavior. This is something we can overcome by embedding the choice in a real market setting.
Diamond and Hausman (1994), who critique stated preference valuation methods, hypothesize that the problem with the approach
is not methodological but due to “an absence of preferences” over the attributes they are being asked to value. This is far less of a
concern here since we are asking people to make choices over realistic work arrangements.
    6 In terms of methodology, our approach is similar to Flory et al. (2015) and Hedegaard and Tyran (2014). Both of these studies

use data collected in the application phase to learn about the preferences of job seekers. Flory et al. (2015) randomize job applicants
into different compensation packages and measure gender differences in the probability that someone applies as a function of the
compensation scheme presented. This approach is informative about the direction of preferences, but does not yield WTP measures.
Hedegaard and Tyran (2014) focus on preferences on the ethnic background of co-workers.


                                                                  2
that we advertised thereby approximating a market choice.7 We elicited preferences from approximately
7,000 applicants, allowing us to estimate the WTP distribution for a number of common alternative work
arrangements using a simple discrete choice framework.8
    There are several challenges to the approach that require addressing. First, prior to running the ex-
periment we hypothesized that some applicants would not pay close attention to the position descriptions.
We implemented several placebo tests which confirmed that approximately 25% of applicants are inatten-
tive. By estimating the inattention rate, we can account for misclassification in the econometric model and
recover the unbiased WTP distribution.9 Second, we are eliciting preferences only from jobseekers who
respond to this position. To address this we can weight the estimates by observed worker characteristics to
match a nationally-representative sample of workers. Additionally, we designed a module in the nationally-
representative Understanding America Study (UAS) that elicited preferences over scheduling flexibility and
employer discretion, using a choice framework similar to the one described above. This survey has addi-
tional advantages that it has information on worker characteristics that are not possible to obtain from the
applicants, such as presence of children, and that there is no potential for responses to the survey to act as a
signal to potential employers.
    The first, surprising, finding is that the great majority of workers do not value scheduling flexibility:
either the ability to set their own days and times of work at a fixed number of hours, or the ability to choose
the number of hours they work. This is true both among job applicants and survey respondents in the
UAS.10 While the average WTP for jobs with flexible schedules is low, there is a long right tail in the WTP
distribution for these arrangements, reflecting people who are relatively inelastic to the price of flexibility.
Thus, there remains considerable potential for reasonably large market compensating wage differentials for
flexible scheduling. We find evidence of heterogeneity in valuations in all of the job attributes we consider;
mean WTP estimates may differ substantially from marginal WTP estimates. Caution is therefore warranted
when interpreting cost-benefit analyses that are based on average valuations alone.
    Second, of the employee-friendly alternatives we consider, working from home is the most valued. On
average, job applicants are willing to take 8% lower wages for the option of working from home. The
fact that working from home is still relatively uncommon – even in the industry in which we are hiring –
   7 The    actual jobs combined the highest wage the applicant viewed, scheduling flexibility, and the ability to work remotely.
   8 The    applicant figure refers to the number of jobseekers who initiated the application process and chose one of the two jobs
presented. Of these, 78% completed the application and applied for the job. At present, we have contacted 150 applicants to offer
them jobs, subject to their passing a required criminal background check.
    9 It is an interesting question whether this type of inattention should be taken into account when estimating the WTP for these

positions. This type of inattention may represent a real friction in the labor market. By adjusting the estimates our framework
allows us to estimate the welfare costs to inattention.
   10 This result is noteworthy in that it shows that survey based choice experiments, when designed properly, elicit responses that

are close to market choices.


                                                                 3
while there is a substantial share of workers willing to take wage cuts for these jobs, suggests that it may be
costly for employers to offer this arrangement. Taking our estimates of the WTP distribution at face value,
the share of hourly workers who work at home (9%) implies that it would cost at least 21% of wages for
employers to switch to work-at-home positions.
    Third, job applicants and UAS respondents have a strong aversion to jobs that permit employer discretion
in scheduling: the average applicant is willing to take a 20% wage cut to avoid these jobs, and almost 40% of
applicants would not take this job even if it paid 25% more than a M-F 9 am - 5 pm position. The distaste for
jobs with employer discretion is due to aversion to working non-standard hours, rather than unpredictability
in scheduling. For most workers, a traditional M-F 9 am - 5 pm schedule works well: workers are not willing
to take lower wages to set their schedules on top of this, but they are willing to take substantial wage cuts to
avoid evening and weekend work.
    The paper also contributes to our understanding of how women and men differentially value workplace
amenities and how this translates into the observed gender wage gap. A large literature has examined
gender differences in work arrangements and asked to what extent these differences can explain gender
wage gaps.11 We find that women are more likely to select flexible work arrangements than are men. While
women do not tend to value flexible schedules, they do place a higher average value on working from home
and avoiding irregular work schedules than do men. The latter is particularly true for women with young
children. Despite this, women are only slightly more likely to be in work-from-home jobs and slightly less
likely to be in jobs with irregular schedules. The differences in observed work arrangements are not large
enough to lead to significant gender gaps even with substantial compensating wage differentials. While there
are gender differences in the propensity to select into alternative work arrangements, there is no detectable
relationship between workers’ education or score on a cognitive test we administered and their choices.
    We begin by discussing our experimental design (Section 2) and conceptual and econometric framework
(Section 3). From there, we present our main estimates of workers’ valuations for alternative work arrange-
ments (Section 4) and show external validity through the nationally-representative UAS (Section 5). We
examine heterogeneity of WTP by subgroup in Section 6 and discuss the implications of our findings for
compensating differentials in Section 7.
  11 Studies include Filer (1985), Goldin and Katz (2011), Goldin and Katz (2012), Flory et al. (2015), Goldin (2014), and Wiswall

and Zafar (2016).




                                                                4
2     Experimental Design

Our experiment is structured around the hiring process for a national call center that we staffed to implement
a labor market survey, unrelated to this project, during calendar year 2016. The experiment takes place
during the application process for these positions.
    We posted advertisements for telephone interviewer positions on a national U.S. job search platform.
The platform has separate portals for most regions and we posted a customized ad in 68 large metro areas.
The ads were modeled off of existing ads on the site; the text of these ads is presented in Appendix Figure
1. They mentioned the necessary skills for the job, emphasized that the position did not include sales or
telemarketing, and included information about the job’s wage range.12 We provided no information about
the job’s schedule, location, or duration. The ad had a link to our website where interested jobseekers could
apply for a position.
    We ran the labor market survey and conducted all hiring under the auspices of a center responsible for
the hiring. We did not disguise the center’s mission (the study of labor markets) or its personnel. However,
the center did not specify an affiliation with any university or this particular project. The center website is
professionally designed, and the feedback we received from applicants we spoke to is that the ad and the
website looked like those of a regular employer.
    Once applicants followed the link to our site, they could apply by creating an account which required
them to enter their contact information, year of birth, and zip code. The next step in the application was a
voluntary self-identification page where applicants could provide their race/ethnicity and gender. The page
prominently stated that this information was optional and that the questions could be skipped, though the
vast majority of applicants responded.13 We did not feel that it would be appropriate to ask about marital or
parental status.
    The third step of the application was the discrete choice experiment. Applicants were shown two de-
scriptions of job positions. The two positions differed in their characteristics (e.g., schedule or the ability
to work from home) and their hourly wages. The characteristics and wages were assigned to applicants
at random. While we could have shown each applicant multiple job descriptions with varying wages and
amenities, to minimize cognitive load, we limited the comparison to two options, a baseline and an alterna-
tive. In fact, we show that even with just two simple choices there is a substantial amount of inattention that
   12 The necessary skills specified were “good communication skills,” “ability to work with others,” and “used to basic computer

and/or mobile applications.” The platform has a field for the compensation range. We filled this in to be consistent with the site’s
typical practices as well as to encourage applications from interested participants and prevent applicants uninterested in jobs at these
wages from wasting their time. The wage range corresponded to the lowest and highest wage in the discrete choice experiment. We
hired at the highest wage in the range.
   13 Ninety-five percent of applicants provided their gender and 93% provided their race.



                                                                   5
we have to account for. Additionally, in our judgment, more than two choices would have made the research
intent of this section too obvious. Implementing a between-subject design also allows us to avoid carry-over
effects. In Subsection 2.1 we describe the positions and randomization in more detail.
      We told applicants that the type of work in both jobs was the same and asked them which job they would
choose if both were available. We assured applicants that we would not look at their choices before making
hiring decisions. The position descriptions were crafted to match the general description of the telephone
interviewer position advertised, but we did not tell applicants that these were the actual positions available.
Without specifying them, we indicated that there were other positions they could be hired for (“...regardless
of your choice you will be considered for all open positions”). This approach allowed us to use position
descriptions that deviated from the real jobs, while maximizing realism by describing positions that were
like the ones advertised.14
      This step of the application process produces the key data for our analysis. The remainder of the ap-
plication asked about applicants’ background, including their educational attainment. We asked workers
six quantitative questions from the ACT WorkKeys, ranging from simple multiplication to basic algebra,
which we use as a measure of cognitive ability. Most (78%) workers who made a job choice completed the
application. Our main analysis uses all choices made, but we show in an appendix table that the results are
similar if we restrict attention to workers who ultimately applied for the jobs.


2.1     Job Description and Wages

As described above, applicants were shown two position descriptions that differed in their work arrange-
ments and wages. In all of the main comparisons we use the same baseline job description: a traditional
40 hour-per-week, Monday - Friday 9 am - 5 pm position physically located near downtown of the city we
advertised in. This job description reads:



“The position is 40 hours per week. ¶ This is a M-F 9 am - 5 pm position. The work is exclusively on-site in
downtown [city]. This position pays [wage] dollars per hour.”


Here [city] is the city of the job ad (sometimes we used “center city” or a variant of this instead of “down-
  14 The real job offered workers the maximum of the hourly wages shown in the position descriptions, plus additional compensation

for using their own phones and devices, flexible schedules (within the constraint of work hours being appropriate times to conduct
telephone surveys), and remote work. The duration of the job was either one or two months and either 20 or 40 hours per week,
depending on when they applied and the surveys we were running. This information was conveyed to all applicants who were
selected for the position at the time the job offer was first extended. At this time, we have contacted 150 applicants to offer them
jobs, subject to their passing a required criminal background check.


                                                                 6
town” to conform to local terminology), and [wage] is a randomly-selected wage.15 We compare this base-
line position to five alternatives: (1) “flexible schedule:” a 40 hour-per-week position that allows the worker
to make his or her own work schedule, (2) “flexible number of hours:” a position that gives the worker the
choice of how many hours to work per week up to 40, (3) “work from home:” a 40 hour-per-week M-F 9
am - 5 pm position that gives the worker the option of working at home, (4) “combined flexible:” a position
that allows workers to make their own schedule, choose the number of hours they work, and work from
home, and (5) “employer discretion:” a 40 hour-per-week position that lets the employer select the worker’s
schedule (including weekends and evenings) with one week’s notice. The exact wording of each of the
descriptions is listed in Table 1.
      We randomize which jobs workers are presented with and the wages in these jobs. For each metro area,
we randomly selected a maximum hourly wage of $16 or $19. In a given metro area, all applicants observed
one position that offered this maximum hourly wage.16 For the second option, we displayed a wage that was
a randomly-selected increment lower than the maximum wage. The increments – $0, $0.25, $0.50, $0.75,
$1.00, $1.25, $1.50, $1.75, $2.00, $2.25, $2.50, $2.75, $3.00, $4.00, and $5.00 – were selected to allow us
to capture both very small and very large WTP. Each increment had a uniform probability of selection. The
baseline position was sometimes (randomly) assigned the higher wage and sometimes assigned the lower
wage, so that we have approximate symmetry in the relative wages offered between the two positions. We
also randomized which job was presented first.
      Appendix Figure 2 provides an example of the page with the job descriptions. This page was designed
with several goals in mind. First, we wanted to ensure that only parameters of job would affect workers’
choice. Thus, we referred to jobs by number (not name) to minimize the extent to which job titles would
affect workers’ choices.17 We also made the wording of the job descriptions as similar as possible. To max-
imize the fraction of applicants who read both job applications carefully, we forced applicants to physically
click on each position to see the job descriptions. We also required applicants to manually type the number
of the job they preferred to lessen the tendency to simply click through to the next page.


2.2     Measuring Inattention

A challenge for any experiment that manipulates information is accounting for the presence of people who
do not fully process the information. Despite our efforts, some workers did not read the choices carefully.
  15 The ¶ indicates a line break.
  16 We select whether a city has a maximum wage of $16 or $19 at random.
  17 These numbers were randomly assigned to jobs. The numbers were also balanced within comparisons, so if some individuals

were given a choice between Position #78 which was inflexible and Position #81 which was flexible, other participants were faced
with a choice between Position #81 which was inflexible and Position #78 which was flexible.


                                                               7
Because estimates of quantiles and higher order moments of the WTP distribution will be influenced by this
form of misclassification, we implemented a number of mechanisms to measure the inattention rate and we
incorporate estimates of the inattention rate into the econometric models.
      First, we presented some applicants with two positions that were identical except that one of them stated
at the end, “This position is currently unavailable, please select the other position.” The fraction of workers
who choose the unavailable position is an indicator of the fraction of inattentive workers.18 Second, on the
page after the job choice, we asked workers whether they chose a fixed schedule M-F 9 am - 5 pm job or one
with an alternative schedule. The fraction of workers answering incorrectly is another inattention measure.
Finally, the measure we utilize in the estimation approach, which is described in more detail in the next
section, is the estimated share of applicants who choose a dominated position when this position paid $5
per hour less than the alternative. This approach is attractive because it allows us to calculate inattention
rates that are specific to each comparison and demographic group. We estimate that, on average, 13.3% of
individuals chose the dominated position when it paid $5 less than the alternative. In comparison, 13.3% of
individuals answered which position they chose incorrectly and 13.0% chose the “unavailable” position. We
show in appendix tables that our results are robust to using either of these alternative methods of measuring
the inattention rate. Our findings highlight the importance of accounting for inattention in even simple
discrete choice experiments, especially when the analyst is interested in higher moments of the distribution.



3      Conceptual and Econometric Framework

We use workers’ choices over positions to estimate applicants’ distribution of willingness to pay. The
experimental design limits the differences in the positions to the work arrangement and the wage.
      Building on Rosen (1986), we assume that an individual chooses between two jobs, which are equivalent
except for the presence of an amenity (e.g., the ability to work from home, a traditional schedule). Job A = 1
has the amenity, while job A = 0 does not. The difference in wages between the two jobs is 4w = w1 − w0 .
In the experiments 4w ∈ [−5, 5]. Each individual i has a willingness to pay W T Pi for the amenity: µ is the
population mean willingness to pay, while σ is the population standard deviation. If the individual is fully
attentive, she prefers the job with the amenity if her willingness to pay for the amenity (W T Pi ) exceeds the
price of the amenity −4w:
                                               P4w ≡ Pr(W T Pi > −4w).

    18 Both
          positions used the language from the baseline position. If a fraction α of workers choose the lower-wage option, this
suggests that 2α workers chose their preferred job at random.



                                                              8
If there is probability 2α that the individual is inattentive, the probability that she chooses the job with the
amenity is:


                   Pr(Ai = 1|4w) = P4w (1 − α) + (1 − P4w )α = F(b4w + c; µ, σ )(1 − 2α) + α.                      (1)


Equation 1 is a mixture model that can be estimated by maximum likelihood (ML) given an estimate for α
and a parametric assumption about the cdf of W T Pi : F(). We assume W T Pi follows a logistic distribution,
though a normality assumption works just as well. Under the logistic assumption, with estimates of b and c
we can fully characterize the WTP distribution: µ̂ = −1 ∗ ĉ/b̂ and σ̂ = 1/0.55b̂.19 The qth quantile of the
WTP distribution can be computed by inverting the cdf: 4ŵq = F −1 (q; µ̂, σ̂ ). Standard errors are
bootstrapped.20

    An advantage of our design is that we can plot our estimates of P4w nonparametrically to assess distri-
butional assumptions. For a given 4w, the share of individuals in the sample who choose A = 1 is:


                                                  Y4w = P4w (1 − 2α) + α + ε4w ,



where ε4w represents sampling error. We use an estimate of α to transform this share so that it is an
unbiased estimate of the share of jobseekers whose willingness to pay for a job attribute exceeds −4w:

                                                         Y4w − α̂
                                                  Ye4w ≡          = P4w + ε̃4w .
                                                          1 − 2α̂

    We plot Ye4w against 4w to visually assess fit.
    We estimate a treatment- and (when applicable) subgroup-specific α. Our estimate of α is the share of
applicants who chose the dominated position (the position without the amenity) when it paid $5 less per
hour, that is, α̂ = 1 − Ê[Y |4w=5]. We estimate Ê[Y |4w=5] by estimating the linear regression Y4w =
                                                                                        
γ + β 4w + ζ4w for values of 4w ranging from 2 to 5 and calculating α̂ = 1 − γ̂ + 5β̂ . We present
estimates without the inattention correction as well. In practice, this correction will affect estimates at the
tails of the WTP distribution, but not estimates of the mean or median.
    For most treatments the logistic specification provides a good description of the data, but in some cases
we can observe that the symmetry assumption seems to be violated. In particular, the logistic cdf does
not capture the extreme non-linearity in Ỹ at 4w = 0 we observe for some comparisons. In these cases
  19 The   0.55 parameter in the denominator corrects for the scale parameter.
  20 We    bootstrap standard errors to take into account variability in the estimation of the inattention rate.


                                                                      9
        
E Ỹ | 4w is approximately 1 for most positive values of 4w and shifts downward close to 4w = 0. This
close-to-discontinuous shift suggests that there may be mass points in the cdfs of WTP that the logistic
distribution cannot accommodate. To account for this, we estimate a “breakpoint” model that nests a mass
point:                               
                          h       i 1,                             if 4w > w∗
                         E Ye | 4w =                                            ,
                                     F(b4w + c; µ, σ )(1 − 2α) + α, if4w ≤ w∗
                                     
                                           i


where w∗ is a breakpoint. We impose the constraint b ≤ 0 to ensure that predicted values can be interpreted
as a cdf. Rather than assume a value of w∗ , we estimate a structural break model where we vary w∗ from
w∗ = −2 through w∗ = 5 (the no mass point case) and select the value of w∗ that minimizes the root mean
square error of the model.

      To calculate the mean and variance of WTP in the breakpoint model we use the integration by parts
expression for computing a mean and variance of a distribution from a cdf:

                                                    ˆ0            ˆ∞
                                                            ˆ
                                                        1 − Y d4w − Yeˆ d4w
                                                              
                                               µ̂ =         e
                                                  −∞                      0

                                           ˆ∞                    ˆ0
                                                4w 1 − Ye d4w − 2 4wYeˆ d4w − µ̂ 2
                                                        ˆ
                                                         
                                 σˆ2 = 2
                                           0                            −∞


The integrals are computed numerically, the quantiles are calculated by inverting the cdf, and the standard
errors are bootstrapped.



4      Willingness to Pay for Alternative Work Arrangements

4.1      Descriptive Statistics and Randomization Assessment

Panel A of Table 2 shows the characteristics of our sample and a representative sample of workers in tele-
phone occupations from the CPS.21 Like workers in telephone occupations in general, our sample is dispro-
portionately female. Applicants average 33 years old. Approximately half of our sample has some college
but no degree, while the rest of the sample is split between people with a high school degree and those with
a college degree. Our sample is also racially diverse – more so than workers in telephone occupations in
    21 Wedefine telephone occupations to include telemarketers, bill and account collectors, customer service representatives, and
interviewers (except eligibility and loan).



                                                               10
general. This is in part, but not entirely, because our experiment is focused within metro areas. Panel B of
Table 2 shows that the UAS sample comes close to matching the CPS sample.
      Table 3 shows that the randomization was balanced. For each of the five different treatments, we regress
six applicant characteristics on indicators for each wage gap (4w) the applicant was randomly assigned in
the application process. If the randomization was implemented correctly the wage gap indicators should
not be jointly significant. We only include the variables that were collected before the jobs were presented:
gender, race, and age. The table reports the p-value for each of the 30 regressions, corresponding to six
demographic characteristics and five alternative work arrangements. The wage gap indicators are jointly
significant for predicting the demographic characteristic in only one of these combinations (work from
home and Hispanic), a number we may expect to see by chance given the number of tests. Appendix Table
1 replicates this table, limiting the sample to workers who chose one of the two job options presented (and
thus did not stop the job application before making a choice). It shows that observable characteristics look
balanced along this dimension as well. Appendix Figures 3 and 4 show that neither the probability of making
a choice nor the probability of entering the subsequent demographic information is related to the wage gap.
Appendix Table 2 shows that, consistent with random assignment, workers in the different treatments have
similar demographic characteristics.


4.2     Main Treatments

We begin with visual nonparametric and parametric summaries of the data. We show binned scatterplots
of the inattention-corrected fraction of applicants who chose the arrangement with the amenity, against the
wage gap (4w) between this job and the job without the amenity. We overlay the scatterplot with the ML and
breakpoint model fits, which can be interpreted as cdfs of the WTP distribution since they are monotonic and
bounded between 0 and 1. We also report statistics from the WTP distribution using the ML model in Table
4 and the breakpoint model in Appendix Table 3. Statistics from the ML inattention-uncorrected estimates
are presented in Appendix Table 4 and scatterplots with the uncorrected data are presented primarily in
appendix figures. We discuss the estimates for each of the main alternatives sequentially below.
      Flexible Scheduling
      Figure 1 plots the raw fraction of workers choosing the flexible-schedule job at each wage gap, without
the inattention correction. There is a strong positive relationship between the premium for the flexible
alternative (4w) and the probability that an applicant chose a flexible job. Reading from this figure where
the scatterplot intersects the y-axis at 0.5 and multiplying by −1, the median WTP for flexible scheduling



                                                      11
is positive but less than $1 per hour.22 Only 60% of applicants chose the flexible alternative when 4w = 0,
suggesting that a large fraction of applicants place no value on this arrangement. In the figure we can
see that when 4w = $5, that is, when the flexible position pays $5/hour more than the baseline position,
approximately 20% of applicants still choose the fixed position. This gap is expected if there is inattention.
As we discussed above, we fit a line over the range of points between 4w = 2 and 4w = 5 to estimate the
share of applicants who choose the dominated position (the baseline position) when it pays $5 less than the
more-flexible position. We do not interpret the share of applicants choosing the flexible position when 4w
is large and negative (that is, when flexibility is more expensive) as reflecting inattention because there are
applicants who might have strong preferences for flexibility.
    After estimating the inattention rate using the procedure described above, we calculate the inattention-
corrected shares Ye .23 These shares are plotted in Figure 2 along with the estimated implied cdfs using the
ML and breakpoint models. The inattention correction shifts shares that are greater than 0.5 towards 1 and
shares that are less than 0.5 towards 0, making the implied cdfs steeper. This changes the tails of the WTP
distribution (where the y-axis meets the lower and upper quantiles) but not the median. Inspecting this
figure we can see that after correcting for inattention almost everyone prefers the flexible alternative when
it pays more, modulo sampling error. This is effectively mechanical at 4w = $5, but not at other values of
4w. There is a “cliff” in the cdf at 4w = 0, indicating a mass point in the WTP distribution at this point;
approximately 60% of workers do not value being able to make their own schedule at all. The ML model
cannot capture this extreme nonlinearity while the breakpoint model does. In both models most individuals
do not value the ability to make their own schedule and the median WTP for flexible scheduling is 0 or
close to 0. However, there is a tail of individuals who place a high value on this option: the top 25% of
workers are willing to give up at least 10% of their wages to be able to make their own schedule (Table
4 and Appendix Table 3).24 This quantitatively and qualitatively important heterogeneity in valuations is
something that we observe across all arrangements we consider. We see a very similar pattern of estimates
in the nationally-representative UAS discussed below.
    One potential concern is that at 40 hours per week there may be limited latitude to adjust schedules. To
investigate this possibility, we conducted a supplementary study where we gave workers a choice between
a baseline job and one of our five alternatives, but all jobs were 20 hours per week rather than 40 hours
  22 The x-axis of this graph shows the wage premium for the job with the higher amenity. Multiplying this by -1 gives the cost of

the amenity. The cost that 50% of workers is willing to pay is the median WTP.
  23 Technically these are not shares because they can be greater than 1 or less than 0, but we use this term for convenience.
  24 In the tables we report WTP in levels, as in the experimental variation. We divide our estimates by $17, the approximate

average wage presented to workers (and the approximate average wage selected) to convert the levels into percentages.




                                                               12
per week.25 These estimates are reported in Appendix Table 5. The median WTP remains very low in this
part-time alternative: we estimate it at $0.55 (se = $0.50).
    The participants in our experiment are a selected sample of workers who responded to our job adver-
tisement. We can construct WTP estimates that match the demographic and education characteristics of the
hourly workforce by reweighting the sample. We construct WTP estimates that weight our sample to match
a nationally-representative sample of hourly workers (those in the 2016 March CPS) using DiNardo, Fortin
and Lemieux (1996) weights. We create two sets of weights: the first uses only the characteristics collected
before participants saw their job options (age, race, and gender) and the second adds educational attainment
categories.26 Descriptive statistics from the March 2016 CPS, our experimental sample, and our experi-
mental sample reweighted with both sets of weights are in Appendix Table 6. Table 5 presents willingness
to pay estimates using the reweighting. The results are very similar to the estimates using the unweighted
data, suggesting that our estimates appear representative of a wider population. This similarity between
the weighted and unweighted estimates is also observed for the other arrangements we examine. This is
largely because as discussed below, aside from by gender, there are not large differences in WTP by worker
characteristics. We provide additional evidence that the estimates are representative in Section 5 where we
report WTP estimates from a discrete choice experiment embedded into a nationally-representative survey.
    Flexible Number of Hours
    For the remaining treatments, we show the inattention-corrected figures in the text; the uncorrected
versions are in Appendix Figures 5-8. The low valuation for flexibility, on average, is even more striking for
the ability to choose the number of hours worked, as shown in Figure 3. Here the more parsimonious ML
model provides a reasonable fit to the data. The figure shows that the median worker actually slightly prefers
the M-F 9 am - 5 pm job over the ability to choose the number of hours worked. While the median worker
does not value being able to choose the number of hours she works, the top 25% of workers are willing to
give up about 7% of their wages for this flexibility.
    We again explore the sensitivity of the estimates to changing the jobs to 20 hour-per-week positions.
This is particularly important for the flexible number of hours comparison because of the possibility that
applicants dislike the flexible option because they believe that the position is less likely to come with benefits.
We eliminate this potential concern by limiting the positions to a maximum of 20 hours. In this 20-hour
version, we see a somewhat higher mean valuation for this alternative (Appendix Table 5), but it remains
  25 The   flexible number of hours job allows workers to choose the number of hours they work up to 20 hours per week.
  26 To create the first set of weights, we use race dummies, a female indicator, age, age interacted with race dummies, age interacted

with the female dummy, and the female dummy interacted with race dummies. We add educational attainment indicators to create
the second set of weights.



                                                                 13
small and the median WTP is both insignificantly different from 0 and from the estimate in the 40-hour
version.
    Because the negative valuation of the flexible hours arrangement by a subset of applicants is somewhat
puzzling, we created a focus group on Mechanical Turk to help us understand why some people might prefer
less hours flexibility. We gave Mechanical Turk workers the choice between the baseline and flexible hours
position at the same wage and asked them to explain their choice. By virtue of being on Mechanical Turk,
the workers in this survey were much more likely to prefer the flexible number of hours option. However,
the ones who preferred the M-F 9 am - 5 pm job typically mentioned that they liked having someone else
set the schedule and tell them how many hours they should work. They expressed concern that if they could
choose it would be difficult to force themselves to work their desired number of hours.27 This qualitative
evidence suggests that, as previously suggested in Kaur et al. (2015), there may be psychological, not just
economic, factors that enter into the decision over work arrangements.
    The flexible number of hours arrangement offers jobseekers two benefits. It allows workers to make
adjustments if they need to work more or fewer hours in a given week and it allows them to optimize
the number of hours worked if they typically prefer to work fewer than 40 hours. To disentangle these two
possible benefits, and to better understand jobseekers’ labor supply behavior, we designed an auxiliary study
that elicited workers’ preferences over the number of hours of work. We gave applicants choices between
jobs with different wage and hour combinations. We elicited preferences over a 20 versus 40 hour-per-week
position, as before, randomly varying the wage gap between the two jobs such that either wage could be
up to +/− $5/hour from the other. The higher-paying job paid $16 per hour. Using the above framework,
we can estimate WTP for the 40 hour-per-week job relative to the 20 hour-per-week job. For this exercise,
we specify an inattention rate of α = 0.133 (the mean in our data) rather than estimating it from the share
choosing a dominated position since there is no obvious dominated position for these comparisons.
    Inattention-corrected WTP estimates are shown in Table 6 and uncorrected estimates are in Appendix
Table 7. At the wages we offer, most workers prefer the 40-hour job: the median worker is willing to take
more than a $6 per hour pay cut for a 40-hour job relative to a 20-hour job. This implies a median value of
time of under $4 per hour between 20 and 40 hours of work.28 Even at the top of the distribution, workers’
   27 These are a sample of the responses conditional on choosing the baseline schedule job: “Although being able to choose my

hours would be nice, I would kind of have to force myself to work the 40 hours a week;” “I like that the hours and pay are
fixed... [with the flexible hours job] I might be tempted to work less hours at the start of [the week] then work longer hours later to
compensate or make enough for that week which would be tiring and stressful;” “I would prefer to have a set schedule every week.
A routine is better for me personally;” “[the fixed schedule] suits me better. I like it when someone tells me how long I should
work. That way there’s an expectation that I can live up to. If I were to choose the hours that I would like to work, it would make
me feel uncomfortable and I wouldn’t be sure how the employer would feel about that;” “I prefer to have set hours so I will know
for sure what my schedule will be. This makes it much easier for me to plan other activities and know the expectations.”
   28 This value of time is calculated as the amount the worker has to earn per hour in hours 20 through 40 to be indifferent between



                                                                 14
value of time is fairly low. The 75th percentile value of time is approximately $11, well below the predicted
market hourly wage of $16 for the applicant pool.29 In the standard labor supply model, the decision to
work part-time when a worker is unconstrained is due to a high shadow value of time and/or a low wage.
Our estimates suggest that jobseekers by and large prefer working 40 hours, even at wages substantially
lower than the one we offered. This may explain the very low valuation for hours flexibility since one of its
primary benefits (lower regular hours) appears to be of low value to most jobseekers.30
    We also investigated preferences for working overtime. Estimating how workers value overtime is par-
ticularly important in the context of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which requires employers to pay
most hourly workers time-and-a-half for work over 40 hours per week. To our knowledge, it is not known
how this legislated wage premium compares to workers’ WTP to avoid working these additional hours.
Overtime pay complicates estimating WTP for positions over 40 hours per week. If we presented a 40
versus 50 hours choice without mentioning overtime pay it would be unclear what applicants assume about
overtime pay. To circumvent this problem, we gave some applicants a choice between a 40 hour-per-week
job and a 50 hour-per-week job which both paid the same base wage ($16 per hour). We randomly varied the
overtime premium so that workers would either earn 1.5 × or 2 × wages for hours over 40 hours per week.
Using the fraction of applicants who chose the 50-hour position at the two overtime premia and assuming a
logistic distribution for WTP, we can recover estimates of the WTP distribution.
    We have to pay most workers a premium to work over 40 hours: 40 hours appears close to the bliss
point at workers’ predicted market wage. Fifty-four percent of jobseekers accept overtime at 1.5 × wages
and 63% accept overtime at 2 × wages: the FLSA overtime requirements make the median jobseeker in
our applicant group close to indifferent towards working overtime.31 When assuming a logistic distribution,
these rates imply a WTP to work 40 hours per week of $0.88 in terms of the overall wage (not just for
hours over 40). Workers’ average value of time between 40 and 50 hours of work is almost $20 per hour,
substantially higher than their predicted market wage and their value of time before 40 hours of work.
    Working from Home
                                    40×(16−Wd
                                            T P)−20×16
the 20 and 40 hour-per-week jobs:              20         .
   29 The 75th percentile value of time is calculated using the 25th percentile of the WTP distribution ($2.37 per hour). To calculate

applicants’ predicted market wage, we estimate the average hourly wage in 2016 for hourly workers with the education, race, and
gender composition of workers in our sample using CPS data.
   30 This finding is also relevant for understanding the prevalence of part-time work. In 2015, 25% of workers worked less than

35 hours per week, and 20% of workers reported working fewer than 35 hours per week by choice. With the usual caveats about
generalizing, our estimates suggest that most workers would prefer full-time jobs, with a relatively small fraction preferring part-
time work at the same hourly wage. While this may seem obvious given the distribution of hours, one might have hypothesized that
40 hour-per-week work hour blocks exceed the preferred hours of many workers due to technological or organizational constraints.
Our experimental evidence suggests this is not the case.
   31 Both of these rates are inattention-corrected. We use the average inattention rate in the experiment to adjust the estimates.




                                                                 15
    While we see that workers largely do not value choosing the number of hours they work or choosing
which hours these are, applicants do largely value working from home. The cdf of WTP for this alternative
relative to the baseline is shown in Figure 4. The average worker does value working from home and is
willing to give up about 8% of wages for this option.32 Twenty-five percent of applicants are willing to pay
at least $2.45 per hour, or about 14% of wages, to work from home. Yet, approximately 20% of applicants
choose to work exclusively on-site even when there is no wage penalty for doing so (4w = 0). Bloom et al.
(2015) also find that many workers (50% in the company they study) prefer working on-site, all else equal.33
However, the estimates suggest that almost no workers are willing to accept a lower wage for the on-site
option.
    Part of the benefit of working from home is a reduction in commuting times. However, we do not find
that this drives workers’ desire to work from home. Using workers’ zip codes, we calculated their average
driving time to the downtown area of their metro area, corresponding to where the job was said to be located.
We used the Google Maps API to calculate the typical driving time on a Monday at 8 am for each worker.
Workers’ round-trip commute averages 40 minutes or 8% of a working day; roughly the magnitude of the
mean WTP for working at home. However, workers with longer commutes were not, on average, willing to
pay more for the option of working from home (Appendix Table 8).
    Combined Flexible Option
    The option that combines flexible scheduling, flexible number of hours, and working from home is
shown in Figure 5. If these types of flexibility are complements, workers could value the sum of the com-
ponents more than the parts. We don’t see evidence supporting this: the mean valuation of this combined
option ($1.17) is close to the sum of its components ($1.59). This approximate equivalence does, how-
ever, provide some reassurance that we are not subjected to the embedding bias of Kahneman and Knetsch
(1992).34 Overall, the combined flexible option looks very similar to the work from home option, the only
worker-friendly alternative that workers seem to value.
    Employer Discretion
    While most workers seem content to work a regular M-F 9 am - 5 pm job with a fixed schedule and a
set number of hours, they are quite averse to arrangements where the employer has discretion over the work
schedule. As a reminder, we gave workers a choice of a 40 hour-per-week, M-F 9 am - 5 pm job and a 40
hour-per-week job where the employer sets the schedule – which can include evenings and weekends, but
  32 Estimated mean WTP is about 5% for the 20 hour-per-week version (Appendix Table 5).
  33 The choice we study is slightly different from the one in Bloom et al. (2015) in that our choice provided workers the option of
working from home, not a potential requirement to do so.
  34 The embedding bias occurs when individuals are estimated to have a higher WTP for a good when the good is evaluated on its

own rather than when it is presented as part of a larger, composite good.


                                                                16
not nights – at least one week in advance.35 Figure 6 shows the cdfs for the WTP distribution to avoid this
option. Note here that the baseline M-F 9 am - 5 pm job is now the higher amenity position and the y-axis is
the fraction of people who choose the baseline job. The x-axis is the wage difference between the baseline
position and the employer discretion position. For this alternative the ML and breakpoint models yield an
almost identical fit, suggesting no mass point in the WTP distribution. The average worker is willing to
give up 20% of wages to avoid this employer discretion (Table 4 and Appendix Table 3). And while there
is variation in workers’ aversion to this work arrangement, even the bottom 25% of workers are willing to
give up 10% of earnings to avoid this option. Here we see a similar pattern of estimates in the nationally-
representative UAS study discussed below as well as in the 20 hour-per-week comparisons (Appendix Table
5).
      The appendix shows the robustness of these results to several different estimation strategies. Appendix
Table 9 shows the results using different estimates of inattention, while Appendix Table 10 limits the sample
to (1) workers who completed the job application, (2) unemployed workers, and (3) workers who were not
employed part-time.
      Workers may dislike employer discretion either because it entails working non-standard hours or because
it requires workers to adjust their schedules on short notice. We use two sets of supplemental treatments
to distinguish between these possibilities. We find that workers have a strong aversion for working non-
standard times, in particular evenings and weekends. However, conditional on working non-standard hours,
they do not appear to dislike having their hours change from week to week or learning their schedules only
a week in advance.
      In the first supplementary treatment we gave some workers a choice between a standard M-F 9 am - 5 pm
job and a job with a potentially non-standard schedule that was consistent from week to week. (The exact
wording of this treatment and the others in this section are presented in Appendix Table 11.) The position
description stated that the work schedule would be the same from week to week, but would be determined
at a future time, before the job begins.36 This job differs from the employer discretion job only in that in
this job the hours are the same from week to week, while in the employer discretion job, the schedule can
change from week to week and workers are only guaranteed a week’s notice of their schedule. Despite the
fact that this job came with consistency and ability for more advanced planning, the average worker required
the same amount to take this job (20%) as they did for the employer discretion job (Table 7). This points to
  35 Ina pilot, we told workers we would give them this schedule at least two weeks in advance and the results were similar.
  36 The schedule in this job was described as follows: “The work schedule in this position will be the same from week to week.
You will be given your work schedule before the job begins. The hours can be morning through evening, weekdays and weekends,
but not nights.”



                                                              17
the non-standard work schedule as the more likely reason for the strong distaste for irregular jobs.
      We test workers’ aversion to non-standard schedules directly in the second set of supplementary treat-
ments. Here we elicit preferences for schedules that involve working alternative times and days. We gave
workers a choice between our baseline M-F 9 am - 5 pm job and jobs with consistent alternative schedules:
(1) Monday - Friday 7 am - 3 pm, (2) Monday - Friday 12 pm - 8 pm, and (3) Thursday - Monday (including
weekends) 9 am - 5 pm. On average, workers like the 7 am - 3 pm schedule. However, they dislike working
evenings and weekends. The average worker requires 14% more to work evenings and 19% more to work
on the weekends. It is interesting that the point estimate for the mean WTP for weekend work ($3.27) is
very close to the corresponding point estimate for employer discretion ($3.41). This pattern further rein-
forces the conclusion that the aversion to employer discretion is rooted in a distaste for non-standard work
schedules. These findings are also helpful in that these very differently-worded comparisons lead us to
the same conclusions, quantitatively and qualitatively, suggesting internal consistency in the experimental
approach.37
      We also estimate workers’ willingness to pay to work the “1st shift” (M-F 7 am - 3 pm) relative to the
“2nd shift” (M - F 3 pm - 11 pm), by having workers choose between these two options. We find that
workers strongly prefer the first to the second shift. Even the 25% of workers who least dislike the later
shift require approximately 8% more to work the 2nd shift. This is larger than the 2nd shift wage premium
reported in employer surveys. These surveys tend to find that only a relatively small share of employers has
a 2nd shift premium, and when they do it is in the 5 − 10% range (Aguirre and Moore-Ede, 2014).



5      Understanding America Study

To further probe the external validity of our experimental results, we designed a survey module to elicit
valuations of work arrangements from participants in the nationally-representative Understanding America
Study.38 We focus on two work arrangements: flexible scheduling and employer discretion.
      All employed and unemployed respondents were asked to consider the following scenario about an
employer discretion job:

Imagine that you are applying for a new job in your current line of work, and you have been offered two
positions. Both positions are the same as your [current/last] job in all ways, and to each other, other than
the work schedule and how much they pay. ¶ Please read the descriptions of the positions below. ¶ Position
    37 Diamond
             (1996) recommends testing for internal consistency in contingent valuation surveys. We go further in Section 5 by
comparing WTP estimates in the market setting to estimates from a nationally-representative survey.
  38 The UAS is a panel of respondents who were randomly selected to participate in an ongoing web-based survey.



                                                             18
1) This position is 40 hours per week. The work schedule is Monday - Friday 9am - 5pm. This position
pays the same as your [current/last] job. ¶ Position 2) This position is 40 hours per week. The work
schedule in this position varies from week to week. You will be given your work schedule one week in
advance by your employer. The hours can be morning through evening, weekdays and weekends, but not
nights. ¶ This position pays “X” your current job. ¶ Which position would you choose?


Here, [current/last] is “current” for employed workers and “last” for unemployed workers. For employed
workers “X” randomly varies between “30% less than,” “the same as,” “2% more than,” “5% more than,”
“10% more than,” “15% more than,” “25% more than,” and “35% more than.”39 These values were chosen
to match the values used in our experiment, where the largest wage gap offered was 31%. We used fewer
values of X – “5% more than,” “15% more than”, and “35% more than,” – for the unemployed group since
they are a much smaller sample. We use workers’ choices when the employer discretion job pays 30% less
than the Monday - Friday 9 am - 5 pm job to measure inattention. As in our experiment, we assume that
workers choosing the employer discretion job when it pays 30% less are inattentive. We randomized
whether the employer discretion position was Position 1 or Position 2.

    To elicit WTP for flexible scheduling, we first ask respondents whether they can choose the days and
times that they work. Unemployed and self-employed respondents are not included. If the respondent
reports having a flexible job we ask:

Suppose your primary employer gives you the option of working a fixed work schedule, Monday-Friday
during the daytime. Under this arrangement you would continue to work your usual number of hours but
once your schedule is set you may not change the times and days of work. In exchange for having this fixed
rather than flexible schedule you would get [2/5/10/20/35]% higher pay. Would you agree to this
arrangement if given the choice?

    If the respondent does not report having a flexible job we ask:

Suppose your primary employer gives you the option of being able to make your own work schedule.
Under this arrangement, you would continue to work your usual number of hours but you may freely
choose the times and days you work. In exchange for having this flexible rather than fixed schedule you
would get [2/5/10/20/35]% lower pay. Would you agree to this arrangement if given the choice?
  39 Wealso clarify that “By pay we mean your salary if you were a salaried employee or your hourly pay if you were an hourly
employee. If you were a part-time salaried employee we mean the salary you would have received if working on a full-time basis.”



                                                              19
    The UAS allows us to ask about the presence of children in the home, which seemed inappropriate on a
job application. The survey targeted 2,593 respondents and the response rate was 83%.
    We present the findings in two ways. We show figures like the ones for job applicants, plotting the share
of respondents who selected either the baseline position (in the baseline vs. employer discretion compari-
son) or the flexible-schedule position (in the flexible schedule vs. baseline comparison). We also estimate
inattention-corrected ML models, as above, to quantify valuations over these alternatives (Tables 8 and 9).
In the UAS, workers’ average willingness to pay for flexible scheduling was 2.5% of wages, relative to 2.8%
in our experimental data. This argues against the concern that experimental participants disguised their de-
sire for flexibility to be more appealing applicants. We designed our choice page to explicitly eliminate this
concern – assuring applicants that (1) their choice would not affect whether they were hired, but only what
job they were matched to and (2) their choice would be reviewed only after hiring decisions were made. Ap-
plicants’ willingness to avoid the employer discretion job also suggests that they were not simply choosing
the most-palatable job to employers.
    Figure 7 plots the choices for the flexible-schedule job for survey respondents not in flexible-schedule
jobs. There is very little demand in this group for flexible positions; only half of respondents are willing to
take even a 2% pay cut for flexibility. Among individuals currently in positions with flexible scheduling, it is
more nuanced. While the mean WTP is still quite low among this group (2.0%), there is a subset of workers
that really value flexibility. The top 25% of workers in flexible jobs is willing to give up 16% of their pay for
the option to make their own schedule. This is consistent with sorting in the labor market, where workers
with the highest WTP for flexible scheduling are in flexible-schedule jobs.40 This may also be driven by the
endowment effect, with workers valuing the ability to make their own schedules because they have it.
    Table 9 shows the additional wages workers need to accept a job with employer discretion. In the survey,
unemployed workers require approximately the same wage premium to accept a job with employer discre-
tion (22.6%) as they do in the experiment (23.1%). While one might have worried that many experimental
participants were unemployed because they dislike employer discretion, unemployed workers do not dislike
employer discretion more than do employed workers. Consistent with labor market sorting, the average
worker in an employer discretion job is less averse to this job than is the average worker in a job without
employer discretion, though this difference is not significant (Table 9 and Figure 8). Nevertheless, workers
in jobs with employer discretion would be willing to give up a significant fraction of their wages for M-F
9 am - 5 pm jobs: the top 25% of workers would give up at least 44% of their earnings. This suggests the
  40 Past evidence on sorting into job attributes based on preferences includes Viscusi and Hersch (2001), Borghans et al. (2006),

and Krueger and Schkade (2008).




                                                               20
presence of frictions or other job characteristics that prevent perfect sorting.



6      Heterogeneity in Valuations

A number of papers suggest that women value flexibility and standard work schedules more than do men
(e.g., Wiswall and Zafar, 2016) and that this may explain gender wage gaps (e.g., Goldin and Katz, 2011
and Cortes and Pan, 2016). We find that women do have a higher valuation for worker-friendly work
arrangements and a stronger distaste for employer discretion than do men. However, the differences in work
schedules by gender along these margins are not large enough to explain a large part of gender wage gaps.
      Table 10 shows mean willingness to pay by gender for the five main alternative work arrangements in
our field experiment and Appendix Table 12 shows the quantiles of the WTP distributions. On average,
neither men nor women are willing to pay much for flexibility in their schedules or in the number of hours
they work. While we do not have information on whether the workers in our experiment have children, we
do have this information for workers in the UAS. Table 11 shows that, on average, even women with young
children (under 13 years of age), are not willing to take a pay cut for flexible scheduling. Even at the upper
quantiles of the distribution, women with young children do not have higher WTP for flexible scheduling
than do men. This is consistent with the fact that women with young children are not more likely to be in
jobs with flexible schedules (Table 11).
      While women do not seem to value the flexibility to adjust their schedule from the traditional M-F 9 am
- 5 pm schedule, they do seem to be willing to pay substantially more than are men for the ability to work
from home (more than twice as much, though this difference is not statistically significant). They are also
willing to pay more for the combined flexible job. And women are willing to pay twice as much as are men
to avoid employer discretion (Table 10). In particular, in the UAS, we find that women with young kids are
willing to give up over a third of their wages to avoid a job with an irregular schedule. Unlike women, men
with young children are not willing to pay more than other men to avoid a non-standard schedule (Table
11).41
      As we would expect based on their preferences, women are more likely to work from home (12.9% of
female and 6.2% of male hourly workers do so at least once per week). Women are also less likely to be
in jobs with irregular schedules (16.6% of women vs. 19.3% of men). These gaps change to 6.0% and
6.2%, respectively when controlling for education, race and ethnicity, age, marital status, self-employment,
    41 Our results are similar when we consider children of different ages.
                                                                    For all ages up to 18, we find women with children that age
or younger have a higher WTP to avoid employer discretion than do other women. The difference is significant only for children
under three years old. Women with young children are never willing to pay more for flexible scheduling than are other women,
regardless of the age cutoff we use.


                                                                   21
and part-time work.42 However, because the difference in the prevalence of these arrangements by gender
is so small, even with sizable compensating differentials, these differences cannot explain large gender
wage gaps. For example, with a 20% compensating differential for both work at home and working a fixed
schedule instead of an irregular one, the differences by gender in the prevalence of these arrangements would
only lead to a 1.9% raw gender wage gap or a 2.4% gap with controls.
      While we do find large differences by gender in WTP for alternative work arrangements, we do not find
significant or consistently-signed differences by the other characteristics we have: ethnicity, age, education,
number of ACT WorkKeys questions answered correctly (experimental data only) or family income (UAS
data only). Appendix Table 13 shows the differences in WTP for alternative work arrangements for these
subgroups.
      Table 12 presents results from regressions of whether the applicant chose the more-flexible job on worker
characteristics. We limit the regression to choices in our main treatments where the more-flexible job had a
lower wage. (In the employer discretion treatment, the more-flexible job is the baseline job.) We control for
the wage gap 4w. Consistent with our other results, workers choosing worker-friendly arrangements are
more likely to be female, but they look similar on other characteristics.



7      Discussion and Conclusion

We implement a discrete choice experiment in the job application process for a national call center to es-
timate workers’ willingness to pay for alternative work arrangements. Despite widely held views on the
importance of workplace flexibility (see e.g., Dominus, 2016), the majority of workers do not value flexible
scheduling or the ability to choose the number of hours they work. Workers do value the option to work from
home and strongly dislike employers setting their schedules on short notice. Jobseekers do not seem to mind
the inconsistency of these arrangements; mostly they don’t want to work nights and weekends. Overall, the
traditional M-F 9 am – 5 pm schedule works well for most people, perhaps because this schedule allows
them to coordinate their leisure time.
      Our estimates of the WTP distribution for workplace amenities allow us to shed light on market compen-
sating differentials. For all of the job attributes we consider, there is considerable evidence of heterogeneity
in valuations, suggesting that any analysis based on mean WTP alone will lead to possibly misleading con-
clusions. While scheduling flexibility is not valued by most workers, the right tail in the WTP distribution
    42 These
           statistics come from the UAS. They differ from the prevalence numbers in Table 11 since here we consider only hourly
workers, for whom we think our experiment is most representative. Using all workers in the UAS, women are 3.9 percentage
points more likely to work from home (3.3 percentage points with controls) and 5.2 percentage points less likely to work irregular
schedules (7.8 percentage points with controls).


                                                               22
still allows for potentially large market compensating wage differentials. The estimates imply that an em-
ployer could set the wage of a flexible-schedule job or a work-from-home job at 11% or 14% below the
market wage of a fixed-schedule job, respectively, and still attract at least 25% of the applicants who would
have applied to the fixed-schedule job at the higher wage.
    Whether there is a business case for setting lower wages and providing this flexibility depends on a
number of things, including the relative productivity of workers with high WTP. In the Chinese firm studied
by Bloom et al. (2015), workers who chose to work from home appear at least as productive ex ante as
workers who did not. In our experiment, workers who select into flexible positions differ significantly
only in their gender; they have similar educational characteristics and scores on the cognitive application
questions as workers choosing less-flexible positions (Table 12). Another important factor is the extent to
which a firm can distinguish higher-ability applicants with a high WTP for these arrangements from lower-
ability workers since setting a lower wage would mean attracting more lower-ability applicants. A firm
would also need to consider the impact of these arrangements on worker productivity, turnover, and capital
costs.43
    Alternatively, we can interpret our estimates as providing the WTP distribution for the overall workforce
(or the population of hourly workers). There is evidence that this is a reasonable approximation given the
close correspondence between the weighted and unweighted estimates, and the experimental and nationally-
representative survey estimates. Viewed this way, the WTP distributions shed light on the cost to firms
of alternative work arrangements. In the frictionless Rosen (1986) framework, workers with the highest
valuations for an amenity work at firms with the lowest cost of providing it. These firms provide the amenity,
while higher-cost firms employing lower-valuation workers do not. The market compensating differential is
the marginal worker’s valuation of the amenity, or equivalently, the marginal firm’s cost of providing it.
   Taking our estimated distribution of WTP as the market distribution, we can calculate the implied market
                                                         h       i
compensating differential for an attribute by inverting E Ye | 4w . Under perfect sorting, if p is the share of
workers in the alternative arrangement, the marginal worker’s valuation is the 1 − p percentile of the WTP
distribution. This is of course not meant to be taken literally as the actual market compensating differential –
there are many reasons why such differentials may not appear – but it is a useful way to assess magnitudes.
    In the UAS survey, 20% of hourly workers report being able to make their own schedules. Based on
our estimates, there are still workers on the margin who would choose flexible scheduling at a 12% wage
discount. The fact that employers are not offering these marginal workers flexible scheduling suggests that
   43 In a randomized experiment, Bloom et al. (2015) find that working from home increased the productivity of call center workers

in a Chinese company. Moen et al. (2016) experimentally evaluate the effects of greater employee control over work time in a U.S.
company and find evidence of higher job satisfaction and lower stress among employees.


                                                               23
flexible scheduling is quite costly for the marginal employer to implement. To the extent that there is not
perfect sorting of workers to firms based on the value of the amenity, this conclusion is amplified: there are
workers in inflexible jobs willing to take even larger pay cuts for flexible scheduling.44 Offering flexible
scheduling could be costly to firms because it leads to difficulties in worker coordination or in the ability to
monitor workers.
    We can do a similar calculation for the ability to choose the number of hours worked. Given that 18%
of hourly workers in the UAS report being able to choose the number of hours they work, this suggests a
market compensating differential of at least 13% – a sizable compensating differential even given that the
average worker does not value this type of flexibility.
    Despite the fact that the average worker places a relatively high valuation on working from home, only
a relatively small share of hourly workers (9% in the UAS) has this option. This suggests that there are
workers who don’t have this option who would be willing to take 21% lower wages for the ability to work
from home. The fact that they are not working from home suggests that it is likely quite costly for employers
to implement this type of flexibility.45
    Women value working from home and dislike employer discretion more than men do. However, because
men are only slightly less likely to work from home and slightly more likely to work irregular schedules,
even with large compensating differentials, these differences in preferences cannot explain a large part of
gender wage gaps.
   44 One caveat is that firms may be prevented from lowering wages by the minimum wage. However, in the UAS we find that the

prevalence of and WTP for flexible scheduling is similar when we restrict to workers earning above-minimum wages.
   45 This may be surprising given the positive benefits of work from home found in Bloom et al. (2015). Some jobs (e.g., operating

a cash register) cannot be conducted from home and many others may require more cooperation and teamwork, potentially reducing
the benefits of home work. Alternatively, many employers may overestimate the costs of allowing employees to work from home.




                                                               24
References
Aguirre, Acacia and Andrew Moore-Ede, “Shiftwork Practices 2014 Manufacturing,” Circadian Infor-
  mation, 2014.

Bloom, Nicholas, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying, “Does Working from Home
  Work? Evidence from a Chinese Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 165, 218.

Bonhomme, Stèphane and Grègory Jolivet, “The Pervasive Absence of Compensating Differentials,”
  Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2009, 24 (5), 763–795.

Borghans, Lex, Bas Ter Weel, and Bruce A Weinberg, “People people: Social capital and the labor-
  market outcomes of underrepresented groups,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2006.

Brown, Charles, “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1980,
  pp. 113–134.

Cortes, Patricia and Jessica Pan, “When Time Binds: Returns to Working Long Hours and the Gender
  Wage Gap among the Highly Skilled,” 2016.

Council of Economic Advisors, “Work-Life Balance and the Economics of Workplace Flexibility,”
  https://www.whitehouse.gov/files/documents/100331-cea-economics-workplace-flexibility.pdf, March
  2010.

DePillis, Lydia, “Walmart Is Rolling out Big Changes to Worker Schedules This Year,” Washington Post,
  February 2016.

Diamond, Peter, “Testing the Internal Consistency of Contingent Valuation Surveys,” Journal of Environ-
  mental Economics and Management, 1996, 30 (3), 337–347.

Diamond, Peter A and Jerry A Hausman, “Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better Than No
  Number?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1994, 8 (4), 45–64.

DiNardo, John, Nicole M Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution
  of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (5), 1001–1044.

Dominus, Susan, “Rethinking the Work-Life Equation,” New York Times Magazine, February 2016.

Ferrell, Diana and Fiona Greig, “Paychecks, Paydays and the Online Platform Economy,” JPMorgan
  Chase & Co. Institute, February 2016.

Filer, Randall K, “Male-Female Wage Differences: The Importance of Compensating Differentials,” In-
  dustrial & Labor Relations Review, 1985, 38 (3), 426–437.

Flory, Jeffrey A, Andreas Leibbrandt, and John A List, “Do Competitive Workplaces Deter Female
  Workers? A Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment on Job-Entry Decisions,” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 2015, pp. 122–155.

Goddeeris, John H, “Compensating Differentials and Self-Selection: An Application to Lawyers,” The
 Journal of Political Economy, 1988, pp. 411–428.

Goldin, Claudia, “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter,” The American Economic Review, 2014,
 104 (4), 1091–1119.

                                                  25
  and Lawrence F Katz, “The Cost of Workplace Flexibility for High-Powered Professionals,” The Annals
  of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 2011, 638 (1), 45–67.

  and , “The Most Egalitarian of All Professions: Pharmacy and the Evolution of a Family-Friendly
  Occupation,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2012.

Hall, Robert E and Andreas I Mueller, “Wage Dispersion and Search Behavior,” Technical Report, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research 2015.

Hanley, Nick, Robert E Wright, and Vic Adamowicz, “Using Choice Experiments to Value the Environ-
 ment,” Environmental and Resource Economics, 1998, 11 (3-4), 413–428.

Hedegaard, Morten and Jean-Robert Tyran, “The Price of Prejudice,” Technical Report, University of
 Copenhagen Department of Economics 2014.

Hwang, Hae-shin, Dale T Mortensen, and W Robert Reed, “Hedonic Wages and Labor Market Search,”
 Journal of Labor Economics, 1998, 16 (4), 815–847.

Kahneman, Daniel and Jack L Knetsch, “Valuing Public Goods: The Purchase of Moral Satisfaction,”
 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 1992, 22 (1), 57–70.

Kantor, Jodi, “Starbucks to Revise Policies to End Irregular Schedules for Its 130,000 Baristas,” New York
 Times, August 2014.

Katz, Lawrence F and Alan B Krueger, “The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the
 United States, 1995-2015,” 2016.

Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Self-control at work,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 2015, 123 (6), 1227–1277.

Kostiuk, Peter F, “Compensating Differentials for Shift Work,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990,
 pp. 1054–1075.

Krueger, Alan B and David Schkade, “Sorting in the Labor Market Do Gregarious Workers Flock to
 Interactive Jobs?,” Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (4), 859–883.

Lanfranchi, Joseph, Henry Ohlsson, and Ali Skalli, “Compensating Wage Differentials and Shift Work
  Preferences,” Economics Letters, 2002, 74 (3), 393–398.

Lang, Kevin and Sumon Majumdar, “The Pricing of Job Characteristics When Markets Do Not Clear:
  Theory and Policy Implications,” International Economic Review, 2004, 45 (4), 1111–1128.

Manski, Charles F, “The Structure of Random Utility Models,” Theory and Decision, 1977, 8 (3), 229–254.

McFadden, Daniel, “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in Paul Zarembka, ed.,
 Frontiers in Econometrics, Academic press, 1973, chapter 4, pp. 105–142.

Moen, Phyllis, Erin L Kelly, Wen Fan, Shi-Rong Lee, David Almeida, Ellen Ernst Kossek, and Or-
 feu M Buxton, “Does a flexibility/support organizational initiative improve high-tech employeesâ well-
 being? Evidence from the work, family, and health network,” American Sociological Review, 2016,
 p. 0003122415622391.

Oettinger, Gerald S, “The Incidence and Wage Consequences of Home-Based Work in the United States,
 1980–2000,” Journal of Human Resources, 2011, 46 (2), 237–260.

                                                   26
Rosen, Sherwin, “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Competition,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82 (1), 34–55.

  , “The Theory of Equalizing Differences,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 1986, 1, 641–692.

Smith, Robert S, “Compensating Wage Differentials and Public Policy: A Review,” Industrial and Labor
  Relations Review, 1979, pp. 339–352.

Sorkin, Isaac, “Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference,” 2015.

Stern, Scott, “Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists?,” Management Science, 2004, 50 (6), 835–853.

Taber, Christopher and Rune Vejlin, “Estimation of a Roy/Search/Compensating Differential Model of
  the Labor Market,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.

Viscusi, W Kip and Joni Hersch, “Cigarette smokers as job risk takers,” Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics, 2001, 83 (2), 269–280.

   and Joseph E Aldy, “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates Throughout
  the World,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2003, 27 (1), 5–76.

Weber, Lauren, “Retailers Are Under Fire for Work Schedules,” Wall Street Journal, April 2015.

Wiswall, Matthew and Basit Zafar, “Preference for the Workplace, Human Capital, and Gender,” Techni-
 cal Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.




                                                   27
                                                    Figure 1. WTP for Flexible Schedule
                                                               Uncorrected for Inattention

                                    1.2
Share Choosing Flexible Schedule Job
  0    .2    .4    .6
                   -.2   .8    1




                                          -5   -4    -3      -2     -1      0       1     2      3       4      5
                                                          Wage Premium for Flexible Schedule Job



                                                    Figure 2. WTP for Flexible Schedule
                                                                Corrected for Inattention
 Share Choosing Flexible Schedule Job
-.2 0    .2 .4 .6 .8          1 1.2




                                          -5   -4    -3      -2     -1      0       1     2      3       4      5
                                                          Wage Premium for Flexible Schedule Job

                                                    Maximum Likelihood Logit                 Breakpoint Model




                                                                        28
                                                   Figure 3. WTP for Flexible Number of Hours
                                                                    Corrected for Inattention
Share Choosing Flexible Number of Hours Job
  -.2 0     .2 .4 .6 .8         1 1.2




                                              -5   -4    -3    -2    -1       0     1       2      3        4      5
                                                        Wage Premium for Flexible Number of Hours Job

                                                        Maximum Likelihood Logit                Breakpoint Model




                                                        Figure 4. WTP to Work from Home
                                                                    Corrected for Inattention
                             1 1.2
  Share Choosing Work from Home Job
-.2 0     .2 .4 .6 .8




                                              -5   -4    -3      -2    -1      0       1    2     3         4      5
                                                              Wage Premium for Work from Home Job

                                                        Maximum Likelihood Logit                Breakpoint Model




                                                                            29
                                                  Figure 5. WTP for Combined Flexible Job
                                                                 Corrected for Inattention
 Share Choosing Combined Flexible Job
-.2 0     .2 .4 .6 .8        1 1.2




                                        -5   -4      -3      -2     -1      0     1      2       3       4      5
                                                          Wage Premium for Combined Flexible Job

                                                     Maximum Likelihood Logit                Breakpoint Model




                                             Figure 6. WTP to Avoid Employer Discretion
                                                                 Corrected for Inattention
                         1 1.2
Share Choosing Baseline Job
0    .2 .4 .6 .8  -.2




                                        -5   -4      -3       -2    -1    0       1       2       3      4      5
                                                              Wage Premium for Baseline Job

                                                     Maximum Likelihood Logit                Breakpoint Model




                                                                         30
                                                       Figure 7. WTP for Flexible Schedule
                                                               UAS Data; Corrected for Inattention
Share Choosing Flexible Schedule Job
 0     .2    .4     .6    .8     1




                                       -40                 -30               -20               -10                                       0
                                                         Wage Premium (in %) for Flexible Schedule Job

                                                               Has Flexible Job             Has Inflexible Job
                                       Note: Flexible jobs are defined as those in which the respondent is able to make his or her own
                                       schedule. All other jobs are defined as having inflexible schedules.




                                                Figure 8. WTP to Avoid Employer Discretion
                                                               UAS Data; Corrected for Inattention
                            1
Share Choosing Baseline Job
   .2    .4    .6
                0     .8




                                       -40                   -30             -20                -10                                      0
                                                              Wage Premium (in %) for Baseline Job

                                                       Has Regular Schedule                  Has Irregular Schedule
                                       Note: Irregular schedules are those in which the respondent's schedule varies from week to week
                                       and is set by the respondent's employer. All other work schedules are considered regular.




                                                                                  31
                                        Table 1. Description of Main Treatments

Treatment Name                                          Position Description                                Sample Size
Flexible Schedule          The position is 40 hours per week.                                                  640
                           You can make your own schedule. This can be a M-F 9 am - 5 pm schedule or
                           other days and times. The work is exclusively on-site in downtown [city]. This
                           position pays [wage] dollars per hour.

Flexible Number of Hours   In this position you can choose the number of hours you work, up to and             663
                           including 40 hours each week.
                           The position has a M-F daytime schedule. The work is exclusively on-site in
                           downtown [city]. This position pays [wage] dollars per hour.


Work from Home             The position is 40 hours per week.                                                  608
                           This is a M-F 9 am - 5 pm position. You have the option of working from
                           home as well as on-site in downtown [city]. This position pays [wage] dollars
                           per hour.

Combined Flexible          You can choose the number of hours you work, up to and including 40 hours           694
                           each week. You can make your own schedule. This can be a M-F 9 am - 5 pm
                           schedule or other days and times.
                           You have the option of working from home as well as on-site in downtown
                           [city].
                           This position pays [wage] dollars per hour.


Employer Discretion        The position is 40 hours per week.                                                  640
                           The hours in this position vary from week to week. You will be given your
                           work schedule one week in advance. The hours can be morning through
                           evening, weekdays and weekends, but not nights.
                           The work is exclusively on-site in downtown [city]. This position pays [wage]
                           dollars per hour.




                                                            32
                                             Table 2. Descriptive Statistics
                                       Experiment, UAS, and Comparison Samples

                                                   Panel A. Experiment                                Panel B. UAS

                                      Experiment       CPS (phone        CPS (phone             UAS             CPS (all)
                                                      occupations)     occupations, in
                                                                           cities)
Female                                   75%               67%              65%                 47%                  52%

Currently Employed                       39%              100%              100%                92%                  95%
 Full-time                               16%              81%               82%                 76%                  77%
 Part-time                               23%              19%               18%                 16%                  18%
Unemployed                               61%               0%                0%                  8%                   5%

Age
 Average Age                             33.0              38.9             38.8                42.9              46.1
 < 30 years old                          49%               32%              32%                 18%               24%
 30-40 years old                         28%               26%              27%                 29%               18%
 > 40 years old                          23%               43%              42%                 52%               58%

Education
 Less than High School                    2%                6%               6%                  7%               15%
 High School                             28%               31%              30%                 29%               28%
 Some College                            46%               28%              28%                 19%               18%
 College Degree                          22%               31%              32%                 33%               28%
 Advanced Degree                         2%                4%               4%                  13%               11%

Race
 White                                   41%               59%              53%                 67%               64%
 Black                                   33%               17%              18%                 13%               12%
 Hispanic                                13%               18%              21%                 17%               16%
 Other/Don't Want to Report              13%               3%               8%                  3%                8%

Observations                            3,245            1,041               738                1,950            148,626
Notes: The first column of each panel presents descriptive statistics on the experimental sample (Panel A) and the
Understanding America Study sample (Panel B). The remaining columns present descriptive statistics on comparison
samples. CPS data are from March 2016. "Phone occupations" include telemarketers, bill and account collectors,
customer service representatives, and interviewers (except eligibility and loan). The "in cities" column is limited to
respondents who live in a metropolitan area (either inside or outside the central city).




                                                            33
                                    Table 3. Randomization Assessment
                       p-Values from Regressions of Covariates on Wage Gap Dummies

                                           Flexible      Flexible     Work from     Combined      Employer
                                          Schedule      Number of      Home          Flexible     Discretion
                                                          Hours

Age                                         0.750          0.271         0.875        0.720         0.200

Female                                      0.677          0.573         0.065        0.630         0.734

White                                       0.481          0.661         0.372        0.594         0.621

Black                                       0.331          0.055         0.271        0.416         0.984

Hispanic                                    0.054          0.365         0.049        0.755         0.442

Other Race/Do Not Want to Report               0.774           0.070         0.860         0.746       0.501
Notes: Each cell reports the p-value of an F-statistic from a separate regression of the demographic
characteristic indicated by the row on dummies for the difference in offered wages between the baseline M-F 9
am - 5 pm job and the position indicated by the column. This table includes all applicants who were presented
with the choice, regardless of whether they made a choice. There are 711 applicants in the Flexible Schedule
treatment, 724 in the Flexible Number of Hours treatment, 695 in the Work from home treatment, 739 in the
combined flexible treatment, and 763 in the employer discretion treatment.




                                                      34
                       Table 4. Willingness to Pay for Alternative Work Arrangements

                                                                      Quantiles
                                 Mean      Standard         25th        50th         75th        Observations
                                           Deviation

                                                A. Willingness to Pay for Worker Flexibility
Flexible Schedule               $0.48        $2.15          -$0.82      $0.48       $1.79            640
                                (0.25)       (1.16)         (0.58)      (0.25)      (0.88)

Flexible Number of Hours        -$0.22       $2.24          -$1.58      -$0.22      $1.14            663
                                (0.21)       (0.96)         (0.57)      (0.21)      (0.66)

Work from Home                  $1.33        $1.86          $0.20       $1.33       $2.45            608
                                (0.30)       (0.87)         (0.53)      (0.30)      (0.67)

Combined Flexible               $1.17        $2.33          -$0.25      $1.17       $2.58            694
                                (0.30)       (0.81)         (0.47)      (0.30)      (0.66)

                                            B. Willingness to Pay to Avoid Employer Discretion
Employer Discretion             $3.41        $2.95           $1.63      $3.41      $5.20             640
                                (0.42)       (0.92)         (0.48)      (0.42)     (0.87)

Notes: All treatments are compared to the baseline Monday-Friday, 9 am - 5 pm position. Estimates are
generated using an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model using data from the experiment.
Bootstrapped standard errors based on 500 samples are in parentheses.




                                                      35
          Table 5. Willingness to Pay for Alternative Work Arrangements: Robustness to Reweighting
                    Reweighted by Demographic Characteristics to Match March 2016 CPS

                                                                         Quantiles
                                   Mean      Standard           25th      50th       75th     Observations
                                             Deviation

                                            A. Weighted Using Pre-Experiment Characteristics Only
Willingness to Pay for
 Flexible Schedule                 $0.44       $3.66            -$1.78    $0.44      $2.65           604
                                   (0.29)      (1.03)           (0.65)    (0.29)     (0.72)

 Flexible Number of Hours         -$0.11       $0.74            -$0.56    -$0.11     $0.34           623
                                  (0.24)       (1.05)           (0.68)    (0.24)     (0.68)

 Work from Home                    $1.33       $1.94            $0.16     $1.33      $2.51           565
                                   (0.48)      (0.88)           (0.38)    (0.48)     (0.94)

 Combined Flexible                 $1.13       $1.59            $0.17     $1.13      $2.10           643
                                   (0.38)      (0.91)           (0.62)    (0.38)     (0.72)

Willingness to Pay to Avoid
 Employer Discretion               $3.23       $4.26            $0.65     $3.23      $5.81           611
                                   (0.61)      (0.88)           (0.41)    (0.61)     (1.08)

                                              B. Weighted Using All Demographic Characteristics
Willingness to Pay for
 Flexible Schedule                 $0.24       $0.40            $0.00     $0.24      $0.48           465
                                   (0.18)      (0.76)           (0.47)    (0.18)     (0.52)

 Flexible Number of Hours         -$0.30       $1.30            -$1.09    -$0.30     $0.48           514
                                  (0.34)       (1.04)           (0.63)    (0.34)     (0.79)

 Work from Home                    $1.35       $1.43            $0.48     $1.35      $2.21           457
                                   (0.75)      (1.21)           (0.53)    (0.75)     (1.39)

 Combined Flexible                 $1.42       $1.46            $0.53     $1.42      $2.30           522
                                   (0.61)      (1.00)           (0.55)    (0.61)     (1.09)

Willingness to Pay to Avoid
 Employer Discretion                $3.75       $4.99          $0.73     $3.75     $6.78            483
                                    (1.40)      (1.97)         (0.94)    (1.40)    (2.43)
Notes: Weights are calculated using the DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) method, matching the covariate
distribution of the March 2016 CPS. Panel A uses race dummies, a female dummy, age, and age*race,
age*female, and female*race interaction terms to create weights. Panel B adds educational attainment
categories. Estimates are based on an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model using data from
the experiment. Bootstrapped standard errors based on 500 samples are in parentheses. Sample weights are
capped at a maximum of 10 standard deviations above the sample mean weight. This restriction affects 2
observations in Panel A and 5 observations in Panel B.




                                                           36
                             Table 6. Willingness to Pay for a 40 Hour-per-Week Job

                                                                         Quantiles
                                   Mean       Standard          25th      50th         75th        Observations
                                              Deviation

                                                         A. WTP for a 40 Hour-per-Week Job
Relative to
 20 Hour-per-Week Job              $6.20        $6.34           $2.37     $6.20       $10.03           728
                                   (1.40)       (1.82)          (0.60)    (1.40)      (2.45)

 50 Hour-per-Week Job              $0.88        $6.33          -$2.96     $0.88        $4.72           751
                                   (0.73)       (2.90)         (2.42)     (0.73)       (1.18)

                                                              B. Shadow Value of Time
 20 Hour-per-Week Job              $3.60                        -$4.07     $3.60      $11.26           728
                                   (2.81)                       (4.90)     (2.81)     (1.19)

 50 Hour-per-Week Job               $19.52                      $4.17       $19.52     $34.87            751
                                     (2.94)                     (9.70)      (2.94)     (4.70)
Notes: The table provides statistics on workers' willingness to pay for a 40 hour-per-week job relative to a 20
hour- and 50 hour-per-week job. Estimates are based on an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit
model using data from the experiment. Standard errors calculated using the delta method are in parentheses.




                                                         37
                                                   Table 7. Unpacking Aversion to Employer Discretion

                                                                                                                Quantiles
        Alternative Option                  Base Option               Mean          Standard         25th         50th           75th        Observations
                                                                                    Deviation

Irregular Hours, Consistent           M-F 9 am - 5 pm                 $3.42          $5.73          -$0.05        $3.42         $6.89             626
Schedule                                                              (0.51)         (1.09)         (0.50)        (0.51)        (1.06)

Morning Schedule                      M-F 9 am - 5 pm                 -$1.09         $1.12          -$1.77        -$1.09        -$0.41            202
(M-F 7 am - 3 pm)                                                     (0.44)         (1.52)         (0.74)        (0.44)        (1.24)

Afternoon/Evening Schedule            M-F 9 am - 5 pm                 $2.39          $4.34          -$0.24        $2.39         $5.02             195
(M-F 12 pm - 8 pm)                                                    (0.73)         (1.04)         (0.46)        (0.73)        (1.28)

Weekend Schedule                      M-F 9 am - 5 pm                 $3.27          $4.13          $0.76         $3.27         $5.77             209
(Th-M 9 am - 5 pm)                                                    (0.70)         (0.99)         (0.55)        (0.70)        (1.18)

2nd Shift                              1st Shift                        $5.20        $6.21            $1.43          $5.20        $8.96            192
(M-F 3 pm - 11 pm)                     (M-F 7 am - 3 pm)               (1.72)        (2.12)           (0.76)         (1.72)       (2.94)
Notes: The table provides statistics on workers' willingness to pay for the base option relative to the alternative option. Estimates are based on an
inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model using data from the experiment. Bootstrapped standard errors based on 500 samples are in
parentheses. Appendix Table 11 contains the job description text for each treatment.




                                                                               38
                           Table 8. Willingness to Pay for Flexible Schedule
                          Estimates from the Understanding America Study

                                                          Quantiles
    Mean           Standard              25th               50th          75th           Observations
                   Deviation

                                                 A. All
     2.5%             4.0%               0.1%               2.5%           4.9%              1,598
    (0.4%)           (1.4%)             (0.7%)             (0.4%)         (1.1%)

                                      B. In Flexible-Schedule Job
     2.0%            22.9%              -11.9%            2.0%            15.9%               450
    (2.7%)           (7.9%)              (6.8%)          (2.7%)           (3.9%)

                                     C. In Inflexible-Schedule Job
     1.9%             0.2%                1.8%             1.9%            2.1%              1,148
    (0.0%)           (0.1%)              (0.1%)           (0.0%)          (0.0%)

                    D. Difference: In Flexible-Schedule Job - In Inflexible-Schedule Job
       0.1%          22.6%***             -13.7%**          0.1%            13.8%***          1,598
      (2.6%)           (7.5%)               (6.4%)         (2.6%)             (3.7%)
Notes: The table show statistics for workers' willingness to pay for the flexible schedule job relative
to the M - F 9 am - 5 pm baseline job. Data come from the Understanding America Study.
Respondents are considered to have a flexible-schedule job if they report being able to make their
own schedule at work. All other jobs are defined to be have inflexible schedules. Estimates are
generated using an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model. * denotes the difference
is significant at the 10% level and is only presented for the Difference panels. Standard errors
calculated using the delta method are in parentheses.




                                                          39
                      Table 9. Willingness to Pay to Avoid Employer Discretion
                         Estimates from the Understanding America Study

                                                          Quantiles
    Mean           Standard              25th               50th         75th           Observations
                   Deviation

                                                 A. All
    29.3%           22.1%               15.9%              29.3%         42.7%              1,614
    (1.7%)          (2.2%)              (1.4%)             (1.7%)        (2.8%)

                                            B. Employed
    30.1%           22.2%               16.7%         30.1%              43.6%              1,461
    (1.9%)          (2.4%)              (1.5%)        (1.9%)             (3.1%)

                                           C. Unemployed
    22.6%           23.7%                8.2%         22.6%              36.9%               153
    (4.4%)          (7.6%)              (4.7%)        (4.4%)             (7.7%)

                               D. Difference: Employed - Unemployed
     7.6%           -1.5%                8.49*          7.6%         6.6%                   1,614
    (4.8%)          (8.0%)              (4.9%)         (4.8%)       (8.3%)

                                  E. In Job with a Regular Schedule
    30.5%           21.4%                17.5%           30.5%           43.5%              1,250
    (2.0%)          (2.5%)               (1.6%)          (2.0%)          (3.2%)

                                 F. In Job with an Irregular Schedule
    26.9%           27.9%                10.0%            26.9%          43.9%               218
    (5.2%)          (8.9%)               (4.4%)          (5.2%)          (9.6%)

                              G. Difference: Regular - Irregular Schedule
     3.6%            -6.5%                7.5%             3.6%            -0.4%              1,468
    (5.6%)          (10.8%)              (4.6%)           (5.6%)          (10.2%)
Notes: Estimates are generated using an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model using
data from the Understanding America Study. Irregular schedules are those in which the employer
chooses the worker's schedule and it varies from week to week; all other work schedules are
considered regular. * denotes the difference is significant at the 10% level and is only presented for
Panel D. Standard errors calculated using the delta method are in parentheses.




                                                          40
                                          Table 10. Willingness to Pay by Gender
                                                Data from the Experiment

                                               Mean WTP for Flexibility                              Mean WTP to Avoid
                      Flexible Schedule Flexible Number of Work from Home          Combined          Employer Discretion
                                               Hours                                Flexible

Female                     $0.58              -$0.19              $1.59              $1.56                   $4.27
                           (0.34)             (0.28)              (0.40)             (0.48)                  (0.78)

Male                       $0.16              -$0.34              $0.68              $0.03                   $2.11
                           (0.34)             (0.36)              (0.42)             (0.44)                  (0.54)

Difference                 $0.42               $0.15              $0.91             $1.52**                $2.16**
(Female - Male)            (0.48)              (0.46)             (0.58)             (0.62)                 (0.98)

Observations                 609                638                  576                654                     621
Notes: The table shows the mean willingness to pay for or to avoid each alternative work arrangement, by gender. Estimates
are generated using an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model using data from the experiment. Bootstrapped
standard errors based on 500 samples are in parentheses. For the gender difference estimates, ** denotes significance at
the 5% level.




                                                                           41
                                              Table 11. WTP by Gender and Parental Status
                                                Data from Understanding America Study

                                                      Flexible Schedule                                Employer Discretion
                                       % in Flexible-      WTP for      Observations     % in Irregular- WTP to Avoid Observations
                                       Schedule Jobs        Flexible                     Schedule Jobs    Employer
                                                           Schedule                                       Discretion

                                                                                    A. Women
Women with Children under 13              27.0%             1.3%            317                12.1%        37.5%             351
                                                           (0.7%)                                           (6.0%)

Women without Children under 13           30.0%             2.1%            550                12.7%        28.3%             611
                                                           (1.1%)                                           (2.5%)

p-value of Difference                      0.43             0.57                               0.82          0.16

                                                                                     B. Men
Men with Children under 13                20.2%             2.9%            248                15.6%        28.2%             258
                                                           (1.1%)                                           (3.4%)

Men without Children under 13             28.6%             3.1%            488                19.0%        27.5%             529
                                                           (0.4%)                                           (3.2%)

p-value of Difference                      0.03             0.86                               0.38          0.88

p-value: Difference between women
with Children under 13 and All Other
Groups                                       0.96             0.22                               0.14           0.14
Notes: Estimates are generated using an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model using data from the UAS. Standard errors
calculated using the delta method are in parentheses. Respondents are considered to be in an irregular-schedule job if their employer
sets their schedule and their schedule varies from week to week. They are considered to have a flexible-schedule job if they are able to
set their own schedule. The fraction of each group in flexible-schedule and irregular-schedule jobs is conditional on employment.




                                                                               42
           Table 12. Relationship between Job Choice and Applicant Characteristics
                        Dependent Variable: Chose More-Flexible Job


Female                            0.133***                                             0.132***
                                   (0.028)                                              (0.031)

Black                                          0.001                                     -0.008
                                              (0.029)                                   (0.033)

Hispanic                                       -0.002                                    0.019
                                              (0.040)                                   (0.045)

Other Race/Do Not Want                         0.059                                     0.020
To Report                                     (0.037)                                   (0.043)

Some College                                             -0.004                          0.002
                                                        (0.032)                         (0.033)

College Degree or More                                   0.024                           0.032
                                                        (0.037)                         (0.038)

ACT Questions Correct                                               0.001                0.000
                                                                   (0.015)              (0.015)

Above Median Age                                                              0.014      -0.018
                                                                             (0.024)    (0.029)

Mean of Dependent Variable          0.444     0.444     0.437      0.437      0.444     0.439
Observations                        1,564     1,641     1,301      1,301      1,641     1,247
R-Squared                           0.028     0.016     0.021      0.021      0.014     0.035
Notes: Each column presents the results of a regression of an indicator for whether a worker
chose the more-flexible of the jobs presented on the characteristics in the left-most column.
Applicants from the Flexible Schedule, Flexible Number of Hours, Work from Home,
Combined Flexible, and Employer Discretion treatments who were presented a choice in
which the more-flexible job was offered at a lower wage are included. The more-flexible job
in the Employer Discretion treatment is the baseline job. All regressions include a control for
the difference in the wages offered. *** denotes the coefficient is significant at the 1% level.




                                                         43
                              Appendix Figure 1. Job Advertisement
    Phone Survey Associate ([city, state])

    The [center] is currently recruiting phone survey interviewers to join our call center team in
    [city].

    This is not a sales or telemarketing position.

    Please follow the link [link] to apply to this opportunity. We do not accept applications through
    email.

    Essential Functions
    Make phone calls in order to implement phone surveys

    Desired Skills
    Good communication skills
    Ability to work with others
    Used to basic computer and/or mobile applications

          Principals only. Recruiters, please don’t contact this job poster.
          do NOT contact us with unsolicited services or offers

    compensation: $11.00 - $16.001 dollars/hour
    employment type: employee’s choice



1
    Notes: This was $11.00 - $16.00 in some cities and $14.00 to $19.00 in others.




                                                     44
Appendix Figure 2. Welcome Message




 Notes: The name of the center is redacted.




                                              45
                                              Appendix Figure 3. Probability of Choosing
              1
              .75                                   a Job Option by Wage Gap
Coefficient Size
              .5
              .25
              0
              -.25
              -.5




                              t
                      -$ 00
                      -$ 00
                      -$ 00
                      -$ 75
                      -$ 50
                      -$ 25
                      -$ 00
                      -$ 75
                      -$ 50
                      -$ 25
                      -$ 00
                      -$ 75
                      -$ 50
                       $0 5
                       $0 5
                       $0 0
                       $1 5
                       $1 0
                       $1 5
                       $1 0
                       $2 5
                       $2 0
                       $2 5
                       $2 0
                       $3 5
                       $4 0
                       $ 0
                     on 0
                           an
                           2
                          .2
                          .5
                          .7
                          .0
                          .2
                          .5
                          .7
                          .0
                          .2
                          .5
                          .7
                          .0
                          .0
                    C 5.0
                        5.
                        4.
                        3.
                        2.
                        2.
                        2.
                        2.
                        1.
                        1.
                        1.
                        1.
                        0.
                        0.
                        0.




                        st
                   -$




                                                                        Wage Gap Dummies
                        Notes: The figure plots the coefficients from a regression of a dummy for choosing one of the two job options on dummies for the
                        wage gap between the more- and less-flexible jobs. Data from the Flexible Schedule, Flexible Number of Hours, Work from Home,
                        Combined Flexible, and Employer Discretion treatments are included. Applicants are included if they were presented with the job
                        options. The omitted category is a $0 wage gap. Vertical bars show the 95% confidence interval.




                                Appendix Figure 4. Probability of Submitting Subsequent
                                       Demographic Information by Wage Gap
              1
              .75
Coefficient Size
              .5
              .25
              0
              -.25
              -.5




                             t
                     -$ 00
                     -$ 00
                     -$ 00
                     -$ 75
                     -$ 50
                     -$ 25
                     -$ 00
                     -$ 75
                     -$ 50
                     -$ 25
                     -$ 00
                     -$ 75
                     -$ 50
                      $0 5
                      $0 5
                      $0 0
                      $1 5
                      $1 0
                      $1 5
                      $1 0
                      $2 5
                      $2 0
                      $2 5
                      $2 0
                      $3 5
                      $4 0
                      $ 0
                    on 0
                          an
                          2
                         .2
                         .5
                         .7
                         .0
                         .2
                         .5
                         .7
                         .0
                         .2
                         .5
                         .7
                         .0
                         .0
                   C 5.0
                       5.
                       4.
                       3.
                       2.
                       2.
                       2.
                       2.
                       1.
                       1.
                       1.
                       1.
                       0.
                       0.
                       0.




                       st
                   -$




                                                                        Wage Gap Dummies
                        Notes: The figure plots the coefficients from a regression of a dummy for submitting the demographic information after the job choice
                        on dummies for the wage gap between the more- and less-flexible jobs. Data from the Flexible Schedule, Flexible Number of Hours,
                        Work from Home, Combined Flexible, and Employer Discretion treatments are included. The omitted category is a $0 wage gap.
                        Vertical bars show the 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                                46
                                              Appendix Figure 5. WTP for Flexible Number of Hours
                                                                  Uncorrected for Inattention
Share Choosing Flexible Number of Hours Job
-.2   0   .2     .4    .6   .8    1    1.2




                                              -5   -4    -3    -2    -1       0     1       2      3    4   5
                                                        Wage Premium for Flexible Number of Hours Job



                                                   Appendix Figure 6. WTP to Work from Home
                                                                  Uncorrected for Inattention
                                 1.2
Share Choosing Work from Home Job
  0    .2    .4  .6  -.2.8  1




                                              -5   -4    -3      -2    -1      0       1    2     3     4   5
                                                              Wage Premium for Work from Home Job




                                                                                  47
                                              Appendix Figure 7. WTP for Combined Flexible Job
                                                                Uncorrected for Inattention
                                   1.2
Share Choosing Combined Flexible Job
   0    .2   .4   .6
                  -.2  .8     1




                                         -5      -4   -3      -2     -1      0     1      2       3   4   5
                                                           Wage Premium for Combined Flexible Job



                                         Appendix Figure 8. WTP to Avoid Employer Discretion
                                                                Uncorrected for Inattention
                  1.2     1
Share Choosing Baseline Job
   .2    .4   .6  0 .8
                  -.2




                                         -5      -4   -3       -2    -1    0       1       2     3    4   5
                                                               Wage Premium for Baseline Job




                                                                                 48
            Appendix Table 1. Randomization Assessment: Workers who Made a Job Choice Only
                     p-values from Regressions of Covariates on Wage Gap Dummies

                                           Flexible     Flexible     Work from     Combined     Employer
                                          Schedule     Number of      Home          Flexible    Discretion
                                                         Hours

Age                                         0.705          0.310       0.633         0.676        0.255

Female                                      0.770          0.812       0.157         0.564        0.488

White                                       0.527          0.730       0.159         0.669        0.825

Black                                       0.360          0.093       0.097         0.752        0.989

Hispanic                                    0.012          0.295       0.297         0.726        0.252

Other Race/Do Not Want to Report              0.838          0.106          0.635        0.758         0.768
Notes: This table replicates Table 3, where the sample is limited to individuals who chose one of the two
positions presented. Each cell reports the p-value of an F-statistic from a separate regression of the
demographic characteristic indicated by the row on dummies for the difference in offered wages between the
baseline M-F 9 am - 5 pm job and the job indicated by the column. There are 640 applicants in the Flexible
Schedule treatment, 663 in the Flexible Number of Hours treatment, 608 in the Work from Home treatment,
694 in the Combined Flexible treatment, and 640 in the Employer Discretion treatment.




                                                      49
                                          Appendix Table 2. Descriptive Statistics by Treatment

                                         Flexible        Flexible       Work from         Flexible       Employer           p-value of
                                        Schedule        Number of        Home           Combination      Discretion         difference
                                                          Hours

Age                                        32.9            33.2             33.3            33.5            32.2               0.23

Female                                     75%             77%              77%             76%             73%                0.50

Race/Ethnicity
 White                                     41%             42%              42%             39%             37%                0.28

 Black                                     31%             32%              33%             32%             33%                0.93

 Hispanic                                  14%             12%              11%             13%             13%                0.57

 Other Race/Don't Want to Respond          14%             14%              14%             16%             17%                0.46

Education
 Less than High School                     2%               1%              1%               2%              3%                0.69

 High School                               29%             29%              26%             31%             32%                0.29

 Some College                              47%             46%              46%             47%             43%                0.67

 College Degree                            22%             21%              24%             20%             23%                0.59

 Advanced Degree                           2%               3%              3%               2%              1%                0.10

Observations                                640             663           608                694             640               3,245
Notes: The first five columns of data show the mean of the demographic characteristic indicated by the row for applicants in the
treatment indicated by the column. The final column shows the p-value from a test that the means are equal across treatments.



                                                                          50
                      Appendix Table 3. Willingness to Pay for Alternative Work Arrangements
                                                Breakpoint Method

                                                                         Quantiles
                                    Mean       Standard        25th       50th         75th           Observations
                                               Deviation

                                                    A. Willingness to Pay for Worker Flexibility
Flexible Schedule                   $1.75       $3.43          $0.00       $0.00      $2.14               640
                                    (3.36)      (4.11)         (0.82)      (0.26)     (3.07)

Flexible Number of Hours            -$0.01      $1.96         -$1.72      -$0.28       $1.17              663
                                    (0.96)      (1.52)        (0.66)      (0.29)       (1.18)

Work from Home                      $1.72       $2.04          $0.00      $1.06        $2.80              608
                                    (2.52)      (3.20)         (0.60)     (0.48)       (3.52)

Combined Flexible                   $1.42       $2.30         -$0.74      $1.02        $2.77              694
                                    (1.57)      (2.14)        (0.65)      (0.39)       (1.80)

                                                 B. Willingness to Pay to Avoid Employer Discretion
Employer Discretion                 $3.53       $3.16           $1.39       $3.43     $5.48               640
                                    (2.18)      (2.39)          (0.54)     (1.63)     (3.42)

Notes: This table replicates Table 4, where instead of using a maximum likelihood logit model, the
estimates are generated using the breakpoint model, corrected for inattention. This model is described in
Section 3 of the text. Bootstrapped standard errors based on 500 samples are in parentheses. The
estimates from the bootstrap runs are capped at 5 times the maximum point estimate across all five main
treatments for the respective statistic (mean, standard deviation, or quantile).




                                                         51
                    Appendix Table 4. Willingness to Pay for Alternative Work Arrangements
                                          Uncorrected for Inattention

                                                                        Quantiles
                                   Mean      Standard          25th       50th         75th       Observations
                                             Deviation

                                                   A. Willingness to Pay for Worker Flexibility
Flexible Schedule                  $0.59       $4.51           -$2.14      $0.59      $3.32           640
                                   (0.23)      (0.54)          (0.34)      (0.23)    (0.45)

Flexible Number of Hours           -$0.13      $4.87          -$3.07      -$0.13      $2.82           663
                                   (0.22)      (0.56)         (0.41)      (0.22)      (0.40)

Work from Home                     $1.44       $6.38          -$2.42      $1.44       $5.31           608
                                   (0.40)      (1.20)         (0.55)      (0.40)      (1.03)

Combined Flexible                  $1.26       $6.60          -$2.73      $1.26       $5.26           694
                                   (0.34)      (1.02)         (0.53)      (0.34)      (0.84)

                                               B. Willingness to Pay to Avoid Employer Discretion
Employer Discretion                 $3.74       $5.43           $0.45      $3.74     $7.03           640
                                    (0.49)      (0.79)          (0.28)     (0.49)    (0.93)
Notes: This table replicates Table 4, where the estimates are generated without correcting the data for
inattention before the maximum likelihood logit estimation. Bootstrapped standard errors based on 500
samples are in parentheses.




                                                         52
                     Appendix Table 5. WTP Estimates for Alternative Work Arrangements
                                   All Jobs Limited to 20 Hours per Week

                                                                        Quantiles
                                    Mean      Standard         25th       50th        75th        Observations
                                              Deviation

                                                   A. Willingness to Pay for Worker Flexibility
Flexible Schedule                   $0.55       $1.45          -$0.33      $0.55     $1.43            176
                                    (0.50)      (1.51)         (0.73)      (0.50)    (1.28)

Flexible Number of Hours            $0.39       $1.79         -$0.70      $0.39       $1.47           182
                                    (0.37)      (0.86)        (0.46)      (0.37)      (0.77)

Work from Home                      $0.89       $2.87         -$0.84      $0.89       $2.63           193
                                    (0.37)      (0.95)        (0.63)      (0.37)      (0.73)

Combined Flexible                   $1.24       $1.85          $0.12      $1.24       $2.36           181
                                    (0.49)      (1.03)         (0.59)     (0.49)      (0.95)

                                                B. Willingness to Pay to Avoid Employer Discretion
Employer Discretion                   $2.64       $4.33          $0.02     $2.64      $5.26           178
                                      (0.69)      (1.01)        (0.43)     (0.69)     (1.23)
Notes: This table replicates Table 4, where both the baseline treatment and the alternative treatments are 20
hours per week. The Flexible Number of Hours treatment allows the worker to choose the number of hours
worked up to 20 hours per week.




                                                         53
                Appendix Table 6. Descriptive Statistics: Experimental Sample and March CPS
                                   Weighted and Unweighted Estimates

                                     CPS                                 Experiment
                                  Hourly          Unweighted      Weighted Using Pre-    Weighted Using All
                                  Workers                            Experiment           Demographics
                                                                    Demographics
Female                              50%               76%                50%                     49%

Age                                 39.4              33.0                38.5                   38.7

Race
 White                              59%               41%                 59%                    61%
 Black                              13%               32%                 13%                    13%
 Hispanic                           20%               13%                 21%                    19%
 Other Race/Do Not Want to          8%                13%                 8%                     7%
 Report

Education
 Less than High School              12%               2%                  2%                     13%
 High School                        33%               28%                 26%                    29%
 Some College                       23%               46%                 44%                    23%
 College Degree                     27%               22%                 25%                    28%
 More than College                  5%                2%                  3%                     7%

Observations                        7,567             3,245                3,046                  2,441
Notes: The first column of data shows descriptive statistics for hourly workers in the March 2016 CPS. The
second, third, and fourth columns of data show descriptive characteristics for the experimental sample, with
different weights. Pre-experiment demographics are collected before the job options are presented. These
weights are constructed using race categories, a female dummy, age, and age*race, age*female, and
female*race interaction terms. The weights in the final column are generated using these characteristics and
educational attainment categories. Sample weights are capped at a maximum of 10 standard deviations above
the sample mean weight. This restriction affects 2 observations in the third column of data and 5 observations
in the fourth.




                                                       54
                       Appendix Table 7. Willingness to Pay for a 40 Hour-per-Week Job
                                         Uncorrected for Inattention

                                                                         Quantiles
                                    Mean       Standard         25th       50th          75th     Observations
                                               Deviation

                                                      A. WTP for a 40 Hour-per-Week Job
Relative to
 20 Hour-per-Week Job               $8.03        $13.37        -$0.05      $8.03      $16.11          728
                                    (2.12)       (3.55)        (0.64)      (2.12)     (4.21)

 50 Hour-per-Week Job               $0.86        $8.84         -$4.49      $0.86         $6.22        751
                                    (0.75)       (4.02)        (3.11)      (0.75)        (1.81)

                                                           B. Shadow Value of Time
 20 Hour-per-Week Job               -$0.06                     -$16.23    -$0.06      $16.10          728
                                    (4.24)                      (8.43)    (4.24)      (1.29)

 50 Hour-per-Week Job                $19.45                     -$1.97     $19.45       $40.88          751
                                      (3.00)                    (12.46)     (3.00)      (7.25)
Notes: The table replicates Table 6, where the estimates are generated without correcting the data for
inattention before the maximum likelihood logit estimation. Standard errors calculated using the delta method
are in parentheses.




                                                      55
                 Appendix Table 8. Effect of Commuting Time on WTP for Alternative Work Arrangements

                                                 Flexible         Flexible   Work from       Combined       Employer
                                                Schedule         Number of    Home            Flexible      Discretion
                                                                   Hours

Mean WTP for Applicants Who Live in the          $0.04             $0.40        $1.14          $0.63          $3.14
Same Zip Code As the Job                         (0.36)            (0.42)       (0.59)         (0.51)         (0.65)

Additional WTP for an Additional One Hour        $0.76            -$0.88        $0.28          $0.91          $0.68
per Day of Commuting Time                        (0.59)           (0.52)        (0.85)         (0.82)         (0.92)

Observations                                       632            645              597          690               632
Notes: The table shows mean willingness to pay estimates from an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model
using data from the experiment. Commuting time is calculated as twice the driving time between an applicant's zip code
and the zip code of the job at 8 am Monday morning, as estimated by Google Maps. Bootstrap standard errors based on
500 samples are in parentheses.




                                                            56
                     Appendix Table 9. Willingness to Pay for Alternative Work Arrangements
                                Robustness to Alternative Inattention Measures

                                                                           Quantiles
                                    Mean        Standard           25th      50th         75th         Observations
                                                Deviation

                                               A. Inattention Estimate from Incorrect Recall of Choice
Willingness to Pay for
 Flexible Schedule                  $0.26         $0.64           -$0.13      $0.26      $0.65              640
                                    (0.14)        (0.59)          (0.30)      (0.14)     (0.45)

 Flexible Number of Hours           -$0.22        $2.31           -$1.61     -$0.22      $1.18              663
                                    (0.21)        (0.45)          (0.31)     (0.21)      (0.37)

 Work from Home                     $1.42         $5.01           -$1.62      $1.42      $4.45              608
                                    (0.33)        (0.85)          (0.46)      (0.33)     (0.74)

 Combined Flexible                  $1.21         $3.84           -$1.12      $1.21      $3.54              694
                                    (0.31)        (0.68)          (0.39)      (0.31)     (0.61)

Willingness to Pay to Avoid
 Employer Discretion                $3.51         $3.92           $1.13       $3.51      $5.88              640
                                    (0.44)        (0.60)          (0.28)      (0.44)     (0.75)

                                             B. Inattention Estimate from Choice of Unavailable Position
Willingness to Pay for
 Flexible Schedule                  $0.51         $2.52           -$1.01      $0.51      $2.04              640
                                    (0.21)        (0.44)          (0.27)      (0.21)     (0.40)

 Flexible Number of Hours           -$0.18        $2.98           -$1.98     -$0.18      $1.63              663
                                    (0.21)        (0.48)          (0.34)     (0.21)      (0.38)

 Work from Home                     $1.38         $3.79           -$0.92      $1.38      $3.68              608
                                    (0.31)        (0.75)          (0.43)      (0.31)     (0.64)

 Combined Flexible                  $1.22         $4.20           -$1.33      $1.22      $3.77              694
                                    (0.31)        (0.72)          (0.41)      (0.31)     (0.64)

Willingness to Pay to Avoid
 Employer Discretion                 $3.41         $2.90          $1.66       $3.41      $5.17            640
                                     (0.42)        (0.47)         (0.29)      (0.42)     (0.65)
Notes: Each panel replicates Table 4, using a different measure of inattention. Panel A bases the inattention
measure on the fraction of applicants who, when asked to recall which job option they chose, responded
incorrectly. The inattention rate varies by treatment. Panel B bases the inattention measure on the fraction of
applicants who chose a position which explicitly instructed applicants not to choose it (13.0% of applicants). This is
uniform across treatments. Robust standard errors based on the delta method are in parentheses.




                                                             57
                           Appendix Table 10. Willingness to Pay for Alternative Work Arrangements
                                        Robustness: Limited to Different Subsamples

                                                                                      Quantiles
                                        Mean        Standard              25th          50th          75th       Observations
                                                    Deviation

                                                        A. Applicants who Completed the Application Only
Flexible Schedule                       $0.29         $0.57            -$0.06       $0.29          $0.64              484
                                        (0.19)        (0.87)           (0.47)       (0.19)        (0.64)

Flexible Number of Hours               -$0.25         $2.14              -$1.55        -$0.25         $1.05           527
                                       (0.23)         (0.98)             (0.62)        (0.23)         (0.66)

Work from Home                          $1.22         $1.75               $0.16         $1.22         $2.28           485
                                        (0.34)        (0.98)              (0.55)        (0.34)        (0.79)

Combined Flexible                       $1.04         $2.02              -$0.18         $1.04         $2.27           548
                                        (0.32)        (0.75)             (0.44)         (0.32)        (0.65)

Employer Discretion                     $3.43         $2.76               $1.76         $3.43         $5.10           494
                                        (0.50)        (1.14)              (0.57)        (0.50)        (1.06)

                                                                    B. Unemployed Workers Only
Flexible Schedule                       $0.26         $2.95              -$1.53      $0.26            $2.05           292
                                        (0.30)        (1.27)             (0.74)     (0.30)            (0.90)

Flexible Number of Hours               -$0.51         $2.91              -$2.27        -$0.51         $1.26           309
                                       (0.35)         (1.31)             (0.83)        (0.35)         (0.90)

Work from Home                          $1.16         $1.40               $0.31         $1.16         $2.01           299
                                        (0.36)        (0.69)              (0.43)        (0.36)        (0.64)

Combined Flexible                       $0.48         $2.44              -$1.00         $0.48         $1.96           320
                                        (0.45)        (1.22)             (0.68)         (0.45)        (1.01)

Employer Discretion                     $3.93         $4.16               $1.41         $3.93         $6.46           320
                                        (0.64)        (0.78)              (0.38)        (0.64)        (1.06)

                                                               C. Excluding Workers with Part-Time Jobs
Flexible Schedule                       $0.41         $2.94               -$1.37        $0.41         $2.19           532
                                        (0.24)        (1.31)              (0.71)        (0.24)        (0.94)

Flexible Number of Hours               -$0.40         $2.53              -$1.93        -$0.40         $1.13           537
                                       (0.24)         (1.04)             (0.60)        (0.24)         (0.74)

Work from Home                          $1.36         $1.77               $0.28         $1.36         $2.43           493
                                        (0.31)        (0.85)              (0.54)        (0.31)        (0.66)

Combined Flexible                       $0.87         $2.40              -$0.58         $0.87         $2.32           554
                                        (0.34)        (0.85)             (0.49)         (0.34)        (0.72)

Employer Discretion                      $3.53           $2.79             $1.84         $3.53          $5.23           538
                                         (0.45)         (0.91)            (0.55)         (0.45)        (0.84)
Notes: Each panel replicates the results in Table 4, limiting the included observations to different subsamples. Panel A limits
the sample to applicants who finished the application, Panel B limits the sample to unemployed applicants, and Panel C limits
the sample to applicants who are either unemployed or in full-time jobs. Estimates are based on an inattention-corrected
maximum likelihood logit model using data from the experiment. Bootstrapped standard errors based on 500 samples are in
parentheses.
                                                                  58
                                 Appendix Table 11. Description of Supplemental Treatments

Treatment Name                                             Position Description                               Sample Size
Irregular Hours, Consistent   The position is 40 hours per week.                                                 626
Schedule
                              The work schedule in this position will be the same from week to week. You
                              will be given your work schedule before the job begins. The hours can be
                              morning through evening, weekdays and weekends, but not nights. The
                              work is exclusively on-site in downtown [city]. This position pays [wage]
                              dollars per hour.

Weekend Schedule              The position is 40 hours per week.                                                 209
                              This is a Thursday-Monday (including weekends) 9 am - 5 pm position. The
                              work is exclusively on-site in downtown [city]. This position pays [wage]
                              dollars per hour.

Afternoon/Evening             The position is 40 hours per week.                                                 195
Schedule
                              This is a Monday-Friday 12 pm - 8 pm position. The work is exclusively on-
                              site in downtown [city]. This position pays [wage] dollars per hour.



Morning Schedule              The position is 40 hours per week.                                                 202
                              This is a Monday-Friday 7 am - 3 pm position. The work is exclusively on-site
                              in downtown [city]. This position pays [wage] dollars per hour.



2nd Shift                     2 nd Shift (Alternative):                                                          192
                              The position is 40 hours per week.
                              This is a Monday-Friday 3 pm - 11 pm position. The work is exclusively on-
                              site in downtown [city]. This position pays [wage] dollars per hour.

                              1 st Shift (Base Option):
                              The position is 40 hours per week.
                              This is a Monday-Friday 7 am - 3 pm position. The work is exclusively on-site
                              in downtown [city]. This position pays [wage] dollars per hour.




                                                               59
             Appendix Table 12. Willingness to Pay for Alternative Work Arrangements by Gender

                                                                   Quantiles
                      Mean        Standard             25th          50th            75th      Observations
                                  Deviation

                                             A. Willingness to Pay for Flexible Schedule
Female                $0.58         $1.83              -$0.53         $0.58          $1.69          456
                      (0.34)        (1.24)             (0.59)         (0.34)         (1.01)
Male                  $0.16         $3.29              -$1.84         $0.16          $2.15          153
                      (0.34)        (1.04)             (0.69)         (0.34)         (0.73)
Difference            $0.42         -$1.46              $1.31         $0.42          -$0.46         609
(Female - Male)       (0.48)        (1.57)             (0.90)         (0.48)         (1.21)

                                       B. Willingness to Pay for Flexible Number of Hours
Female                -$0.19        $2.49            -$1.71         -$0.19        $1.32             491
                      (0.28)        (1.18)           (0.68)          (0.28)       (0.85)
Male                  -$0.34        $1.42            -$1.20         -$0.34        $0.51             147
                      (0.36)        (1.05)           (0.68)          (0.36)       (0.78)
Difference             $0.15        $1.08            -$0.50          $0.15        $0.80             638
(Female - Male)       (0.46)        (1.57)           (0.93)          (0.46)       (1.16)

                                             C. Willingness to Pay for Work from Home
Female                $1.59         $1.53              $0.66          $1.59        $2.51            441
                      (0.40)        (1.18)             (0.78)         (0.40)       (0.85)
Male                  $0.68         $1.94              -$0.50          $0.68       $1.86            135
                      (0.42)        (1.31)             (0.71)         (0.42)       (1.06)
Difference            $0.91         -$0.41              $1.16          $0.91       $0.66            576
(Female - Male)       (0.58)        (1.71)             (1.04)         (0.58)       (1.32)

                                         D. Willingness to Pay for Combined Flexible Job
Female                $1.56         $2.83            -$0.16          $1.56        $3.27             496
                      (0.48)        (1.44)           (0.83)          (0.48)       (1.13)
Male                  $0.03         $0.97            -$0.56          $0.03        $0.62             158
                      (0.44)        (0.72)           (0.48)          (0.44)       (0.73)
Difference           $1.52**        $1.86            $0.40          $1.52**      $2.65**            654
(Female - Male)       (0.62)        (1.67)           (0.95)          (0.62)       (1.39)

                                          E. Willingness to Pay to Avoid Employer Discretion
Female                 $4.27           $3.24            $2.30          $4.27         $6.23               453
                       (0.78)         (1.02)            (0.64)         (0.78)        (1.26)
Male                   $2.11           $3.76            -$0.17         $2.11         $4.39               168
                       (0.54)         (0.89)            (0.44)         (0.54)        (0.99)
Difference            $2.16**         -$0.51          $2.47***        $2.16**        $1.85               621
(Female - Male)        (0.98)         (1.40)            (0.78)         (0.98)        (1.66)
Notes: Estimates are generated using an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model using data from
the experiment. Bootstrapped standard errors based on 500 samples are in parentheses. For the gender
difference (female - male) estimates, **, *** denote significance at the 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                              60
                                    Appendix Table 13. Willingness to Pay for Alternative Work Arrangements by Subgroup

                                                                     A. Experiment Data                                                B. UAS Data
                                                                                                      Mean WTP to                              Mean WTP to
                                                            Mean WTP for                                 Avoid              Mean WTP for           Avoid
                                           Flexible      Flexible  Work From           Combined        Employer               Flexible           Employer
                                          Schedule      Number of     Home              Flexible       Discretion            Schedule            Discretion
                                                          Hours

All                                         $0.48         -$0.22         $1.33          $1.17             $3.41                  2.5%               29.3%
                                            (0.24)        (0.22)         (0.29)         (0.32)            (0.47)                (0.3%)              (1.7%)

Race/Ethnicity
  White                                     $0.61         -$0.20         $1.60          $1.54             $3.04                  2.4%               29.1%
                                            (0.29)        (0.30)         (0.31)         (0.54)            (0.54)                (0.4%)              (1.8%)

  Non-White                                 $0.30         -$0.39         $0.97          $0.85             $3.65                  2.8%               29.7%
                                            (0.34)        (0.32)         (0.53)         (0.42)            (0.72)                (1.1%)              (4.8%)

  p-value of Difference                     0.45           0.65          0.29            0.32              0.51                  0.76                0.91

Education
  Less than a College Degree                $0.34         -$0.21         $0.88          $0.91             $3.79                  1.9%               28.8%
                                            (0.28)        (0.28)         (0.39)         (0.38)            (0.73)                (0.4%)              (2.6%)

  College Degree or More                    $0.55         -$1.38         $2.63          $1.52             $2.69                  3.5%               29.8%
                                            (0.25)        (0.55)         (1.02)         (0.54)            (0.64)                (0.6%)              (2.1%)

  p-value of Difference                     0.58           0.06          0.11            0.36              0.25                  0.02                0.77

Income
  Below Median Income ($67,500)                                                                                                  1.7%               27.2%
                                                                                                                                (0.4%)              (2.4%)

  At or Above Median Income ($67,500)                                                                                            3.1%               31.3%
                                                                                                                                (0.5%)              (2.4%)

  p-value of Difference                                                                                                          0.02                0.24

Age
  Below Median Age (30)                     $0.32         -$0.24         $0.72          $0.85             $3.41                  1.7%               24.2%
                                            (0.32)        (0.35)         (0.45)         (0.59)            (0.73)                (0.7%)              (4.6%)

  At or Above Median Age (30)               $0.67         -$0.12         $1.65          $1.45             $3.25                  2.7%               30.2%
                                            (0.34)        (0.30)         (0.52)         (0.37)            (0.55)                (0.4%)              (1.8%)

  p-value of Difference                     0.45           0.80          0.17            0.37              0.85                  0.20                0.23

ACT WorkKeys Questions
  Below Median Score (3)                    $0.23         -$0.30         $0.59           $0.64            $3.26
                                            (0.35)        (0.50)        (19.52)         (11.01)           (1.11)

  At or Above Median Score (3)              $0.64         -$0.27         $1.34          $1.42             $3.71
                                            (0.26)        (0.26)         (0.34)         (0.39)            (0.64)

  p-value of Difference                      0.36            0.97           0.97         0.94               0.72
Notes: Cells present the mean willingness to pay for (or to avoid) the arrangement indicated by the column for the subsample indicated by the row. Estimates
are based on an inattention-corrected maximum likelihood logit model. Bootstrapped standard errors from 500 samples are in parentheses.




                                                                                  61
