NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLITICS OF FDI EXPROPRIATION
Marina Azzimonti
Working Paper 22705
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22705

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2016

I would like to thank Laura Karpuska for excellent RA work and Gregory O'Rourke for editing.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marina Azzimonti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Politics of FDI Expropriation
Marina Azzimonti
NBER Working Paper No. 22705
September 2016
JEL No. E6,F38,F43,H2,H21
ABSTRACT
I examine the role of political instability as a potential explanation for the lack of capital flows
from rich countries to poor countries (i.e. the `Lucas Paradox'). Using panel data from 1984 to
2014, I document the following: (i) developed countries exhibit larger inflows of foreign direct
investment (FDI), (ii) countries subject to high investment risk are those that typically receive
low FDI inflows, and (iii) investment risk is generally higher in fractionalized and politically
unstable economies. These findings suggest a negative relationship between political instability
and FDI through the investment risk channel. I then inspect the theoretical mechanism using a
dynamic political-economy model of redistribution, wherein policymakers have access to an
expropriation technology that can be used to extract resources from foreign investors. The
proceeds are used to finance group-specific transfers to domestic workers, but hinder economic
growth by discouraging FDI. Different social groups compete to gain control of this instrument,
but face a probability of losing power at each point in time. The greater the degree of political
turnover is, the stronger the incentives to expropriate when in power. A key force driving this
result is redistributive uncertainty, since there is a possibility that no transfers will be received in
the future. The mechanism is supported by the finding that investment risk (a measure that
captures the degree to which the extraction technology is used) is negatively related to FDI and
government stability. Finally, I show that the political equilibrium exhibits over-expropriation
and under-investment even when there is no political uncertainty because fractionalized societies
suffer from static inefficiencies due to the presence of a common pool problem.

Marina Azzimonti
Economics Department
Stony Brook University
100 Nicolls Road
Stony Brook, NY 11794
and NBER
marina.azzimonti@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Even though the return of foreign direct investment is potentially large in many countries
at the stage of development (for example, the opening up of Eastern Europe provided
advantages to multinational firms due to the low cost of labor, low levels of capital in place,
and the proximity to major markets), the flow of direct investment is heavily concentrated
in a small set of countries.1 Lucas (1990) suggested that this lack of FDI could be due to the
fact that many developing countries face higher political risk than industrialized ones, but
disregarded the empirical importance of political risk by focusing mostly on the pre-1945
colonial experience as case studies.2 In this paper, I revisit his hypothesis by examining
the role of political risk (due to fractionalization and/or political instability) as a potential
deterrent of FDI inflows. Using panel data from 1984 to 2014, I document three stylized
facts: (i) developed countries exhibit larger inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI), (ii)
countries subject to high investment risk are those that typically receive low FDI inflows, and
(iii) investment risk is generally higher in fractionalized and politically unstable economies.
This suggests a negative relationship between political risk and FDI, through the investment
risk channel.3 I then inspect the theoretical mechanism using a dynamic political-economy
model featuring a redistributive conflict between fractionalized social groups that alternate
in power. The policymaker in power has access to an expropriation technology that can be
used to extract resources from foreign investors which, are then transferred to local targeted
groups. In equilibrium, a higher degree of fractionalization is associated with a greater use
of the technology, and thus lower levels of foreign investment and growth. Fractionalization
(modeled as the number of ethnic, religious, or social groups competing for power) results
in inefficient expropriation for two reasons. First, because the likelihood of staying in power
is smaller, making policymakers more short-sighted. Second, because the common pool
problem is aggravated as the number of groups competing for transfers grows.
I consider a small open economy composed of a government, a set of multinational corporations and two types of agents: domestic workers and foreign capitalists. Multinational
corporations are run by managers that hire domestic labor and combine it with capital to
produce output. Managers choose investment and dividends in order to maximize the value
of the firm. To highlight the effects of expropriation on FDI, I assume that shares of the
multinational corporations are owned exclusively by foreign investors. Hence, reinvested
earnings constitute FDI inflows to the domestic country. Firms are competitive and face
investment adjustment costs (given by the cost of installing new capital), as in the standard
Tobin’s q model. Domestic workers belong to n social (i.e. ethnic or religious) groups that
alternate in power according to an exogenous probability. Once in office, they decide how
much to extract from FDI and where to transfer the resources collected. The extraction
technology can be interpreted as a cost that foreigners must incur in order to gain access to
the development of an investment project in the domestic market. Examples of these are
investment taxes, capital controls, permits necessary to expand a factory or simply bribes.4
1 The United Nations (1996) reports that 80% of the total investment flowing to developing countries in
1995 was received by 10 countries with the highest FDI.
2 See Tornell and Velasco (1992) and Alfaro et al. (2008) for additional literature analyzing the Lucas
(1990) puzzle.
3 Consistent with this, Busse and Hefeker (2007) find that government stability is an important determinant of foreign investment flows. See also Gastanaga et al. (1998), Janerba (2002) and Brunetti and Weder
(1998) for earlier empirical literature linking political risk to FDI.
4 The financial crisis of 2001-2002, with the imposition of the ‘corralito’ in Argentina provides a good
example: the government restricted capital transactions and “pesified” contracts and financial assets. For-

2

When a group is in power, it chooses policy (i.e. the fraction to be expropriated) while
taking into account how this will affect future production and growth—via reductions in
FDI— as well as the effects on the level of expropriation that other groups may choose in
the future. A balanced-growth Markov-perfect equilibrium (BG-PMPE) is characterized,
where variables grow at a constant rate and policy is a function of the only payoff relevant
variable: foreign capital installed in the country. I focus on symmetric MPE because all
groups are assumed to be identical, so the identity of the group in power is irrelevant on
the determination of policy. It is important to note that this equilibrium concept rules
out reputation mechanisms, and it constitutes a lower bound for the set of potential subgame perfect equilibria that would arise in this environment. The choice of this equilibrium
concept is made not only because it allows for a simple characterization, but because it does
not require strong assumptions about the feasibility of punishment strategies. For example,
it would be possible to attain higher welfare by inducing lower expropriation rates under
the threat of financial autarky (as in Aguiar and Amador, 2011), but it is not clear that
this would be in the best interest of foreign investors (i.e. share-holders) ex-post due to the
large costs associated with installing and dis-installing capital.
The main mechanism explaining the negative relationship between FDI and political
risk rests on the assumption that groups compete to receive transfers and derive no utility if resources are distributed to other groups. So when a given group is in power, it
will balance the government budget by making transfers only to its own type or region.
This introduces a common pool problem, as the benefits from expropriation are enjoyed
by the group in power, whereas the costs are paid by all members of society. Relative to
a planner’s (constrained-efficient) allocation, fractionalization results in over-expropriation.
This static inefficiency would arise even with no political turnover (e.g. under a dictator
in power forever). A second source of inefficiency stems from redistributive uncertainty,
as the incumbent group may lose power next period with some probability—in which case
they receive no transfers. The cost associated with high expropriation rates (e.g. a smaller
‘expropriation base’ next period) is lower on expectation than it would be under a dictator,
whereas the benefits are the same. Hence, the degree of inefficiency is larger when groups
are subject to political uncertainty. Due to these two effects, and given the assumptions of
the model, the political equilibrium exhibits inefficiently low inflows of FDI in fractionalized
and politically unstable economies. This hinders the production capabilities of the country,
reduces both growth and the overall level of welfare. To evaluate the relative importance
of these distortions, I consider changes in both fractionalization (e.g., number of groups),
and incumbency advantage (e.g., ability of the incumbent group to remain in power regardless of the number of groups). I show in a numerical example that while both result in
inefficient expropriation levels, the effects of fractionalization are stronger. This happens
because incumbency advantage only affects expropriation by lowering the expected benefits
from keeping FDI undistorted—through lower political turnover—whereas fractionalization
also affects the relative size of current transfers, aggravating the common pool problem. Finally, I show that greater political instability—due either to fictionalization or incumbency
advantage—is associated with stronger incentives to expropriate, and hence lower levels of
foreign direct investment.
eign firms’ funds were forcedly converted into Pesos, and many contracts, especially in infrastructure, were
rewritten or canceled. At the same time, capital was not allowed to leave the country (hence the name
‘corralito,’ which means ‘little-fence’). Janeba (2002) provides some other examples, such as China’s 1195
announcement of the scrapping of various benefits that foreign firms received in the form of exemptions
from custom duties or tax rebates when using local materials.

3

The paper is organized as follows. The next section summarizes the connections with
the literature. Section 2 describes the empirical evidence supporting the main hypothesis
of the paper. Section 3 presents the environment, while Section 4 defines and characterizes
the political equilibrium. Finally, Section 5 concludes.

Related Literature
Eaton and Gersovitz [1984] developed one of the most influential articles on expropriation
theory. They analyzed sustainable equilibria in a static environment, and showed that
even though no expropriation occurs in equilibrium, the international allocation of capital
is distorted. Thomas and Worral [1994] extended this idea to an infinite-horizon economy
and characterized the set of self-enforcing agreements between the host government and a
multi-national corporation. Building on their work, Aguiar and Amador [2011] showed how
political uncertainty could impact international capital flows. Because both the focus and
economic environment studied in Aguiar and Amador [2011] are closely related to the one
in this paper, it is worth pointing out some of their main differences.
First, the object of interest is different, as they focus on domestic capital whereas I
analyze foreign direct investment. An important value added by this paper is precisely
documenting the empirical relationship between FDI and political instability in a large set
of countries.
Second, the source of the dynamic inefficiency in Aguiar and Amador [2011] is debt
overhang: absent a large stock of initial debt, the government would not need to distort
capital in order to face interest payments, and the first best would be reached immediately
and sustained forever after. In this paper, to emphasize the role of fractionalization, debt
is always zero (that is, I assume a balanced budget). The inefficiency arises due to a
redistributive conflict, more in line with that in Tornell and Velasco’s [1992] tragedy of the
commons in which a large number of groups would like to gain access to the expropriation
technology in order to divert resources to themselves through targeted transfers. This
friction causes static inefficiencies—incentives to over-expropriate—even if policymakers are
as patient as agents and do not face re-election uncertainty (although, as shown in the
paper, inefficiencies are exacerbated by impatience and political instability). As a result,
the politico-equilibrium is always inefficient in my paper.
This touches upon a third important difference. In Aguiar and Amador’s [2011] paper,
while political frictions slow down capital accumulation and growth during the transition,
the inefficiency eventually vanishes. That is, in the long run the economy converges to the
first best in their work. In this paper, the economy is inefficient along the balanced-growth
path and never reaches the first best. This is not only the result of the static common
pool problem mentioned above, but also due to the fact that our solution concepts are
radically different. While Aguiar and Amador characterize self-sustaining equilibria, I focus
on Markov-perfect equilibria instead. As mentioned in the introduction, this concept was
chosen because, given the structure of the model, a threat such as financial autarky would
not be appealing due to the existence of adjustment costs of capital and the fact that shareholders are dispersed (that is, they are not likely to be able to force a corporation of which
they hold an infinitesimal share to leave the country forever after a small deviation). It
would be interesting to consider self-sustaining equilibria where groups could revert back to
the BG-MPE, but that is beyond the scope of this paper and it is deferred to future work.
Finally, the behavior of policymakers in Aguiar and Amador [2011] is similar to that of
a quasi-hyperbolic (or quasi-geometric) agent in Laibson [1997] (see also Halac and Yared

4

[2014] for a similar environment). This results from the assumption that groups place a
higher weight on consumption when in power than when out of power. Higher political
turnover affects the effective discount factor, making policymakers de-facto more impatient
than agents, and hence always results in more under-investment on the transition path in
their model. The mapping between effective discount factors and incumbency advantage
breaks in this paper because the continuation utility takes a different form when groups are
out of power, as they receive no transfers but are still affected by production. This implies
that the dynamic consequences of excessive expropriations when a group is out of power
are valued differently than when the group is in power. Moreover, the relative marginal
value of a unit of capital in the two cases can be affected by policy. So even though higher
turnover induces myopia due to the ‘effective discount factor effect’ as in their model, it also
changes the relative value of the associated distortion: I call the ‘value of a dollar effect.’ As
a result, and similarly to Acemoglu, Golosov, and Tsivinski [2011], the probability of power
switches does not map one to one with the effective discount factor. To illustrate this, I show
an example in which expropriation rates are completely irresponsive to changes in political
turnover. I also show that this is a knife-edge case, and provide numerical examples in which
higher political stability is associated with better outcomes (e.g. lower expropriation rates).
Acemoglu, Golosov, and Tsivinski [2011], on the other hand, find that more persistence
typically worsens outcomes. The difference in our findings arises from the fact that they
focus on self-sustainable equilibria whereas I restrict attention to Markovian ones. Given
the negative correlation between political stability and investment risk documented in this
paper, the positive implication of my model seems more in line with the data.
By focusing on this particular equilibrium concept, this paper contributes to a growing
literature characterizing Markov Perfect equilibria under political frictions, following the
pioneering work of Klein, Krusell and Rios Rull [2008]. Examples are Azzimonti, Sarte,
and Soares [2009], Debortoli and Nunes [2010], Ilzetzki [2011], Klein and Rios-Rull [2003],
Martin [2010, 2015], Ortigueira [2006] in closed economy environments, and Quadrini, [2005]
in open economies. More generally, it is related to the political macroeconomics literature
analyzing the impact of political uncertainty on government policy in dynamic environments. Azzimonti [2011] and Azzimonti and Talbert [2014] show that political turnover
can negatively affect capital accumulation, whereas Amador [2004] points out its effects on
public debt. Caballero and Yared [2010] emphasize how a government’s myopic behavior
in the presence of political risk results in over-indebtedness. Battaglini and Coate [2007,
2008] find similar inefficiencies in a dynamic bargaining model. The underlying force driving
the inefficiency of policy in all of these papers is the uncertainty surrounding the identity
of tomorrow’s policymaker, a channel that was first pointed out by Alesina and Tabellini
[1990] and Besley and Coate [1998]. Most of these papers, by restricting attention to closed
economies, ignore the effects of political frictions on capital flows, and particularly FDI,
which are the focus of this paper.
Finally, this paper is related to the literature analyzing how weak institutions (i) deter
investment and the adoption of new technologies (Parente and Prescott, [2000]), (ii) explain
differences in income per-capita (Acemoglu et al., [2001], [2002] and Acemoglu and Johnson,
[2005]), (iii) relate to fiscal capacity (Besley, Ilzetzki, and Persson, 2013).

5

2

Empirical Evidence

In this section, I analyze the relationship between FDI and Investment Risk (IR). I then
show how investment risk is itself related to several measures of political instability. I use
an unbalanced panel of 145 countries (listed in Appendix 6.1) over the period 1984-2014.

2.1

Variables and data sources

• Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) refers to direct investment equity flows in the reporting economy. It is the sum of equity capital, reinvestment of earnings, and other
capital. Direct investment is a category of cross-border investment associated with
a resident in one economy having control or a significant degree of influence on the
management of an enterprise that is resident in another economy. Ownership of 10
percent or more of the ordinary shares of voting stock is the criterion for determining the existence of a direct investment relationship. This series shows net inflows
(new investment inflows minus disinvestment) in the reporting economy from foreign
investors. FDI is measured in current U.S. million dollars. Source: World Bank WDI
Online.5
• Foreign Direct Investment as a percentage of GDP (FDIGDP) corresponds to net
inflows (new investment inflows minus disinvestment) in the reporting economy from
foreign investors (see description for FDI above), and is divided by GDP. Source:
World Bank WDI Online.6
• Growth corresponds to the percentage change in annual GDP of each country. Source:
World Bank WDI Online.
• Investment risk (IR) incorporates factors affecting the risk to investment that are not
covered by other political, economic and financial risk components. The risk rating
assigned is the sum of three subcomponents: Contract Viability/Expropriation, Profits
Repatriation, and Payment Delays. It captures the degree by which a government
might expropriate either the returns to investment made by foreign firms or part of
the capital invested itself. The larger the value, the higher the risk faced by foreign
investors (with a scale from 0 to 12). The variable is constructed as IR = 12 − IP ,
where IP stands for Investment Profile, obtained from the ICRG Researchers Dataset
2015 distributed by PRS Group.
• Government Stability (GS) is an assessment both of the government’s ability to carry
out its declared programs and its ability to stay in office. The risk rating ranges from
0-12, with 12 indicating the most stable and is calculated by ICRG. The index corresponds to the sum of three subcomponents: Government Unity, Legislative Strength,
5 FDI is based on data obtained from International Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments database,
supplemented by data from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and official national
sources. Series available at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BX.KLT.DINV.CD.WD
6 FDIGDP is based on data obtained from International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics
and Balance of Payments databases, World Bank, International Debt Statistics, and World Bank and OECD
GDP estimates. Series available at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS

6

and Popular Support.7 Source: ICRG Researchers Dataset 2015 distributed by PRS
Group.
• Internal Conflict (IC) is an assessment of political violence in the country and its actual or potential impact on governance. We normalize the series such that the lowest
rating, 0, is given to those countries where there is no armed or civil opposition to the
government and the government does not indulge in arbitrary violence, direct or indirect, against its own people. The highest rating of 12 is given to a country embroiled
in an on-going civil war. The risk rating assigned is the sum of three subcomponents:
Civil War/Coup Threat, Terrorism/Political Violence, and Civil Disorder.
• External Conflict (EC) is an assessment both of the risk to the incumbent government
from foreign action, ranging from non-violent external pressure (diplomatic pressures,
withholding of aid, trade restrictions, territorial disputes, sanctions, etc) to violent
external pressure (cross-border conflicts to all-out war). External conflicts can adversely affect foreign business in many ways, such as restrictions on operations, trade
and investment sanctions, ,distortions in the allocation of economic resources, and
violent change in the structure of society. The variable is defined between 0 and 12,
with the highest score indicating very high risk. The variable is the sum of three
subcomponents: War, Cross-Border Conflict, and Foreign Pressures.
• Religious tensions (RT) may stem from the domination of society and/or governance
by a single religious group that seeks to replace civil law by religious law and to
exclude other religions from the political and/or social process, the desire of a single
religious group to dominate governance, the suppression of religious freedom, and the
desire of a religious group to express its own identity or separate from the country
as a whole. The risk involved in these situations ranges from inexperienced people
imposing inappropriate policies through civil dissent to civil war. The variable is
defined between 0 and 6, with the highest score indicating very high risk.
• Ethnic Tensions (ET) is an assessment of the degree of tension within a country
attributable to divisions associated with race, nationality, or language. Lower ratings
are given to countries where racial and nationality tensions are high because opposing
groups are intolerant and unwilling to compromise. The variable is defined between
0 and 6, with lower ratings given to countries in which tensions are minimal, even
though such differences may still exist.

2.2

Stylized Facts

The stylized facts are described below. The focus is on four sets of countries, grouped by
regions: OECD, East Asia, Latin America, Africa, and Other. The list of countries included
in each region can be found in Appendix 6.1.
1. Developed countries receive larger inflows of FDI on average.
The average amount of FDI (in millions of US dollars) for the period 1984-2014 in the
different regions is presented below, with the annual growth rate of their GDP over
7 Precise

definitions can be found at the ‘International Country Risk Guide,’ published by the PRS Group.

7

the same period. We can see that developed countries (e.g. OECD) grow at a lower
rate but receive much larger FDI inflows on average.
Table 1: FDI and Growth
Region
OECD
East Asia
Latin America
Africa
Other

FDI

Growth

$26, 971
$11, 892
$3, 825
$568
$2, 440

7.1%
8.9%
8.0%
7.8%
8.9%

Note: Average values per region between 1984-2014. Countries included in each region
are described in Appendix 6.1. FDI is in millions of US dollars, and growth rates are in
percentage terms.

These values are surprising due to the fact that OECD countries have a larger stock
of already-installed capital. Assuming a standard production function, where the
marginal return of capital is decreasing, we would expect larger flows of FDI to developing countries. Lucas (1990) made this point using a simple Cobb-Douglas technology: the marginal product of capital in India should be 58 times larger than in the US,
yet capital does not flow to India. One of the explanations proposed by Lucas behind
the lack of FDI flows towards developing economies could be the instability in their
political environment. The next set of facts provides some evidence that supports this
hypothesis.
2. Foreign Direct Investment is lower in countries with larger Investment
Risk (IR).
Because FDI is measured in current dollars, and factors such as inflation and growth
may affect the behavior of the time series, I use FDI as a percentage of GDP in this
section. The scatter-plot in Figure 1 shows a negative relationship between FDI (as a
percentage of output) and investment risk, indicating that foreigners are reluctant to
invest in countries where the government uses the expropriation technology extensively.
The region-specific correlation coefficients are presented in the following table.
Table 2: Correlation between Investment Risk and FDI as a percentage of GDP
Region

Correlation
−0.16
−0.39
−0.39
−0.09
−0.26

OECD
Latin America
East Asia
Africa
Other

Emerging economies (i.e. those in Latin America and East Asia) have a similar correlation coefficient of −0.39, whereas the coefficient is negligible in African countries.
Note, however, that FDI inflows to African countries are very small on average (see
Table 2).
8

26

21

FDI/GDP

16

11

6

1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

‐4

‐9

Investment Risk

Figure 1: FDI/GDP as a function of Investment Risk (average values between 1984-2014 per
country).

In order to determine whether the negative correlation between FDI and investment
risk is statistically significant, I compute a fixed-effects regression of the form
F DIGDPit = αi + γt + βIRit + it
where F DIGDPit denotes FDI inflows as a percentage of GDP in country i at year t,
IRit represents investment risk for the same country-year pair, and it represents an
error term. The variable αi denotes country-specific fixed-effects, in order to control for
time-invariant country characteristics, whereas γt denotes time fixed-effects, in order
to control for aggregate factors that may have affected FDIGDP at particular points
in time. The results are summarized column (1) of Table 3. Standard errors clustered
by country and corrected for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity are reported in
parenthesis.
The negative relationship between FDI and investment risk is statistically significant,
as suggested by a p-value of 0.02. A value of −0.31 indicates that when IR increases
by 1 point, FDI as a percentage of GDP declines by 0.3 points when all countries in
the sample are considered. This relationship is mostly driven by non-OECD countries
as a comparison of the coefficients in Specifications 2 and 3 in Table 3 reveals: the
relationship between the two variables is statistically insignificant in OECD countries.
When emerging and developing economies are considered (e.g. only non-OECD countries) the estimated coefficient β = −0.41 is larger than it is for the whole sample,
β = −0.31.

9

Table 3: Fixed-effects regression, FDIGDP and IR
Dep. Var: FDIGDP

All
(1)

OECD
(2)

Non-OECD
(3)

Non OECD/Africa
(4)

Investment Risk (IR)

−0.31**
(-2.34)

0.1
(0.34)

−0.41**
(-3.01)

−0.65***
(-3.21)

Observations
R-squared
Number of Countries

3,554
0.25
134

676
0.52
24

2,908
0.19
111

1,932
0.23
76

Notes: Sample period 1984-2014. The dependent variable in Specification (1) is F DIGDPit , the independent variables are investment risk IRit , time fixed-effects, and country fixed-effects. Specification (2) includes only OECD countries, whereas Specification (3) excludes OECD countries, Specification (4) excludes
both African and OECD countries. Robust standard errors (corrected for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity), clustered by country, are shown in parentheses. Significance denoted as: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1

Because the relationship between IR and FDI is negligible in African countries (see
Table 2), I re-computed the fixed-effects regression excluding these countries in Specification (4). The results are shown in the last column of Table 3. The coefficient is
now much larger, β = −0.65 (with a p-value of 0.002), suggesting that IR is detrimental to FDI inflows in emerging economies, but less so in African countries. To
put this number in perspective, recall that IR ranges from 0 to 12 with an average
value of 4.4, whereas average FDIGDP is 3.5. Thus an increase in IR of 10% from its
average value results in an average decline of foreign investment of 8.17% per year in
non-OECD/non-African countries.8
3. There is lower investment risk in countries that are more politically unstable.
The ICRG Researchers Dataset has several measures that attempt to capture political instability. For example, low values of ‘Government Stability’ indicate that the
government is unlikely to carry out its proposed plans or even stay in office. Countries under internal conflict (armed or civil opposition to the government) or external
conflict (cross-border disputes or wars) are also politically unstable. Finally, political
instability may arise due to ethnic or religious tensions among different groups in the
population. All of these, by affecting political turnover and the nature of redistributive
policies, are likely to impact investment risk, and hence the returns to FDI.
Because the countries in our sample may face one or more political instability factors,
the analysis will consider the effects of these factors separately. I will first present the
region-specific correlations between investment risk and political instability, and then
a regression analysis to test whether the correlations are statistically significant.
8 This is computed as follows. A 10% increase in IR corresponds to 0.1 × 4.4 = 0.44. The effect of this
change is a −0.65 × 0.44 = −0.286 point decline in FDI as a percentage of GDP, which corresponds to a
decrease of 3.5/0.286 = 0.0817, or 8.17%, from its average value.

10

Table 4: Correlation between investment risk and political instability
Risk/Region
Government Stability
Internal Conflict
External Conflict
Religious Tensions
Ethnic Tensions

OECD
-0.48
0.03
-0.17
0.04
-0.21

East Asia
-0.44
0.38
0.24
0.29
0.45

Lat America
-0.51
0.45
0.42
0.32
0.12

Africa
-0.59
0.46
0.35
0.18
0.31

Other
-0.47
0.36
0.24
0.11
0.15

There is a strong negative correlation between government stability and the risk of
expropriation across regions. This indicates that countries where political turnover is
high are more likely to engage in expropriation activities. We can also see that internal
and external conflicts increase expropriation risk in all regions but OECD countries.
Religious tensions seem more relevant in Latin America and East Asia, whereas ethic
tensions are strongly correlated with investment risk mostly in East Asia and Africa.
Religious and ethnic tensions, which we will refer generically to as fractionalization,
are likely to affect not only political turnover but also the redistributive base (e.g.
the number of groups receiving transfers) and hence the incentives to expropriate.
Because the different sources of political instability may interact with each other, it is
important to consider their effect simultaneously. To do this, I compute a fixed-effects
regression of the following form
IRit = αi + γt + β1 GSit + β2 ICit + β3 ECit + β4 RTit + β5 ETit + it ,
where IRit denotes investment risk in country i at year t, GS stands for Government
Stability, IC for internal conflict, EC for external conflict, RT for religious tensions
and ET for ethnic tensions. Country-fixed effects are represented by αi , time fixedeffects by γt , and the error term by it .
Among the political instability factors, government stability, internal conflict, and
religious tensions seem to be the most significant determinants of investment risk. This
is the case when considering all countries in our sample (see Specification 1 in Table
5), as well as when considering a subset excluding developed ones (see Specification
2). Overall, the empirical findings suggest that countries exhibiting greater political
instability tend to suffer higher expropriation risk of foreign direct investment.

Summarizing, the stylized facts above suggest that there is a positive relationship between political instability and expropriation risk. This could discourage inflows of FDI
despite the fact that the marginal productivity of capital is potentially larger in developing countries. The model below rationalizes these findings and points to a redistributional
conflict as the main cause of excessive expropriation in politically unstable economies.

3

Environment

This small open economy is composed of a government, a set of multinational corporations,
and two types of infinitely lived agents: domestic workers and foreign capitalists. Domestic
workers belong to one of n social (e.g. ethnic or religious) groups, which alternate in

11

Dep. Var: IR

Government Stability (GS)
Internal Conflict (IC)
External Conflict (EC)
Religious Tensions (RT)
Ethnic Tensions (ET)

Observations
R-squared
Number of Countries
Notes: Sample period 1984-2014.

All
(1)

Non-OECD
(2)

-0.22***
(0.035)
0.095**
(0.044)
-0.049
(0.038)
0.18**
(0.081)
-0.02
(0.094)

-0.20***
(0.037)
0.12***
(0.044)
-0.025
(0.042)
0.18**
(0.078)
0.10
(0.10)

3,554
0.33
134

2,908
0.3
111

The dependent variable in Speci-

fication (1) is IRit , the independent variables are GS, IC, EC, RT,
ET, time fixed-effects, and country fixed-effects. Specification (2) excludes OECD countries, and Specification (3) excludes both African and
OECD countries. Robust standard errors (corrected for autocorrelation
and heteroscedasticity), clustered by country, are shown in parentheses.
Significance denoted as: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 5: Fixed-effects regression, IR and political instability

power stochastically and determine government policy. Hence, the domestic economy is
fractionalized and subject to political instability. To highlight the effects of expropriation
on FDI flows, it is assumed that firms are owned by foreign investors. Hence, reinvested
earnings (i.e. earnings not distributed as dividends) constitute FDI inflows to the domestic
country. The government has access to an expropriation technology that allows it to extract
a proportion of foreign direct investment at each point in time. The expropriation rate
chosen by the government in period t is denoted by θt . The proceeds are used to finance
group-specific transfers to domestic workers. These transfers are the source of redistributive
conflict across social groups.
Technology There is one consumption good produced by identical competitive firms, the
multinational corporations. Following Eaton and Gercovitz (1984), I assume that ‘managerial services’ are the intangible assets that foreign firms bring to the production process
such as organizational skills, technological knowledge, access to overseas markets, etc. The
main difference between managerial skills and physical capital is that the former cannot be
expropriated by the government. More importantly, if expropriation occurs, the managerial
services of the foreign manager are no longer available for production. This implies that any
capital expropriated by the government becomes unproductive either because the domestic
worker does not have the necessary skills to run production by himself or because the capital installed by the foreign investor was specific to the manager’s skills. Therefore, capital

12

cannot be used to produce using the foreign technology.
Firms produce using a constant returns to scale technology F (kt , zt ), where kt is physical
capital in productivity units and zt = Ht Lt . Here, Ht is an index of knowledge or human
capital, and Lt denotes the total number of hours worked. Under this specification, additions
of human capital act as an externality in the production of firms, entering as Harrod-neutral
technological progress. The capital stock follows
kt+1 = It + (1 − δ)kt ,
where δ denotes the depreciation rate of kt and It denotes investment used for both
increases in physical capital and activities which improve on the quality of capital (e.g.
research and development). While investment becomes productive instantaneously (that is,
there are no delivery or time-to-build lags), the firm faces adjustment costs of investment,
which are given by the function D(It , kt ).
Assumption 1 Adjustment costs are increasing and convex in investment, DI > 0 and
DII > 0. The costs of installing new capital are decreasing in the existing stock of capital
Dk < 0.
They can be interpreted as costs of installation and de-installation of capital (with the
marginal cost being an increasing function of the rate at which investment takes place) or
diminishing returns in research activities.
Following Arrow (1962) and Romer (1986), knowledge is assumed to grow proportionally
and as a by-product of the accumulation of investment and research activities in the economy,
Ht = Kt ,
where Kt denotes the average capital stock across firms (I assume that there is a measure
1 of firms, so Kt denotes aggregate capital as well). This externality allows for the possibility
of growth in the economy.
Foreign Capitalists Foreign capitalists are infinitely lived and have standard increasing
and concave preferences over consumption u(ckt ), which are additively separable over time.
Their lifetime utility is
∞
X
β t u(ckt ),
t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) denotes their discount factor. Each period, they can trade shares of the
firm operating in the domestic market. I denote by st the number of shares held at the
beginning of period t. The ownership of shares entitles the shareholder to a dividend per
share of dt , and shares can be traded at the competitive price pt . Capitalists also own a
risk-free asset Bt that pays a return 1 + r∗ , where r∗ denotes the world interest rate. Their
budget constraint is
ckt = st (pt + dt ) + (1 + r∗ )Bt − pt st+1 − Bt+1 .

13

Multinational Corporations Because F (kt , Ht Lt ) has constant returns to scale, we can
focus on a representative multinational corporation. The representative firm owns capital
kt installed in the home country, hires domestic workers, and combines these two inputs to
produce consumption, taking Ht as given.
The total number of shares is normalized to one. The firm has no access to additional
sources of external finance (i.e. it cannot issue new equity or debt). Hence, wages, investment, and the distribution of dividends to shareholders must be financed exclusively using
internal funds. The firm’s financing constraint reads
F (kt , Ht Lt ) = dt + wt Lt + It (1 + θt ) + D(It , kt ).
The firm’s objective is to maximize its market value vt . Since owning shares gives
shareholders the right to collect dividends dt and the possibility of re-selling their shares,
the value of the firm is
vt = pt + dt .
Domestic workers Domestic workers supply labor inelastically at the competitive wage
rate w, have no international mobility, and belong to one of n social groups. A group can
be interpreted as a collection of individuals residing in one of n districts, or as sharing a
common language, ethnicity, or religious belief. Agents are identical, so for symmetry it will
be assumed that there is a measure 1/n of individuals in each group or district (and hence
a measure 1 of domestic agents). Their lifetime utility is given by
∞
X

β t u(cjt )

t=0

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor and u(cjt ) is an increasing and concave function
satisfying standard Inada conditions. The consumption of a domestic worker belonging to
group j is denoted by cjt and satisfies
cjt = wt + Tjt .
Two things from this specification are worth noticing. First, the only source of heterogeneity across workers is given by the level of group-specific transfers received from the
government, denoted by Tjt . Second, they do not have access to capital markets, so their
assets equal zero at all times. This simplifying assumption is made to reduce the dimensionality of the problem, and acts as a proxy for the case of developing economies where
FDI is the main driving force of production and domestic investment is negligible.9
Government The government expropriates a proportion of FDI and distributes the proceeds between agents belonging to different social groups. Assuming that it must balance
its budget (e.g. cannot issue debt), the government’s budget constraint is
n
X
1
Tjt = θt It .
n
j=1
9 For example, the ratio of Inward FDI / Gross Fixed Investment in Bolivia is about 45% while Inward
FDI / Domestic Savings is 69.22 %. The numbers for Hong Kong are 59.24% and 51.53%, and 46.77% and
28.03%for Singapore. Finally, FDI / Domestic Savings is 171.1% for Nicaragua .

14

Recall that Tjt denotes per-capita lump-sum transfers received by each agent in group
j, so n1 Tjt is the total amount of transfers that the group as a whole receives from the
government.
Since transfers can be targeted at specific social groups, it is reasonable to expect each
group to exert effort in order to obtain them. Rather than explicitly modeling political
turnover, and following Aguiar and Amador (2011) or Acemoglu, Golosov, and Tsyvinski
(2011), I assume that groups alternate in power stochastically according to a Markov process.
The probability that a given incumbent group remains in power is denoted by p and satisfies
p=

1
+ ξ,
n

where ξ > 0 represents incumbency advantage. This specification implies that countries
with higher political instability (i.e. those with low p) will be those where incumbents have
low incumbency advantage ξ or where there is a high degree of fractionalization, i.e. where
there is a large number of ethnic or religious groups n competing for power. Conditional on
the incumbent losing office, the probability that any opposition group gains control of the
1−p
. Notice that this specification
government, denoted by q, is symmetric and satisfies q = n−1
allows for specifications in which groups gain control via a democratic process where parties
compete for elections, as well as those in which turnover that follows from revolutions and
coups following a non-democratic (and possibly violent) process. It is, however, consistent
with several micro-founded specifications discussed in the political economy literature. For
example, Azzimonti (2011) derives a similar expression for an endogenous voting model
(using probabilistic voting) with n = 2. Battaglini and Coate (2008) consider legislators
bargaining in congress over the distribution of the budget and find that their probability of
being in the minimum winning coalition is constant over time. These approaches share the
property that redistributive uncertainty (captured by the probability of being the decisionmaker in the following period) plays a key role in the level of distortions imposed by policy.
The group in power tries to maximize the lifetime utility of individuals belonging to that
group, taking into account the possibility of losing power and the actions taken by future
policymakers. More details about the political game are provided in Section 4, where the
political equilibrium is defined. It is worth describing the timing more formally at this point.
Timing
• At the outset of period t, group j is in power and chooses the expropriation rate θt .
• The multinational corporation chooses labor Lt , foreign direct investment It , and
dividends dt .
• The good is produced, wages are paid, and expropriation takes place. The government
makes transfers Tjt and domestic workers consume.
• Foreign capitalists collect dividends and consume.
• A new group takes power.
Because all groups are symmetric, they choose the same level of expropriation θit = θjt ≡
θt when in power, so the economy exhibits no aggregate uncertainty.10 Notice that given
10 Hence,

the economy is subject to political risk but not to political uncertainty, as it is in Pastor and
Veronesi’s (2012) paper.

15

the dynamic nature of the game and the timing of events, it would not be optimal for the
government to expropriate at a level where investment in the country drops to zero (that is,
a θt that drives It to 0). Moreover, it is not optimal for the government to expropriate the
capital itself: as mentioned before, neither the government nor the domestic workers own
the managerial skills needed to run the firm efficiently.11

3.1

The competitive equilibrium given policy

In this section, I define and characterize the competitive equilibrium given policy.
Definition 1 A competitive equilibrium given policy {θt }∞
t=0 is given by a sequence of
,
transfers
{{Tjt }nj=1 }∞
allocations {ckt , {cjt }nj=1 , st+1 , Bt+1 , It , kt+1 , Lt , dt }∞
t=0 and prices
t=0
∞
{pt , wt }t=0 such that
• Given prices and dividends, foreign capitalists choose {ckt , st+1 , Bt+1 }∞
t=0 to maximize
their lifetime utility.
• Given prices, multinational corporations choose capital, investment, dividends, and
labor {kt+1 , It , dt , Lt }∞
t=0 to maximize their value vt = pt + dt .
• Given prices and transfers, the domestic worker’s budget constraint holds at each t
cjt = wt Lt + Tjt .
Pn
• The sequence of transfers satisfies the government budget constraint j=1 n1 Tjt = θt It .
• The labor market clears Lt = 1.
• The stock market clears st+1 = 1.
Foreign capitalists choose a sequence of st+1 and Bt+1 to maximize their lifetime utility.
Their first order conditions deliver the no-arbitrage equation
pt+1 + dt+1
= 1 + r∗ ,
pt

(1)

which implies that the return from owning shares st+1 must equal the return from assets
Bt+1 . Using eq. (1), we can re-write the value of the firm vt = pt + dt as the present
discounted sum of dividends
vt

= dt +
=

∞
X
s=0

dt+2
dt+1
+
...
1 + r∗
(1 + r∗ )2

dt+s
(1 + r∗ )s

where distributed dividends correspond to the difference between earnings and investment (net of adjustment costs),
dt = F (kt , Ht Lt ) − wt Lt − It (1 + θt ) − D(It , kt ).
11 This is a simplification for a more general case where the government or members of the group in power
could work as managers, but had access to an inferior technology.

16

Without loss of generality, and to ease notation, we can study the problem of the firm
as of period 0. It’s objective can be re-written as
max

{It ,kt+1 ,Lt }∞
t=0

∞
X
t=0

1
{F (kt , Ht Lt ) − wt Lt − It (1 + θt ) − D(It , kt )}
(1 + r∗ )t
s.t. It = kt+1 − (1 − δ)kt .

(2)

Notice that firms internalize the cost of expropriation, θt It , when evaluating the costs
of reinvesting earnings It in the domestic country. Higher expropriation levels increase
incentives to distribute earnings rather than investing them in the home country, and hence
reduce FDI.
Consider the optimality conditions for an arbitrary t. Wages satisfy the standard
marginality condition wt = fL (Kt , Kt Lt ) since kt = Kt = Ht in equilibrium. Letting
qt denote the current valued Lagrange multiplier on constraint 2, we have that
qt = DIt + 1 + θt ,

(3)

where DIt = DI (It , kt ). Under the optimal plan, the firm invests such that the marginal cost
of an additional unit of capital (which equals 1 plus the adjustment cost and expropriation
rate) equals the shadow price of capital qt , also known as Tobin’s q. Finally, the FOC with
respect to future capital is
!
1
qt =
fkt+1 − Dkt+1 + (1 − δ)qt+1 ,
(4)
1 + r∗
which represents the Euler equation for the firm: the (shadow) price of capital today must
equal the discounted value of the return on capital next period through higher production,
the savings in adjustment costs tomorrow, and the next period’s shadow price of capital
(which can be obtained by selling capital tomorrow). Re-arranging expressions (3) and (4),
we obtain
!
1
DIt + 1 + θt =
fkt+1 − Dkt+1 + (1 − δ)[DIt+1 + 1 + θt+1 ]
(5)
1 + r∗
This dynamic equation determines the evolution of capital over time as a function of
expropriation rates θt .

4

Politico-equilibrium

A group’s objective is to maximize the utility of its supporters. This implies that, while
they do not put any weight on the welfare of other regions or groups, policymakers are
‘benevolent planners’ for their own region.12
I assume that there is no commitment technology: once in power, the group will choose
what is best for its constituency from that point on. This implies that any promises made
before the political uncertainty is resolved are not credible.
12 In the political economy literature, these policymakers are referred as partisan. An alternative approach,
also studied in the literature, assumes that the leader’s sole objective is to maximize their probability
of controlling the government because he either obtains some ego-rents out of being in power or he can
redistribute resources to himself (kleptocrats).

17

The representation of the maximization problem of a group in power is complex because,
due to the dynamic nature of the game, it is necessary to describe how current policymakers
expect future policymakers to behave. In particular, the optimal decision of policy is not
only subject to how foreign investors react to the level of expropriation today, but also to
how next period’s government will choose to expropriate future investment and to whom
they will distribute it. Since groups are forward looking, they need to predict the effects
that a change in policy today will have on the whole sequence of policies in the future
and internalize that the identity of the policymaker can change at each point in time (i.e.
that a representative belonging to different social group might be in power tomorrow).
In principle, this dynamic game allows for multiple sub-game-perfect equilibria that can
be constructed using reputation mechanisms. Characterizing sustainable equilibria in this
game is more involved than characterizing it in, for example, Aguiar and Amador (2011).
In their economy, the policymaker’s utility when out of power is proportional to the utility
when in power at an exogenous rate. The nature of the equilibrium does not change the
relative value of being in power to that of being out of power, and incentives are given
through the threat of financial autarky. In our environment, the value of being out of power
is endogenous as it depends on the level of transfers received from the opposition (if any).
When constructing sustainable equilibria, this would need to be determined as part of the
equilibrium, as it is an important source of incentives. For example, a policymaker may
receive transfers when out of power as long as it does not deviate (see Dixit, Grossman and
Gul, 2000). Moreover, there could be equilibria where some—but not all—groups engage in
giving transfers to other groups out of power. The solution to the political game becomes
closer to one of determining sustainable coalitions in this environment. This is an interesting
avenue of research, but not the one I will follow in this paper.
I will focus on Markov perfect equilibria (MPE) instead, defined as a set of strategies
that depend only on the current payoff-relevant state of the economy, Kt . This is closer to
the approach in Klein, Krusell, and Rios Rull (2008) and Azzimonti (2011).

4.1

Symmetric Markov-perfect equilibria

Because groups cannot credibly promise to transfer resources to other regions in the future,
it is in no group’s interest to provide transfers to regions different than its own once in
power. Mathematically, this implies that group j will optimally set
Tst = 0 for s 6= j.
This reduces the dimensionality of the problem, as we only need to focus on one choice
variable for the incumbent, namely θt , as a function of the state. The level of capital is the
only relevant endogenous state variable because human capital is proportional to physical
capital, so the former does not evolve independently from the latter.
The key equilibrium object that we need to find in the politico-equilibrium is the expropriation rate on FDI, denoted by Θj (K), chosen by group j when in power. This function
is stationary (independent of time) because of the infinite horizon assumption. Since all
groups are symmetric, it is reasonable to look for symmetric Markov-perfect equilibria,
Θj (K) = Θ(K), ∀j,
where the equilibrium rate is independent of the identity of the group in power.

18

It is useful to make a change in notation at this point: variables dated at period t have
no time subscript and variables dated in future periods will be denoted by primes (that is,
K denotes today’s capital, K 0 denotes Kt+1 , etc.).
Consider the problem faced by a representative group in power. It needs to choose
the expropriation rate on FDI, θ, taking as given the behavior of the domestic sector and
foreign firms, as well as competitive prices and aggregates. In particular, it needs to take
into account the effects of the expropriation rate chosen on:
• transfers to the group it represents, via the government budget constraint
T (K, θ) = nθI(K, θ).
• the consumption of the members of its constituency when the group is in power,
because it is maximizing their utility
C(K, θ) = fL (K) + T (K, θ).

(6)

• capital accumulation, K 0 = H(K, θ), implicitly defined by the firms’ first order condition
!
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
f − DK (I , K ) + (1 − δ)[DI (I , K ) + (1 + Θ(K ))]
DI (I, K) + (1 + θ) =
1 + r∗ K
where I = I(K, θ) = H(K, θ) − (1 − δ)K denotes current investment and I 0 =
I(K 0 , Θ(K 0 )) − (1 − δ)K 0 denotes future investment. Note that this is the recursive
representation of eq. (5).
• the consumption of the members of its constituency when the group is out of power,
because there is a probability that next period a different group is in power:
˜ 0 , Θ(K 0 )) = fL (K 0 ),
C(K
The group in power chooses θ so as to maximize the utility of a representative agent in
its constituency (recall that, within a region, all agents are identical)
max u(C(K, θ)) + β{pV (K 0 ) + (1 − p)W (K 0 )} s.t.
θ

(P1)

K 0 = H(K, θ), and
θ0 = Θ(K 0 ).
where V (K) corresponds to the value function of an agent whose group is in power, and
the equilibrium policy Θ is followed,
n 


o
V (K) = u(C(K, Θ(K))) + β pV H(K, Θ(K)) + (1 − p)W (H K, Θ(K))
(7)
and W (K) is the value function when it is out of power,
n 


o
˜
W (K) = u(C(K,
Θ(K))) + β qV H(K, Θ(K)) + (1 − q)W H(K, Θ(K)) .
19

(8)

Notice that the probability of regaining power when the group is not an incumbent is q,
potentially different from p.
The policymaker chooses the current expropriation rate, taking as given future expropriation levels, and assuming that future governments follow the equilibrium rule Θ(K). In
order for Θ(K) to be a Markov-perfect equilibrium, it must be the case that no group has
an incentive to deviate from this equilibrium at any point in time. In other words, it must
be optimal for any policymaker to follow this rule when in power.
Definition 2 A Markov-perfect equilibrium is an expropriation-rate function Θ solving
Θ(K) = arg max u(C(K, θ)) + β{pV (K 0 ) + (1 − p)W (K 0 )}.
θ

A final remark is in order: in contrast to Aguiar and Amador [2011], this maximization
problem cannot be written as that of a hyperbolic-discounting agent. The equivalence
would hold only in the case in which the group’s consumption when out of power was equal
to zero.13

4.2

Finding and characterizing the MPE

Following Klein, Krusell, and Rios-Rull (2008), I will focus on differentiable MPE, where
Θ(K) is a smooth function of the state K. Under this assumption it is possible to find a
functional equation that determines the optimal expropriation rate as a function of the level
of capital in the economy.
The first order condition of a representative group in power can be obtained by deriving
(P1) with respect to θ,
0
Υθ + β{pVK0 + (1 − p)WK
}Hθ = 0

(9)

where, to simplify the notation and derivations, Υx denotes the derivative of instantaneous utility with respect to x, Υx = uc Cx , with x ∈ {K, θ}. This equation implies that
the marginal gain of expropriating FDI today (and increasing transfers) must equal the cost
of reduced FDI inflows to the country in continuation utility (whether in or out of power
next period). This condition can be re-written as an Euler equation for the government, as
shown in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1 The government’s first order condition can be written as

 
∂θ0
+ (1 − p)Υ̃0K Hθ +
Υθ + β p Υ0K Hθ + Υ0θ
∂θ





00
dK 00
1
00
0
00 ∂θ
0
β(q − p) ΥK Hθ + Υθ 0 − (1 − q)Υθ
= 0.
dθ
∂θ
Hθ0
with

dK 00
dθ

0
= (HK
+ Θ0K Hθ0 ) Hθ and

dθ 0
dθ

=−

(10)

Hθ H0k
H0θ .

13 See Amador [2003] for a proof of hyperbolic equivalence, as it can be applied straightforwardly to this
environment.

20

Proof. See Appendix 6.2.
This equation is referred in the literature as a ‘Generalized Euler Equation’ because of
its parallel to the Euler equation faced by an agent (i.e. an expression that is independent of
the value function). It is a functional equation that, for any K, determines the equilibrium
expropriation function Θ(K). It is worth noticing that, in contrast with a traditional Euler
equation, this expression depends not only on the level of expropriation rate, but also on
the derivative of this policy function, ΘK (K).
The first term, Υθ = uc Tθ , captures the fact that when the expropriation rate increases,
there is a direct effect on agents’ consumption since those favored by the group in control
receive an increase in the transfer of Tθ .
When the expropriation rate is increased today, firms react by cutting FDI by Hθ units.
This reduces the amount of capital available for production next period, modifying tomorrow’s consumption by causing the next policymaker to reduce the level of transfers. The
group in power will retain control of the government with probability p, in which case the
change in the continuation utility is affected due to the lower amount of capital in the econ0
omy, affecting consumption directly through Υ0k = uc CK
and indirectly through the change
0
in tomorrow’s transfers θ . A change in the current expropriation rate, by reducing FDI can
affect the way in which future policymakers will choose the expropriation rate, as captured
0
0
by the term dθ
dθ , which has an effect on Υθ tomorrow. This can be seen as an instrument
to manipulate tomorrow’s policymaker.
The group will be out of power next period with probability 1 − p , in which case the
continuation utility changes only through their effect on the stock of capital (since the group
receives no transfers when out of power). This is seen in the second term of the first row.
Finally, the term in the second row is associated with the change in expected utility two
periods from now that is triggered by the increase in θ today. This affects K 00 , and hence
consumption and transfers at that point in time. The first term is only relevant when the
probability of regaining power is independent of whether the group is in power (that is,
when q is different from p). Under no incumbency advantage, the term would vanish. The
second term captures the effects of political instability, as it would disappear were p equal
to 1.

4.3

Balanced growth path

In order to further characterize the equilibrium, I will make specific functional assumptions
about preferences and technology. These will ensure the existence of a balanced growth
path where variables grow at a constant rate.
Assumption 2 Suppose that
• The utility of domestic workers is CRRA,
u(c) =

c1−σ − 1
1−σ

where σ represents the degree of risk aversion, with the standard convention that the
instantaneous utility is logarithmic, u(c) = log(c), when σ → 1.
• The production function is Cobb-Douglas
F (k, HL) = Ak α (HL)1−α .
21

• Adjustment costs satisfy
γ
D(I, k) =
2

 2
I
k.
k

Under this parametrization, w = (1 − α)Ak α H 1−α (L)−α . Since H = K = k and L = 1,
we find that wages depend linearly on K:
w = (1 − α)AK.
The productivity of capital, on the other hand, is constant: fK = αA. The law of motion
for FDI eq. (5) in the political equilibrium becomes
"
#
 2
I0
γ I0
1
I
0
+ (1 − δ)γ 0 , (11)
αA + (1 − δ)(1 + Θ(K )) +
γ + 1 + Θ(K) =
K
1 + r∗
2 K0
K
where I = K 0 − (1 − δ)K. This functional equation determines the growth rate of capital
0
κ= K
K , which may be non-stationary due to the fact that expropriation could depend on the
stock of capital, Θ(K 0 ). The following proposition shows that a Markov-perfect equilibrium
is consistent with a balanced growth path. That is, there exists a time-invariant tax rate that
satisfies the government’s Euler equation and under which capital grows at a constant rate,
κ = κ0 . Since all other allocations are linear in capital, they grow at constant rates as well.
Proposition 2 Under Assumption 2, there exists a balanced-growth Markov-perfect politico
equilibrium (BG-MPE) in which the expropriation rate is constant Θ(K) = θ̄ and allocations
in the domestic economy grow at a time-invariant rate. In particular,
1. Capital grows at rate κ̄ = κ(θ̄), with
r
2
∗
κ(θ̄) = 1 + r − (r∗ + δ)2 − [αA − (1 + θ̄)(r∗ + δ)]
γ

(12)

2. Investment is proportional to capital
I
= κ̄ − (1 − δ) ≡ κ̃
K
3. Transfers and consumption are linear in K
T (K, θ̄)
= nθ̄κ̃
K


I
C(K, θ) = (1 − α)A + nθ̄
K,
K
˜
C(K,
θ) = (1 − α)AK,
implying that aggregate consumption grows at a constant rate.
4. The expropriation rate θ̄ solves
h
i
υθ̄ 1 − βpκ̄1−σ − β 2 κ̄2(1−σ) (q − p) − βκ̄1−σ (1 − q)
−σ

+βκ̄

1−σ

κθ̄ e(θ̄)


1−σ
o
n
ẽ
+ βκ̄1−σ (q − p) = 0,
p + (1 − p)
e(θ̄)

where e(θ̄) = (1 − α)A + nθ̄κ̃, ẽ = (1 − α)A, and υθ̄ = n(κ̃ + θ̄κθ̄ ).
22

(13)

Proof. See Appendix 6.3.
Replacing eq. (12) into eq. (13) we obtain an expression that implicitly determines
the expropriation rate θ̄ as a function of political instability p, the degree of risk aversion
σ, the productivity level A and the degree of fractionalization n. A few remarks are in
order. First, there may be non-balanced growth path equilibria in this economy that are
Markov-perfect. I am limiting the analysis to a stationary situation where the growth
rate is constant. This is in line with the analysis performed in the endogenous growth
and macroeconomic literatures, and is analogous to the study of a steady state in a nongrowing economy. Second, the economy may grow or shrink for arbitrary parameterizations.
Because the expropriation rate is only implicitly defined, it is not possible to determine a
set of restrictions on the parameter space ensuring κ̄ ≥ 1, but this will be imposed in the
numerical simulations below. Third, due to the non-linearity of the expressions, there may
be more than one BG-MPE that satisfies eq. (13).
4.3.1

Incumbency advantage, fractionalization, and FDI

Using the findings from Proposition 2, we can show that there exists a negative relationship
between expropriation and growth.
Corollary 2.1 Countries with high expropriation rates grow at lower rates
κθ̄ = −

r∗ + δ
< 0.
γ(1 + r∗ − κ̄)

(14)

Proof. Differentiating eq. (12) in Proposition 2.
Intuitively, higher expropriation rates deter foreign direct investment, and this in turn
hinders growth.
Corollary 2.2 When utility is logarithmic (e.g., σ → 1) and there is full depreciation δ = 1,
there exists a unique expropriation rate θ that is:
1. Strictly positive, θ̄ > 0.
2. Independent of incumbency advantage,
∂ θ̄
= 0,
∂ξ
3. Increasing in fractionalization
∂ θ̄
> 0.
∂n
Proof. See Appendix 6.4
The corollary shows that, under logarithmic utility, the effects of political instability on
the expropriation rate depend critically on the source of political instability. In this model,
p = n1 + ξ, so there are two possible causes for higher political turnover (e.g. low p). The
first one is low incumbency advantage ξ, as this makes it less likely that the group in power
controls the government next period. The second one is a high degree of fractionalization
23

n, as a larger number of groups in society reduces the chances that any given one of them
gains control of the government. When utility is logarithmic, we find that the first source
of political instability does not affect expropriation rates whereas the second one does. The
intuition behind the second result can be understood by noting that the costs of increasing
θ̄ are borne by all individuals in society (as the overall growth rate κ goes down), but
its benefits are enjoyed only by the group in power. As the number of social groups n
increases, those benefits get shared by a smaller number of individuals within the group, so
the transfer per agent in the group becomes bigger. The incentives to expropriate in order
to consume the transfers immediately are therefore larger, implying that θ̄ increases with n.
It is the nature of the common pool problem rather than the effects of changing the degree
of impatience (by reducing the likelihood of remaining in power) that drives this result.
Hence, if preferences were logarithmic, we should expect a negative correlation between
fractionalization and investment risk on FDI, but not between incumbency advantage and
investment risk.
This example shows that the effective discount factor of the government is not necessarily affected by the degree of political turnover, emphasizing the differences between an
incumbent group and a planner with time-inconsistent preferences. Aguiar and Amador
(2011), by assuming that the benefits of being in power are proportional to those of being
out of power, showed an equivalence result between the policymaker and an agent with
quasi-hyperbolic preferences (see Laibson [2007]). More specifically, they assume that the
instantaneous utility when in power is µu(c) whereas it is u(c) when out of power, with
µ > 1. This implies that the marginal value of a unit of capital, namely Υk = µuc Ck , when
in power relative to that out of power Υ̃k = uc Ck is exogenous and equal to µ. Under this
assumption, they show that higher political turnover 1 − p translates to a more impatient
government. The equivalence breaks in this paper because the ratio of marginal utilities (in
and out of power) is neither exogenous nor constant. Moreover, the relative marginal value
of an extra unit of capital when in power to that when out of power Υk /Υ̃k is endogenous, as
it can be affected by the expropriation rate. Hence, while it is true that higher p increases the
benefits of leaving FDI undistorted (by making expected utility higher) and hence increases
the effective discount factor, it also changes the relative value of a dollar when in power and
out of power. This additional effect may create incentives to actually reduce expropriation
rates. The strength of the second effect is closely linked to the inter-temporal elasticity of
substitution σ. As Corollary 2.2 shows, when σ = 1, the ‘effective discount factor effect’ is
exactly offset by the relative ‘value of a dollar effect.’ As a result, expropriation rates are
unaffected by increases in incumbency advantage (and hence p).
The result in the corollary is not general, however, as incumbency advantage affects the
expropriation rate (and hence growth) when σ 6= 1.
Corollary 2.3 The expropriation rate on FDI is affected by incumbency advantage,
when σ 6= 1.

∂ θ̄
∂ξ

6= 0,

Proof. By a numerical counterexample.
I have not been able to characterize ∂∂ξθ̄ theoretically, but a numerical simulation shows
that incumbency advantage affects expropriation for more generic CRRA functions, indicating that the independence of θ̄ from ξ under logarithmic utility is a knife-edge case. Figure
2 depicts the growth rate of the domestic economy (left panel) together with the expropriation rate (right panel) as a function of political stability p, where n is kept constant
and ξ increases such that government stability p belongs to [1/n, 1] (the series are depicted

24

as functions of p rather than ξ to ease interpretation). The parameters used are σ = 0.9,
β = 0.91, α = 0.4, γ = 25, δ = 0.06, n = 10, A = 1.53, and β(1 + r∗ ) = 1.03 so the growth
rate in the rest of the world is 3%.
Expropriation rate (in %)

Growth Rate (in %)

6

6.85

6.84

5.9

6.83
5.8
6.82

3

5

5.7
6.81

5.6
6.8
5.5
6.79

5.4

6.78

6.77
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

5.3
0.1

1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

p

p

Figure 2: Growth Rate κ and Expropriation Rate θ̄ as a function of incumbency advantage.
Parameters: σ = 0.9, β = 0.91, α = 0.4, δ = 0.06, n = 10, β(1 + r∗ ) = 1.03, A = 1.53.

We can see that θ̄ is negatively related to incumbency advantage in this case. The
intuition behind this result comes from the redistributive uncertainty and is similar to that
in Amador and Aguiar (2011) or Azzimonti (2011). When a group representing one of
the social groups is in power, it chooses expropriation rates on FDI so as to trade-off the
gains obtained from redistribution (from foreign firms to its own group) against the losses
incurred by the resulting reductions in FDI (which limit future redistribution). Because
the policymaker knows that with high probability, 1 − p, one of the other groups will be
choosing expropriation rates in the future, it has incentives to over-expropriate in the current
period and consume the resources today with certainty. Recall that, if out of power in the
future, no transfers will be received. The political uncertainty induces myopic behavior from
policymakers, as the benefits from an extra unit of foreign direct investment resulting from
low expropriation are not fully internalized (i.e. the extra level of transfers that could be
afforded). The effect is stronger as the probability of remaining in power decreases.
Remark 1 Under σ < 1, we should observe that economies with high political turnover
(frequent changes of power due to low incumbency advantage) exhibit a bias towards spending
in transfers, relatively high expropriation rates, relatively low levels of FDI, and low growth
rates.
We can also study the effects of fractionalization by increasing the number of groups n
while keeping constant the degree of incumbency advantage ξ. Figure 3 depicts the growth
rate and expropriation rates for the benchmark economy as a function of n ∈ [10, 15] for
three alternative values of ξ ∈ {0, 0.5, 0.9} (depicted as the solid red line, the broken blue
25

line, and the dotted black line, respectively). Changing the degree of fractionalization affects
two things: (i) government instability and (ii) the importance of the common pool problem.
Increasing n is analogous to decreasing incumbency advantage in terms of its qualitative
effect on p. A larger number of social groups reduces the probability for the incumbent
to retain power, and hence her incentives to promote growth through low expropriation
rates. In addition, and consistent with what we found for the logarithmic example, a higher
number of groups results in a greater incentive to expropriate FDI as the size of transfers
per capita becomes larger. Taken together, both effects result in higher θ̄ and lower κ as
n rises. Quantitatively, the effect of fractionalization is stronger than that of incumbency
advantage under this parameterization.
Growth Rate (in %) and Fractionalization

Expropriation Rate (in %) and Fractionalization

7

30

6.5
25

6

5.5

5

5

20

15
5

10
4.5

4
10

10.5

11

11.5

12

12.5

13

13.5

14

14.5

5
10

15

n

10.5

11

11.5

12

12.5

13

13.5

14

14.5

15

n

Figure 3: Growth Rate κ and Expropriation Rate θ̄ as a function of fractionalization n .
Parameters: Benchmark parameters are σ = 0.9, β = 0.91, α = 0.4, δ = 0.06, β(1 + r∗ ) = 1.03, and
A = 1.53. The solid red line considers ξ = 0, the broken blue line ξ = 0.5, and the dotted black
line ξ = 0.9.

4.3.2

Efficiency of the MPE

In this section I want to emphasize the detrimental effects of redistributive uncertainty and
fractionalization in expropriation policies and ultimately growth. To that end, I analyze the
properties of expropriation policy chosen by a benevolent planner that places equal weight
to all social groups in the economy (e.g., that maximize the welfare of all citizens). I assume
that the planner is subject to the same constraints as policymakers representing different
social groups. That is, it has access to the same policy instruments (expropriations and
group-specific transfers) and does not have a commitment technology. Thus, the only difference between the planner and a politician is that, by giving some weight to all individuals
in society, the former is not subject to the common pool problem. This, in turn, implies
that it does not suffer from redistributive uncertainty due to political turnover: a planner
with identical preferences will replace the current planner with probability one next period.

26

The planner solves
J(K) = max u(C ∗ (K, θ)) + βJ(K 0 ),
θ

(15)

where K 0 = H(K, θ) is the same as in the benchmark case, C ∗ (K, θ) is given by eq. (6),
but where transfers per capita are now:
T ∗ (K, θ) = θI(θ).
The difference between T (K, θ) and T ∗ (K, θ) is that in the political equilibrium, groups
only collect transfers for their constituency, while under a planner all agents receive them
(so transfers per individual are θI rather than nθI as before). A second difference between
the efficient problem and the one solved in the political equilibrium is that the planner does
not face uncertainty whereas a given group stays in power with probability p < 1.
It is possible to show that the efficient solution also admits a balanced growth path.
Proposition 3 Under Assumption 2, there exists an efficient balanced-growth path (EBG)
in which the expropriation rate is constant, Θ(K) = θ̄∗ and allocations in the domestic
economy grow at a time-invariant rate. In particular,
1. Consumption and capital grow at rate κ∗ = κ(θ̄∗ ), with κ(.) defined as in Prop 3.
2. Investment is proportional to capital, with

I
K

= κ̃∗ = κ∗ − (1 − δ).

3. Transfers are linear in K, T (K, θ̄∗ ) = θ̄∗ κ̃∗ K
4. The expropriation rate θ̄ solves
h
i

1−σ
−σ
−σ
κ̃∗ + θ̄∗ κ∗θ̄ 1 − β (κ∗ )
+ β (κ∗ ) κ∗θ̄ θ̄∗ κ̃∗ = −β (κ∗ ) κθ̄∗ (1 − α)A.

(16)

Proof. See Appendix 6.5.
We can easily see that κ̄ 6= κ∗ , so the expropriation rate in the political equilibrium
is generally inefficient. Moreover, this holds even when the incumbent faces no political
uncertainty.
Corollary 3.1 For any n > 1, the BG-MPE is inefficient even under no political instability
(i.e. p = 1). Moreover, if utility is logarithmic and δ = 1, we have that
θ̄ > θ̄∗

and

κ̄ < κ̄∗ .

Proof. See Appendix 6.6.
Hence, political frictions create inefficiently large expropriation rates and low growth
even if the incumbent knows for sure that it will remain in power forever after. This result
is in sharp contrast with previous studies in which the only source of inefficiency is given
by an excessive degree of impatience caused by political uncertainty, such as Amador and
Aguiar (2011) or Azzimonti (2011). The main difference lies on the fact that in those papers
the disagreement was about the composition of a public good, whereas here it lies on the
size of targeted transfers. In the current environment, the common pool problem has both
a dynamic and a static component. As a result, even a ‘benevolent dictator’ will distort the

27

growth rate by excessively expropriating FDI. This illustrates how fractionalization may be
detrimental to growth even in autocratic regimes.
Under redistributive uncertainty p < 1, there is a second source of inefficiency that
arises from myopia. From the numerical example, it is possible to see that the problem is
aggravated by the higher political instability (figures omitted, but available upon request).
The smaller the value of p (i.e. greater government instability), the further away FDI
inflows are from their efficient level. In terms of welfare, the uncertainty over the identity of
tomorrow’s policymaker introduces volatility in private consumption, which is absent in the
planner’s solution (keep in mind that there are no shocks in this economy other than the
identity of the group in power). Welfare along the BG-MPE is lower not only because the
amount of resources is smaller, but also because individuals suffer from artificial fluctuations
in consumption caused by the volatility in targeted transfers.

5

Conclusions

In this paper, I examine the role of political instability as a potential explanation for the
lack of capital flows from rich countries to poor countries. I first do this empirically by
studying the relationship between FDI, investment risk, and politically instability in a large
set of countries between 1984 and 2014. I then provide a dynamic political economy model
of redistributive conflict to explore the theoretical mechanism.
There are several simplifying assumptions that were made in order to reduce the dimensionality of the problem. First, workers are excluded from capital markets. If domestic
agents were allowed to save, expropriation would be costlier because FDI acts as an externality in production. By discouraging FDI, the returns to savings—and hence future
income—would be reduced. Secondly, all groups are assumed to be identical and, in particular, have the same number of supporters. If there is a clear majority with a larger
probability of being in power, the BG-MPE would no longer be symmetric. As in Azzimonti and Talbert (2014), we would expect cycles to arise as groups that gain power less
often become more myopic and choose to expropriate larger amounts. This also introduces
some uncertainty over policy that would affect the way in which FDI is chosen by firms and
potentially generate FDI cycles. Finally, it would be interesting to develop a model where
alternation of power is endogenous.

28

References
[1] Acemoglu, D. and Johnson, S. (2005), Unbundling Institutions, Journal of Political
Economy, 113, 5, pp. 949-955.
[2] Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J. (2001) The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation, American Economic Review, 91, pp.
1369-1401.
[3] Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J. (2002) Reversal of Fortune: Geography
and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 117, pp. 1231-1294.
[4] Acemoglu, D., Golosov, M. and Tsyvinski, A. (2011) Power Fluctuations and Political
Economy, Journal of Economic Theory, 146, 3, pp. 1009-1041.
[5] Aguiar, M. and Amador, M. (2011) Growth in the Shadow of Expropriation, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 2, pp. 651-697.
[6] Alesina, A. and Tabellini, G. (1990) A positive theory of fiscal deficits and government
debt, Review of Economic Studies, 57, pp. 403-414.
[7] Alfaro, L., Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and Volosovych, V. (2008), Why doesn’t capital flow from
poor to rich countries? An empirical investigation, Review of Economics and Statistics,
90, pp. 347-368.
[8] Amador, M. (2003), A political model of sovereign debt repayment. Mimeo.
[9] Azzimonti, M. (2011), Barriers to Investment in Polarized Societies, American Economic Review, 101, 5, pp. 2182-2204.
[10] Azzimonti, M. and Talbert, M. (2014) Polarized Business Cycles, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 67, pp. 47-61.
[11] Azzimonti, M., Sarte, P., and Soares, J. (2009), Distortionary taxes and public investment when government promises are not enforceable, Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 33, 9, pp. 1662-81.
[12] Battaglini, M. and Coate, S. (2007) Inefficiency in legislative policy-making: A dynamic
analysis, American Economic Review, 97, 1, pp. 118-149.
[13] Battaglini, M. and Coate, S. (2008) A dynamic theory of public spending, taxation and
debt, American Economic Review, 98, 1, pp. 201-36.
[14] Besley, T. and Coate, S. (1998) Sources of inefficiency in a representative democracy:
A dynamic analysis, American Economic Review, 88, 1, pp. 139-156.
[15] Besley, T., Ilzetzki, E., and Persson T. (2013) Weak States and Steady States: The
Dynamics of Fiscal Capacity, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 4, pp.
205-235.
[16] Brunetti, A. and Weder, B. (1998), Investment and Institutional Uncertainty: A Comparative Study of Different Uncertainty Measures, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 134, 3,
pp. 513-533.
29

[17] Busse, M. and Hefeker, C. (2007) Political risk, institutions and foreign direct investment, European Journal of Political Economy, 23, 2, pp. 397-415.
[18] Caballero, R. and Yared, P. (2010) Future Renting-Seeking and Current Public Savings,
Journal of International Economics, 82, pp. 124-136.
[19] Debortoli, D., and Nunes, R. (2010) Fiscal policy under loose commitment, Journal of
Economic Theory, 145, 3, pp. 1005-1032.
[20] Dixit, A., Grossman, G.M., and Gul, F. (2000) The dynamics of political compromise,
Journal of Poliitcal Economy, 108, 3, pp. 531-568.
[21] Eaton, J., and Gersovitz, M. (1984) A theory of expropriation and deviations from
perfect capital mobility, Economic Journal, 94, 373, pp. 16-40.
[22] Gastanaga, V. Nugent, J. and Pashamova, B. (1998), Host country reforms and FDI
inflows: How much difference do they make?, World Development , 26, 7, pp. 1299-1314.
[23] Halac, M. and Yared, P. (2014) Fiscal Rules and Discretion under Persistent Shocks,
Econometrica, 82, pp. 1557-1614
[24] Ilzetzki, E. (2011) Rent-seeking distortions and scal procyclicality, Journal of Development Economics, 96, 1, pp. 30-46.
[25] Janerba, E. (2002) Attracting FDI in a politically risky world, International Economic
Review, 43, 4, pp. 1127-1155.
[26] Klein, P. and Rios-Rull, J.V. (2003) Time-consistent optimal fiscal policy, International
Economic Review, 44, 4, pp. 1217-1246.
[27] Klein, P., Krusell, P. and Rı́os-Rull, J.V., 2008, Time-consistent public expenditures,
Review of Economic Studies, 75, 3, pp. 789-808.
[28] Laibson, D. (1997) Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 62, pp. 443-77.
[29] Lucas, R. (1990) Why doeasn’t capital flow from rich to poor countries? American
Economic Review, 80, pp. 92-96.
[30] Martin, F. (2010) Markov-Perfect Capital and Labor Taxes, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34, 3, pp. 503-521.
[31] Martin, F. (2015) Policy And Welfare Effects Of Within-Period Commitment, Macroeconomic Dynamics, 19, 07, pp. 1401-1426.
[32] Ortigueira, S. (2006) Markov-perfect optimal taxation, Review of Economic Dynamics,
9, pp. 153-178.
[33] Parente, S. and Prescott, E. (2000) Barriers to Riches, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2000.
[34] Pastor, L. and Veronesi, P. (2012) Uncertainty about government policy and stock
prices, Journal of Finance, 67, 4, pp. 1219-1264.

30

[35] Thomas, J., and Worrall, T. (1994) Foreign direct investment and the risk of expropriation, Review of Economic Studies, 61, 1, pp. 81-108.
[36] Tornell, A. and Velasco, A. (1992), The tragedy of the commons, Journal of Political
Economy, 100, 6, pp. 1208-1231.
[37] Quadrini, V. (2005) Policy commitment and the welfare gains from capital market
liberalization, European Economic Review, 49, 8.

6
6.1

Appendix
List of countries

The list of countries in each region is presented in Table 6.

31

OECD

East Asia

Latin America

Africa

Other

Other, cont’d

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
East Germany
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
West Germany

Bahrain
Bangladesh
China
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Japan
Malaysia
Mongolia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam

Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela

Algeria
Angola
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Congo
Congo, DR
Cote d’Ivoire
Egypt
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Albania
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belarus
Brunei
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Dominican Republic
Estonia
Hungary
India
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jamaica
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Latvia
Lebanon
Lithuania
Malta
Moldova
New Caledonia
Oman
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Poland
Qatar
Romania
Russia

Saudi Arabia
Serbia
Serbia & Montenegro
Slovakia
Slovenia
Sri Lanka
Suriname
Syria
Trinidad & Tobago
UAE
Ukraine
USSR
Yemen

Notes: Sample period is 1984-2014 for all countries with the following exceptions in starting
• 1985-1986: Angola, Mongolia, Namibia, Uganda
• 1988: Hong Kong, Tanzania
• 1990: Bulgaria, Libya, Moldova, Poland, Romania, Yemen
• 1991: Haiti, Hungary
• 1992: Albania, Armenia, Belarus, Ethiapia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine
• 1993: Czech Republic, Slovakia
• 1995: Azerbaijan, Croatia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovenia
• 2001: Brunei, Lebanon
• 2002: Luxembourg, Belgium
• 2006: Serbia
In addition, New Caledonia’s sample comprises the period 1984-2000.

Table 6: Countries Included by Region

32

6.2

Proof of Proposition (10)

We can obtain an expression for VK by differentiating eq. (7) with respect to capital,
0
0
VK (K) = ΥK + β{pVK0 + (1 − p)WK
}HK + [Υθ + β{pVK0 + (1 − p)WK
}Hθ ]ΘK ,
|
{z
}
=0 by eq. 9

0
⇒ VK (K) = ΥK + β{pVK0 + (1 − p)WK
}HK .

Notice that from (9) we get
0
β{pVK0 + (1 − p)WK
}=−

Υθ
.
Hθ

(17)

Therefore,
HK
(18)
Hθ
Notice the difference between this condition and the one that we would normally see in
a neoclassical growth model. In the traditional model, the marginal value of a unit of
investment is given by the increase in marginal utility driven by the extra consumption
that this unit of capital produces (i.e. VK (K) = ΥK ). In this economy, the equality is
broken for two reasons: first, because foreigners decide how much to invest, and not the
domestic workers; second, because the envelope theorem does not hold in economies where
the identity of the policymaker may change over time.
We can obtain WK by differentiating (8) with respect to capital,
VK (K) = ΥK − Υθ

0
0
WK (K) = Υ̃K + β{qVK0 + (1 − q)WK
}HK + [Υ̃θ + β{qVK0 + (1 − q)WK
}Hθ ]ΘK ,

(19)

where Υ̃K denotes the marginal change in instantaneous utility triggered by an increase
in FDI when the agent’s group is out of power. Since agents do not receive transfers in a
such case, the marginal utilities of consumption and labor are such that Υ̃K 6= ΥK . This
implies that the second term in the expression is different from zero, in contrast to the case
of V (K). Because there are no transfers when out of power, Υ̃θ = 0.
From eq. (9), we have that


Υθ
1
+ pVk0
,
Wk0 = −
Hθ β
1−p
Replacing this into 19,
WK (K) = Υ̃K + β




Υθ 
1
(q − p)Vk0 − (1 − q)
H K + H θ ΘK .
1−p
Hθ β

(20)

0
Replacing eq. (18) into eq. (20) we can obtain an expression WK
independent of value
functions. Updating such expression, together with eqs. (18) and (19) (that is, evaluating
them in tomorrow’s capital) and replacing them back in the first order condition eq. (9) we
obtain the following equation


 
Υ0θ 0
0
0
(21)
Υθ + βHθ p ΥK − 0 Hk + (1 − p)Υ̃K +
Hθ




Υ0
Υ00
0
β 2 (q − p) Υ00K − θ00 Hk00 − (1 − q) 0 θ (HK
+ Θ0K Hθ0 ) Hθ = 0.
Hθ
Hθ β

33

To obtain eq. (10), note that the total change in K 00 when θ increases is
dK 00
0
= (HK
+ Θ0K Hθ0 ) Hθ ,
dθ
and that the change in θ0 when θ rises such that dK 00 = 0 is
Hθ Hk0
dθ0
,
=−
dθ
Hθ0
and re-arrange

6.3

Proof of Proposition (2)

Parts 1, 2, and 3 Imposing the balanced growth path (BGP) condition κ̄ =
obtain
K0
I
=
− (1 − δ) = κ̄ − (1 − δ) = κ̃
K
K
Replacing this into eq. (11), we have
"
#
1
γ 2
0
γκ̃ + 1 + Θ(K) =
αA + (1 − δ)(1 + Θ(K )) + κ̃ + (1 − δ)γκ̃ .
1 + r∗
2

K0
K ,

we

(22)

Clearly, a BGP requires a constant expropriation rate. Imposing Θ(K) = θ̄, we obtain the
following quadratic expression

2
αA − (1 + θ̄)(r∗ + δ) = 0,
κ̃2 − 2(r∗ + δ)κ̃ +
γ
which admits the following two roots
r

2
∗
κ̃ = (r + δ) ± (r∗ + δ)2 −
αA − (1 + θ̄)(r∗ + δ) .
γ
The growth rate of capital is κ̄ = κ̃ + 1 − δ, or
r

2
κ̄ = (1 + r∗ ) ± (r∗ + δ)2 −
αA − (1 + θ̄)(r∗ + δ) .
γ

(23)

Lemma 1 There is only one root consistent with v0 < ∞ (e.g. a finite value of the firm),
r

2
∗
κ̄ = 1 + r − (r∗ + δ)2 −
αA − (1 + θ̄)(r∗ + δ) .
γ
Proof. The value for the firm is

v0

∞
X

1
dt
(1
+
r ∗ )t
t=0


∞
X
1
γ It2
=
αAKt − It (1 + θt ) −
(1 + r∗ )t
2 Kt
t=0
=

34

In the BGP,

t
∞ 
X
γ 2
κ̄
v0 = αA − (1 + θ̄)κ̃ − κ̃ K0
2
1 + r∗
t=0


with K0 denoting initial capital. Hence,
κ̄
<1
1 + r∗
⇔ κ̄ < 1 + r∗ .

v0 < ∞

⇔

Inspecting eq. (23), we see that only one of the roots satisfies this condition.
To complete the proof of parts 1., 2., and 3. note that transfers satisfy
T (K, θ)
I
= nθ̄ = nθ̄κ̃
K
K
Consumption when in power is,


I
C(K, θ) =
(1 − α)A + nθ̄
K
K
= [(1 − α)A + nθ̄κ̃]K ≡ eK
and when out of power is
˜
C(K,
θ) = (1 − α)AK ≡ ẽK,
so aggregate consumption is


1
n−1 ˜
n−1
1
C(K, θ) +
e+
ẽ K,
C(K, θ) =
n
n
n
n
which grows at rate κ̄.

Part 4

Use the expressions derived in Parts 1, 2, and 3 to obtain the following:
Υθ

= C −σ Cθ
= n[κ̃ + θ̄κ̃θ̄ ]e−σ K 1−σ
≡ υθ e−σ K 1−σ ,

ΥK

= C −σ CK
= e1−σ K −σ ,

Υ̃K

=

h

(1 − α)A

i1−σ

K −σ

= ẽ1−σ K −σ .
Note that using K 0 = κ̄K, we can compute Υ0θ = Υθ κ̄1−σ , Υ0K = ΥK κ̄−σ , and Υ̃0K =
Υ̃K κ̄−σ . These imply Υ00θ = Υθ κ̄2(1−σ) and Υ00K = ΥK κ̄−2σ .
35

From the FDI’s decision of firms H(K, θ) = κ̄K, we have
Hθ

=

κθ̄ K

HK

=

κ̄,

0
which implies Hθ0 = κθ̄ κ̄K and HK
= κ̄.
Using these, we can show

dK 00
= (κ̄ + Θ0K κθ̄ K 0 ) κθ̄ K,
dθ
as Θ0K = 0 in the BGPME. We also have that
Hθ Hk0
dθ0
= −1,
=−
dθ
Hθ0
so

dθ 00
dθ 0

6.4

= −1. To obtain eq. (13), replace these into the GEE eq (10) and re-arrange

Proof of Corollary (2.2)

Part 1.: existence, uniqueness, and sign Under full depreciation κ = κ̃ = κ̄, and
under logarithmic utility,


Υ(K, θ) = ln (1 − α)AK + T (K, θ) ,
implying that
υθ
1
, Υ̃θ = 0, and ΥK = Υ̃K = ,
e
K
whereas Hθ = κθ̄ K and HK = κ̄ as before. Replacing these into the GEE, eq (10), imposing
balanced growth conditions, and re-arranging,
Υθ =

Υθ +

β κθ̄
= 0.
1 − β κ̄

This expression can be re-written as
κ (1 − α)A
.
(1 − β)[κ̄ + θ̄κθ̄ ] + β θ̄κθ̄ = −β θ̄
|
{z
} | κ̄ {z n }
LHS

RHS

The right-hand side (RHS) is increasing in θ̄,
∂RHS(θ̄)
(1 − α)A  κθ̄ 2 1 + r∗
=β
> 0,
n
κ̄
1 + r∗ − κ̄
∂ θ̄
and equal to zero at the origin RHS(0) = 0.
The left-hand side (LHS) is decreasing in θ̄,
∂LHS
= (2 − β)κθ̄ + θ̄κθ̄θ̄ < 0,
∂ θ̄
36

(24)

since κθ̄ < 0 as shown in Corollary 2.1 and
κθ̄θ̄ =

(κθ̄ )2
∂κθ̄
=−
< 0,
1 + r∗ − κ̄
θ̄

and positive at the origin, LHS(0) > 0. Hence, there exists a θ̄ > 0 at which they intersect,
RHS = LHS.
Part 2.

Since the LHS and RHS of eq. (24) are independent of p,

∂ θ̄
∂ξ

= 0.

Part 3. The LHS is independent of n. The RHS is increasing in n. Hence, for a small 
and n00 = n0 + , RHS(n00 ) > RHS(n0 ). This implies θ̄(n00 ) > θ̄(n0 ). We can approximate
∂ θ̄(n)
∂n as follows
θ̄(n00 ) − θ̄(n0 )
∂ θ̄(n)
w lim
>0
→0
∂n


6.5

Proof of Proposition (3)

The proof of Parts 1, 2, and 3 is analogous to those in (the proof of) Proposition 6.3. The
only significant difference is that transfers satisfy T ∗ (K, θ) = θI(θ), whereas they were
T (K, θ) = nθI(θ) in the political equilibrium. In addition, the expropriation rate θ̄∗ is
potentially different from θ̄.
The proof of Part 4. is more involved, as we need to re-compute the GEE. Recall that
the planner solves problem (15). Its FOC is
0
Υ∗θ + βJK
Hθ = 0,

where

(25)





J(K) = u C ∗ (K, Θ∗ (K)) + βJ H(K, Θ∗ (K))

and Θ∗ (K) represents the expropriation rate followed by future planners in the MPE. Differentiating the last equation, we obtain


0
JK = Υ∗K + Υ∗θ Θ∗K + βJK
HK + Hθ Θ∗K
which, using eq. (25), reduces to
JK = Υ∗K − Υ∗θ

HK
.
Hθ

Updating this expression and replacing it into eq. (25), we obtain the planner’s GEE


0
0
0 H
Υ∗θ + βHθ Υ∗K − Υ∗θ K
= 0.
(26)
Hθ0
This is similar to the GEE in the political equilibrium, with the exception that there is no
political turnover (so p and q do not appear in this expression) and the transfer function is
different. This implies that now


Υ∗θ = u∗c I ∗ + θHθ ,
37


i
h
Υ∗K = u∗c (1 − α)A + θ∗ HK − (1 − δ) .
Imposing the balanced growth path conditions, HK = κ and Hθ = κθ K. Replacing these
into eq. (26), and re-arranging, we obtain eq. (16)

6.6

Proof of Corollary (3.1)

When there is no political instability p = 1 and q = 0. Then, eq. (13), determining the
expropriation rate under the political equilibrium θ̄ reduces to
κ̄−σ κθ̄
(1 − α)A.
n {z
}

(27)

(1 − βκ̄1−σ )[κ̃ + θ̄κθ̄ ] + β θ̄κθ̄ κ̄−σ κ̃ = −βκ̄−σ κθ̄ (1 − α)A.
{z
} |
{z
}
|

(28)

(1 − βκ̄1−σ )[κ̃ + θ̄κθ̄ ] + β θ̄κθ̄ κ̄−σ κ̃ = −β
{z
} |
|
LHS

RHS

∗

The planner’s FOC determining θ̄ can be written as

LHS

RHS

Note that the LHS of eq. (28) is the same as that of eq. (27), whereas the RHS differs for
any n > 1 implying that θ̄ 6= θ̄∗ . Hence, the BG-MPE is inefficient.
To show the second part, evaluate the equations at δ = 1 and σ = 1. Eq. (27) collapses
to eq. (24), studied in Appendix 6.4. The RHS of eq. (27) is larger than the RHS of eq.
(24), implying that θ̄∗ > θ̄. Since κ is decreasing in θ, then κ̄ < κ̄∗

38

