                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             POVERTY TRAPS AND THE SOCIAL PROTECTION PARADOX

                                      Munenobu Ikegami
                                      Michael R. Carter
                                     Christopher B. Barrett
                                       Sarah A. Janzen

                                      Working Paper 22714
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22714


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2016




We thank John Hoddinott, Valerie Kozel, Felix Naschold and seminar audiences at the
International Food Policy Research Institute, Namur, Purdue, Wageningen, Wisconsin and the
World Bank for helpful comments on earlier versions of this work. Generous financial support
was provided by the Social Protection Division of the World Bank and by a grant from the
USAID Office of Poverty Reduction to the BASIS Assets and Market Assets Innovation Lab. The
ideas expressed are the responsibility of the authors and should not be attributed to either
sponsoring organization, nor to the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Munenobu Ikegami, Michael R. Carter, Christopher B. Barrett, and Sarah A. Janzen.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Poverty Traps and the Social Protection Paradox
Munenobu Ikegami, Michael R. Carter, Christopher B. Barrett, and Sarah A. Janzen
NBER Working Paper No. 22714
October 2016
JEL No. D91,I32,O12

                                             ABSTRACT

Progressively targeted cash transfers remain the dominant policy response to chronic poverty in
developing countries. But are there alternative social protection policies that might have larger
poverty impacts over time for the same public expenditure? To explore this question, this paper
develops a dynamic stochastic model of of consumption and asset accumulation by households
that confront a non-convex production technology and face missing financial markets. The model
demonstrates that a hybrid social protection policy, which devotes resources to funding “state of
the world contingent transfers” (SWCTs) to vulnerable, but non-poor households in the wake of
negative shocks, can result in lower rates of poverty in the medium term than does a conventional
cash transfer policy. We also explore the prospects for using subsidized index insurance as a way
to implement SWCTs and find that an insurance-based hybrid policy can result in lower total
public expenditures than a conventional cash transfer social protection program.


Munenobu Ikegami                                        Christopher B. Barrett
International Livestock Research Institute              Dyson School of Applied Economics
Nairobi, Kenya                                            and Management
m.ikegami@cgiar.org                                     Cornell University
                                                        Ithaca, NY
Michael R. Carter                                       cbb2@cornell.edu
Department of Agricultural and
 Resource Economics                                     Sarah A. Janzen
University of California, Davis                         Department of Economics
One Shields Avenue                                      Montana State University
Davis, CA 95616                                         Bozeman, MN 59717; USA
and NBER                                                sarah.janzen@montana.edu
mrcarter@ucdavis.edu
Poverty Traps and the Social Protection Paradox
Cash transfer programs, progressively targeted at the poorest, have become a predominant
policy for addressing chronic poverty in developing countries. While pioneered by mid-
dle income developing countries (notably Mexico, South Africa and Brazil), cash transfer
programs have spread more broadly across the developing world, including the risk-prone
pastoral regions of Northern Kenya whose economic reality underwrites the analysis in this
paper.1 There is ample evidence that cash transfers break the liquidity constraints that
Loury (1981) argues propagate poverty inter-generationally by limiting parents’ health and
education investment in their children. However, there is much more modest evidence that
these programs enhance the earned incomes of recipient households and impact their living
standards once the cash transfers come to an end, despite their theoretical potential to do
so.2 Indeed policymakers in Latin America now confront the conundrum of former cash
transfer recipients who revert to their pre-transfer living standards once their transfer eligi-
bility ends. In northern Kenya, the Hurrell and Sabates-Wheeler (2013b) impact evaluation
of the Hunger Safety Net Program (HSNP) cash transfer scheme found that while transfers
allowed recipient households to economically tread water even as their untreated neighbors
sunk under the weight of continuing shocks, it did nothing to help recipient households craft
a pathway from poverty. Similar to Latin American countries, Kenya is now looking to
augment its HSNP cash transfer program with a “poverty graduation program.” 3
    The apparently weak impact of cash transfer programs on the upward mobility of poor
households in at least the medium run has particular salience in risky regions. If cash
transfers do little to promote upward mobility in general, their impact on poverty dynamics
may be further blunted in risky environments because they do not protect the assets of
   1
     With the region receiving “emergency” food aid year after year, the Kenyan government in 2009 created a
social protection scheme, the Hunger Safety Nets Program (HSNP), built around bi–monthly cash transfers
targeted at the region’s chronically poor and indigent. By regularizing progressively-targeted assistance,
HSNP had hoped to put households on a pathway from poverty by enabling asset accumulation and sustained
investment in child health and education so as to avert future chronic poverty arising due to economic
disability (see the discussion in the Hurrell and Sabates-Wheeler (2013a)).
   2
     The Gertler et al. (2012) study of Mexico’s Progresa program finds notable investment and income effects
from a purely cash transfer program. The Bastagli et al. (2016) review study finds more modest evidence of
such effects, unless specific efforts were made by implementers to support planning, investment and business
development. In a similar spirit, the six country studies contained Maldonado et al., eds (2016) find some
evidence that the potential impacts of cash transfers on earned income are when cash transfers are paired
with ancillary business development programs targeted at cash transfer recipients.
   3
     The current generation of graduation programs take their inspiration from BRAC’s ultra-poor program
that recognizes that more than liquidity increments to reduce poverty. Such programs involve a mix of cash
transfers, financial education, confidence building and coaching, and culminate with a discrete asset transfer.
Banerjee et al. (2015) summarize evaluations of graduation programs that span both middle and low income
countries.



                                                      1
the non-poor who are vulnerable to falling into poverty. This omission has two potential
effects. First, conventional cash transfers do not stem the downflow of the poor into poverty
that is driven by shocks (Krishna (2006)). Second, by not protecting the assets of the
vulnerable non-poor, cash transfers in turn do little to enhance the investment incentives
of the already poor.4 Given these two effects, the population of future poor may grow and
either (a) benefits to households shrink if the social protection budget is fixed; or, (b) the
social protection budget balloons to keep pace with the growing number of poor households.
    These observations raise the question as to whether an alternative social protection
scheme might be more effective at reducing the extent and depth of poverty compared to
the purely progressive targeting rules of standard cash transfer programs. Using a dynamic
stochastic programming model meant to capture key features of a risky rural landscape like
that of Northern Kenya, this paper explores the poverty reduction potential of a hybrid
social protection system that combines means-tested cash transfers with “state of the world
contingent transfers” (SWCTs) made to the vulnerable, non-poor in the wake of negative
shocks.
    Our findings include what we call the paradox of social protection. Under the assumption
that transfers are unanticipated (i.e., households do not alter their accumulation strategies
in anticipation of social protection benefits), we show that compared to a standard, progres-
sively targeted scheme, a hybrid policy that diverts some the social protection budget to the
vulnerable non-poor results in a lower levels of poverty in the medium term, although poverty
rates are higher in the short term. Conventional cash transfer programs thus implicitly make
an intertemporal tradeoff between the well-being of the poor today versus their well-being
in the future. The hybrid program of course creates the mirror intertemporal tradeoff.
    We then relax the assumption that transfers are unanticipated and explore the impacts
of hybrid social protection when the contingent transfers are anticipated. We show first
that anticipation crowds in additional accumulation by the poor, who are incentivized by
the fact that SWCTs will protect their assets should they invest and advance to the ranks
of vulnerable non-poor. This ex ante accumulation effect might be termed positive moral
hazard as it is induced risk taking that lessens the overall rate of poverty. At the same time,
when SWCTs are precisely targeted at the vulnerable as in our model, a new equilibrium
appears. Specifically, a subset of agents accumulate only to the point where they are eligible
for SWCTs, but not beyond. This new equilibrium reflects what might be termed as negative
moral hazard, as those at this equilibrium make choices that increase the probability of
insurance-like contingent social protection payments.
   4
    Indeed, if anything, it might be expected that means-tested cash transfers would discourage accumulation
as successful accumulation could lead to loss of benefits.



                                                     2
    Given the tradeoffs, expense and complexities associated with SWCTs and hybrid social
protection, we then ask whether the impacts of an SWCT can be achieved with an insurance
contract which is co-funded by the government and by the vulnerable non-poor. Rather than
holding the social protection budget fixed, we instead ask how much budget is needed over
time to fully close the poverty gap for all poor households and to pay for the government
insurance subsidy that is offered to all poor and vulnerable non-poor households under the
hybrid scheme. Drawing on companion work that models the dynamically optimal demand
for insurance (Janzen et al. (2016)), we show that present value of the required government
expenditure stream is lower under the hybrid insurance scheme than it would be under a
conventional cash transfer scheme targeted only at the poor. This cost saving is realized
without any tradeoff between the well-being of the poor in the present and the future.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 presents a dynamic stochastic
model of household consumption and asset accumulation in which households enjoy het-
erogeneous endowments of productive skill. Section 2 then uses this model to analyze a
stylized model of a village economy comprised of 300 households distributed randomly over
the ability-initial asset space that defines the intertemporal choice model. As a baseline for
later analysis of alternative policy regimes, we use dynamic programming methods to simu-
late the stylized economy over a sixty year time horizon, tracking the evolution of growth,
poverty and a new measure of “unnecessary deprivation.”
    Section 3 then explores the impact of alternative social protection schemes, one that
targets transfers in a purely progressive fashion, and another in which the available budget
is targeted according to a triage protocol that prioritizes transfers to households that are
vulnerable to slipping into chronic poverty over transfers to already poor households. In this
section, we assume that households do not anticipate transfers. It is here where the paradox
of social protection emerges. By preventing collapse into poverty by agents vulnerable to
asset shocks, the triage scheme ultimately reduces the extent of poverty and leads to greater
transfers to and higher welfare for poor households in later years.
    Section 4 then relaxes the assumption that transfers are unanticipated and explores what
happens when agents fully anticipate contingent transfers provided to the vulnerable under
the triage scheme. We show that anticipation of these transfers has both positive and
negative effects. Finally we show that implementing the contingent transfers as a partially
subsidized insurance contract (with co-pays required of beneficiaries) eliminates the negative
while preserving the positive effects of contingent protection. Section 5 concludes the paper.




                                              3
1       Assets, Ability, Risk and the Multiple Dimensions of
        Chronic Poverty
Azariadis and Stachurski (2005) define a poverty trap as a “self-reinforcing mechanism which
causes poverty to persist.” A robust theoretical literature has identified a variety of such
mechanisms that may operate at either the macro level–meaning that an entire country
or region is trapped in poverty–or at the micro level–meaning that a subset of individuals
become trapped in chronic poverty even as others escape (Barrett and Carter, 2013, Kraay
and McKenzie, 2014, and Ghatak, 2015 provide recent review papers). In this paper, we
explore the implications of a micro poverty trap mechanism for the design of social protection
programs, employing a variant of what Barrett and Carter (2013) call the “multiple financial
market failure” poverty trap model. This model can generate multiple equilibria in the sense
that a given individual may end up at the high or the low equilibrium depending on initial
conditions and stochastic realizations.
    The semi-arid pastoral region of Northern Kenya, which motivates this work, is an area of
widespread chronic poverty. Multiple studies, using different data sets, have found evidence
of bifurcated asset dynamics in this region, with households above a critical level tending to
a high equilibrium and those below it tending to a low level (Barrett et al. (2006); Lybbert et
al. (2004); McPeak and Barrett (2001); Santos and Barrett (2011, 2016)).5 To explore how
social protection might work in this environment, we build on the Buera (2009) non-stochastic
model of asset accumulation with two production technologies under credit constraints and
heterogeneous agent ability.6 We extend Buera’s model by adding asset shocks to allow for
the importance of both ex ante awareness of risk and the ex post experience of shocks as key
determinants of poverty dynamics (Elbers and Gunning (2005)).
    We show that multiple poverty trap mechanisms emerge in this setting. Low ability
households are innately poor, as they never find the high-return technology attractive and
thus they endure low incomes indefinitely. Meanwhile, intermediate ability households dra-
matically change asset accumulation and production choices in response to ex ante asset risk
    5
      Note, these findings do not generalize globally. Broad-based empirical evidence of poverty traps has been
mixed (Subramanian and Deaton, 1996; Kraay and McKenzie, 2014), although Kraay and McKenzie (2014)
conclude that the evidence for the existence of structural poverty traps is strongest in rural remote regions
like the arid and semi-arid lands of East Africa. As Barrett and Carter (2013) note, there is a tendency to
sometimes conflate the failure to find a multiple equilibrium poverty trap with the non-existence of poverty
traps. Poverty traps can of course be single equilibrium, as in Nashold (2013). For a particularly interesting
analysis of the emergence of a multiple equilibrium from a single equilibrium structure, see Kwak and Smith
(2013).
    6
      Related previous papers include Becker and Tomes (1979), Loury (1981), Banerjee and Newman (1991,
1993), Galor and Zeira (1993), Ray and Streufert (1993), Aghion and Bolton (1997), Piketty (1997), Carter
and Zimmerman (2000), Ghatak, Morelli and Sjostrom (2001) and Ghatak and Jiang (2002).


                                                      4
and ex post realization of asset shocks. This cohort faces a multiple equilibrium poverty trap
of the sort on which the literature has long focused. Finally, there is a high ability group
that may start poor but will inevitably take up the high-return technology and graduate out
of poverty and remain non-poor (in expectation) indefinitely.


1.1     A Model of Asset Dynamics and Heterogeneous Ability
Consider an economy in which each individual j is endowed with a level of innate ability (αj )
as well as an initial stock of capital (kj0 ). Preferences are unrelated to the individual’s innate
ability. In what follows, we treat αj as fixed. We conceptualize the agents in this economy as
adults and αj as capturing the effectively immutable physical stature, cognitive development
and educational attainment with which they enter adulthood and thus the economy. This
approach obviously ignores the origins and evolution of such innate ability. Carter and
Janzen (2015) generalize the specification here and allow each household’s human capital to
evolve endogenously over time through a stochastic process in which ability regresses to the
mean level unless compromised by nutritional shortfalls.
    Exploring the multigenerational extension to the present model, by endogenizing αj ,
seems a promising topic for future research, not least of which because it would directly
address the economic growth and poverty reduction effects of early childhood nutrition,
health and education interventions. In this paper, however, we set those questions aside in
order to concentrate on exploring social protection policy design in the presence of poverty
traps.
    Each period the individual has to choose between two alternative technologies for generat-
ing income. Both technologies are capital using and skill-sensitive (i.e., for both technologies,
more able people can produce more than less able people). One technology (the “high ”tech-
nology) is subject to a fixed cost, E, such that the technology is not worth using at low
amounts of capital. Specifically, we assume that income, f , for individual j in period t is
given by
                                f (αj , kjt ) = αj max[fH (kjt ), fL (kjt )]
                           γL                      γH
where fL (αj , kjt ) = αkjt   , fH (αj , kjt ) = αkjt − E, E > 0 and 0 < γL < γH < 1. We denote
as k̂(α) as the value of capital where it becomes worthwhile to switch to the more productive
technology (i.e., b k(αj ) = {k|fL (αj , k) = fH (αj , k)}).7
    If an individual had access to only one technology, she or he would accumulate capital
   7
     By construction, this formulation favors adoption of the high technology by assuming away information
problems and all other obstacles to adoption other than financing. These simplifications eliminate inessential
factors that would reinforce the effect that are generated here under full information.



                                                      5
up to a unique steady state values kL∗ (αj ) for the low technology or kH     ∗
                                                                                (αj ) for the high
technology. The key question is then what happens when the individual has access to both
technologies. In particular, will an individual whose initial capital stock is below b        k(αj )
gravitate toward the high or the low technology and, relatedly, toward the higher or lower
income level associated with the different technologies?8 Consider the case of an individual
who begins life with kL∗ (αj ) < kj0 < b   k(αj ). Note that because this individual is beyond
the low level steady state, incremental returns to further investment are low and discourage
further investment. Borrowing constraints, and limited income, make it impossible for the
individual to discretely jump over the region of low returns. Will this individual optimally
                                                      ∗
accumulate assets over time, and ending up at kH        (αj ) and a non-poor standard of living?
Alternatively, will the individual settle into a poor standard of living with capital stock
kL∗ (αj )? More formally, is there an initial asset threshold, which we will denote e k(αj ), below
which individuals stay at the low equilibrium (remaining chronically poor), and above which
she or he will move to the high equilibrium (eventually becoming non-poor)?
     We analyze this question with a dynamic model of consumption and investment choice.
We rule out borrowing and hence consumption every period can be no more than available
wealth, or what Deaton (1991) calls cash on hand:

                                       cjt ≤ kjt + f (αj , kjt ),

The household’s stock of accumulated capital evolves over time according to the following
rule:
                         kjt+1 = (kjt + f (αj , kjt ) − ct ) (θt+1 − δ) .

where δ is the natural asset depreciation rate and θt ∈ [0, 1] is a random asset shock realized
at the beginning of every period t. Note that θ = 1 indicates that there is no shock, whereas
θ < 1 indicates an unfavorable shock that destroys some fraction of assets. While in principal
θ > 1 might be allowed, such events seem unlikely and we will restrict the analysis to the case
where only negative shocks are possible. The cumulative density function of θt is denoted
by Ω(·) and we assume that every household knows Ω(·).
    Assembling these pieces, we can write the decision-maker’s intertemporal choice problem
as:
  8
    This question was first (?) explored bySkiba (1978) that with a non-convex production technology,
bifurcated accumulation strategy could occur around a critical minimum asset level.




                                                   6
                                                 ∞
                                                 X
                           max              Eθ         β t u(cjt )
                            cjt
                                                 t=0

                          subject to:
                                            cjt ≤ kjt + f (kjt )                                     (1)
                                            f (αj , kjt ) = αj max[fH (kjt ), fL (kjt )]
                                            kjt+1 = (kjt + f (kjt ) − cjt ) (θjt+1 − δ)
                                            kjt ≥ 0

where Eθ is expectation taken over the distribution of the random shock θ, β is the time
discount factor, and u(·) is the utility function defined over consumption ct and has the usual
properties. Denote the investment rule in the presence of asset shocks as i∗ (kt |α, Ω).9


1.2        The Micawber Frontier and the Two Dimensions of Chronic
           Poverty
                                                                                           k(α),
As in Skiba (1978) and Buera (2009), this model identifies a critical asset level, denoted e
around which dynamic behavior bifurcates. An individual with ability level αj will attempt
to accumulate the assets needed to reach the high technology equilibrium if she enjoys capital
stock kjτ > ek(αj ). Otherwise, she will only pursue the low technology, accumulating the
modest stock of capital that it requires. Note that this frontier, a generalization of what
Carter and Barrett (2006) call the Micawber Threshold, divides those who have the wealth
needed to accumulate from those who do not.10 We label e   k(α) the Micawber Frontier.
    The two graphs in Figure 1, created through numerical analysis of the dynamic pro-
gramming model 1, present the Micawber Frontier under the parameterization reported in
Appendix 1.11 Along the horizontal axes are innate ability or skill levels, ranging from least
to most able. The vertical axes measures the stock of productive assets. Figure 1a graphs the
   9
       More precisely, i∗ (kt |α, Ω) is the policy function of the following Bellman equation:

                                  V (kt ) ≡ max {u(f (α, kt ) − it ) + βE [V (kt+1 |kt , it )]}
                                             it
                                                                Z
                                  where E [V (kt+1 |kt , it )] = V (θt [it + (1 − δ)kt ])dΩ(θt )


  10
    Skiba (1978) less poetically calls the equivalent in his model a critial cutoff point.
  11
    Buera (2009)provides a formal proof for his non-stochastic model. Appendix 1 details the parameteri-
zation used to implement the numerical analysis of the stochastic model discussed in the remainder of the
paper.



                                                                7
                                             Figure 1: The Micawber Frontier and Chronic Poverty
                             (a) Probability of Chronic Poverty (%)                                                     (b) Risk and the Micawber Frontier


                        10                                                        100




                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                               Micawber Frontier (no risk)
                                                                                                                                                               Micawber Frontier(risk)
                                                                                                                                                               Technology Adoption Frontier
                         8                                                        80                                                                           Asset Poverty Line




                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                       ~
 Initial Capital, kj1




                                                                                            Initial Capital, kj1
                         6                                                        60                                                   k (α)




                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                 ^
                                                                                                                                                                                 k(α)




                                                                                                                   4
                         4                                                        40


                                                                                                                                                                                 kp(α)




                                                                                                                   2
                         2                                                        20




                                                                                                                   0
                         0                                                        0
                                1.00   αL   1.05              1.10 α
                                                                     H
                                                                           1.15                                            1.00   αL   1.05
                                                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                               1.10 α            1.15
                                                   Intrinsic Ability, αj                                                                   Intrinsic Ability, αj




probability that a household occupying each initial endowment position will end up chron-
ically poor, i.e., at the low level equilibrium. Notice that households on west/southwest
side of the figure approach the low level equilibrium with probability one, indicating that
for these endowment positions it is not worthwhile to even attempt the accumulation of the
assets required to reach the high equilibrium. As shown in Figure 1b, we define the Micawber
frontier as the locus of skill and assets where the household behaving optimally according to
Model 1 where the probability of escaping chronic becomes strictly positive. The solid curve
in the figure graphs this locus. Comparing across the two graphs in Figure 1, we can see
that for endowment positions far enough east and north of the Frontier, the probability of
escaping chronic poverty is essentially one. For middle ability households in the multi-toned
band just north and east of the Micawber Frontier, the probabilities of escape are modest.
    To ease discussion and link it to more conventional poverty analysis, Figure 1 also includes
an “asset poverty line,” the dashed downward sloping line, denoted kp (α). For each ability
level, this asset poverty line indicates the stock of assets the individual must have in order
to produce a living standard exactly equal to a money metric poverty line, yp . We define
yp as the level of income that a reference middle ability person (αm = 1.12 **check this
number**) would produce were she in steady state equilibrium at the low technology (yp =
f (αm , kL∗ (αm )). This assumption is of course arbitrary,12 but it has the advantage of rendering
most individuals poor unless they craft a pathway to the high technology. This is desirable
     12
    Standard poverty lines are of course inherently arbitrary. In contrast, the Micawber Frontier has a
behavioral foundation, as well as strong behavioral implications, as Hoddinott (2006) discusses, and can be
thought of as a dynamic asset poverty line (Carter and Barrett 2006, Carter and Ikegami 2007).



                                                                                        8
in our stylized model as it creates a strong linkage between improved technology adoption,
income and poverty measures.
    Note that the Micawber Frontier has a behavioral foundation and thus differs from from
the asset poverty line, which is based on a standard (and therefore somewhat arbitrary)
income poverty line.13 Those agents whose initial ability-asset endowments place them above
the Micawber Frontier but beneath the asset poverty line will be initially poor. With the
positive probability illustrated in Figure 1a, these individuals will prove to only transitorily
poor as they attempt to accumulate their way out of poverty.
    By contrast, those whose initial endowments situates them beneath the Micawber Frontier
but above the asset poverty line will not be poor initially, but will steadily eat into their
asset holdings and will eventually become poor. These movements represent structural
transitions across the poverty line. There can also be stochastic movements around the
asset poverty line among the subpopulation that finds itself above the Micawber Frontier.
For those individuals, small asset shocks may temporarily leave them beneath the asset
poverty line without driving them off their growth path toward the high equilibrium. Of
course, individuals could find themselves above (below) both the Micawber Frontier and
the asset poverty line, in which case they would be always non-poor (poor). This simple
depiction of the Micawber Frontier and the asset poverty line thereby captures the full range
of conventional static and dynamic poverty measures.14
    As illustrated in Figure 1, the numerical analysis identifies three distinct regions in the
space of ability and initial asset holdings. Irrespective of their capital endowment, high skill
individuals with αj > αH will always move toward the high equilibrium as e     k(αj ) = 0 ∀ αj >
  H
α . When they reach the technology shift asset threshold k(αj ) they will optimally switch to
                                                              b
the higher technology. Irrespective of their starting position, these upwardly mobile agents
steadily converge to the steady state asset value for the high technology. They may be poor
over some extended period as they move toward their steady state value, but eventually they
should become non-poor by virtue of the optimal accumulation behavior induced by their
high ability endowment. Such individuals do not face a poverty trap.
    In contrast, those with an innate ability level below the critical level αL will never move
toward the high technology irrespective of their initial asset endowment. This critical skill
level defines a region of intrinsic chronic poverty, made up of individuals who lack the ability
to achieve a non-poor standard of living in their existing economic context.15 These indi-
  13
     As discussed by Carter and Ikegami (2009), this characteristic of the Micawber Frontier makes it an
interesting candidate as the base for chronic poverty measures.
  14
     See Carter and Barrett (2006) for a discussion of distinct generations of poverty analysis that encompass
these different ideas.
  15
     CPRC (2004) gives examples of individuals who suffer such fundamental disabilities.



                                                      9
viduals face a unique, low-level equilibrium, a very different sort of poverty trap than is
confronted by the third and final set of agents.
    Those in the intermediate skill group with αL < αj < αH have positive but finite values
k(αj ). If sufficiently well-endowed with assets (kj0 > e
e                                                         k(α)), these intermediate ability indi-
viduals will attempt to accumulate additional assets over time, and will with some strictly
positive probability adopt the high technology and eventually reach a non-poor standard of
living. However, if these same intermediate skill individuals begin with assets below e    k(α),
they will no longer find the high equilibrium attainable and will settle into a low standard
of living. Like those in the region of intrinsic chronic poverty, intermediate ability individ-
uals initially endowed with less than e k(α) will be chronically poor. Unlike the intrinsically
chronically poor, the chronic poverty of the intermediate skilled individuals is needless or
unnecessary deprivation in the sense that they could be helped to lift themselves out of
poverty with appropriate social protection policies, as we discuss below. The total number
of chronically poor in any society will thus depend on the distribution of households across
the ability-wealth space.
    Finally note that while some authors (e.g., Barrett and Carter (2013) and Kray and
McKenize (2014)) often distinguish between single equilibrium poverty trap models, multiple
equilibrium poverty trap models and models without poverty traps, our model here admits
the coexistence of all three possibilities in a single structure.


1.3    The Ex-post and Ex-ante Effects of Asset Shocks
The Micawber Frontier is a function of the economic environment in which individuals find
themselves. In particular, the distribution of the stochastic term θ fundamentally shapes
investment behavior. We now explore the impact of ex ante risk and ex post shocks on
investment and the long-term evolution of poverty.
    The ex post effect of realized shocks comes about simply because negative events may
destroy assets, knocking people off their expected path of accumulation. For upwardly mobile
individuals, such shocks may delay their arrival at the upper level equilibrium, or knock them
down from it, necessitating a period of additional savings and asset reaccumulation. But
it does not set them on a different accumulation path. Similarly, realized shocks have no
long-term effect on the equilibrium toward which the low ability, intrinsically chronically
poor gravitate.
    In contrast, the ex post consequences of shocks can be rather more severe for households
of intermediate ability. Consider the case of a household that is initially slightly above the
Micawber Frontier. A shock that knocks it below that frontier will banish the household


                                               10
into the ranks of the chronically poor as in the wake of the shock, the household will alter
its strategy and move toward the low equilibrium (divesting itself of assets).
    While these ex post effects of shocks are important, the anticipation that they might
take place would be expected to generate a “sense of insecurity, of potential harm people
must feel wary of—something bad can happen and “spell ruin,” as Calvo and Dercon (2009)
put it. Numerical analysis of the model shows that this sense of impending ruin indeed
discourages forward-looking households from making the sacrifices necessary to reach the
high equilibrium. The Micawber Frontier shifts to the southwest once asset risk is removed,
as shown in Figure 1b. The dashed curve is the Micawber Frontier in the absence of risk. The
boundaries marking the critical skill levels at which households move between the different
accumulation regimes also shift out, meaning more intrinsically upwardly mobile households
and fewer intrinsically chronically poor households when we eliminate the ex ante effects of
risk.
    The most dramatic effects of risk are seen by considering a household whose skill and
capital endowments place it between the two frontiers. Consider a household whose skill
and initial asset endowments are represented by the solid circle in the middle of Figure 1.
Absent the risk of asset shocks, such a household would strive for the upper equilibrium
and eventually escape poverty. In the presence of risk, such a household would abandon
this accumulation strategy as futile and settle into a low level, chronically poor standard of
living. In the face of asset risk, the extraordinary sacrifice of consumption required to try to
reach the high equilibrium is no longer worthwhile, and the household will optimally pursue
the low level, poverty trap equilibrium. By contrast, the shift has no significant behavioral
effect on either intrinsically chronically poor households (represented by the solid diamond
on the left side of Figure 1) or intrinsically upwardly mobile households (the solid triangle
on the right side of Figure 1).
    To explore the differential effects of risk and shocks on these different sub-populations,
Carter and Ikegami (2009) used the dynamic choice model above and simulated the income
streams it generates in three distinct settings:

       • A non-stochastic economy in which agents repeatedly apply the optimal investment
         rule, i∗n (kt |αj )16 ,
  16
    The subscript n denotes this non-stochastic world and i∗n (kt |α) is policy function of the following Bellman
equation:

                             Vnr (kt ) ≡ max {u(f (α, kt ) − it ) + βVnr (kt+1 |kt , it )}
                                           it

                                  = max {u(f (α, kt ) − it ) + βVnr (it + (1 − δ)kt )}
                                      it




                                                          11
         • An economy characterized by risk without realized shocks in which agents follow the
           risk-adjusted optimal accumulation rule, i∗ (kt |αj , Ω), but never actually experience
           shocks (a scenario that allows us to isolate the ex ante effects of risk); and,

         • A fully stochastic economy, meaning that individuals not only follow the risk-adjusted
           optimal investment rule but each period they are subject to a random asset shock
           generated in accordance with the probability structure Ω.

These simulations show that for the intrinsically chronically poor (low αj ) and the upwardly
mobile (high αj ) groups, the effects of risk are relatively modest and attributable almost
entirely to the disruptive, ex post effects of asset shocks. By contrast, for the intermediate
ability group, the ex ante behavioral (i.e., investment disincentive) effects of uninsured risk
account for most of the welfare effects due to asset stochasticity. These effects are also
large in magnitude. While the discounted income streams for the other two groups fall
only 5-10 percent in the fully stochastic scenario, the drop is approximately 25 percent for
the intermediate ability group, with roughly 90 percent of the losses due to the ex ante
risk effect exclusively.17 The difference arises because while risk slightly reduces the desired
steady state capital stock for low and high ability agents, mainly it forces them to regularly
rebuild assets in order to reattain the desired steady state capital stock. In sharp contrast,
intermediate ability agents may fundamentally shift their investment strategy in the presence
of risk, eschewing any attempt at trying to reach the high-level equilibrium open to them,
creating added avoidable chronic poverty.
    Among other things, these simulations show that in the presence of critical asset thresh-
olds, risk takes on particular importance for those individuals subject to multiple equilibria.
Social protection policies could in principal generate large returns for such individuals, as the
next two sections describe. Furthermore, this response to risk adds an important twist to the
moral hazard that naturally results from any policy that attempts to reduce risk exposure,
as we discuss in section 4 below.


2          Accumulation and Poverty Dynamics Absent Social Pro-
           tection
The analysis in the prior section showed that both the anticipation and experience of eco-
nomic shocks have a fundamental effect on behavior and welfare in the presence of poverty
traps, expanding the portion of the endowment space from which people do not escape
    17
         Details on these simulation results are available from the authors by request.


                                                         12
poverty through their own efforts. This observation suggests that social protection policies
have a fundamental role to play in stimulating poverty reduction and economic growth. But
how should social protection be designed in a world with multiple sources of poverty traps?
As a first step towards answering this question, this section uses the model of individual de-
cisionmaking developed above as the basis for analyzing accumulation, growth and poverty
in a stylized economy lacking any social protection policies. Sections 3 and 4 will then take
a careful look at the impact of alternative social protection schemes on this economy.


2.1     The Stylized Economy and Measures of Performance
Consider now an economy comprised of agents whose livelihood choices are described by
inter-temporal maximization problem 1. To keep things simple, we will assume that all
shocks are idiosyncratic and that prices in the economy are unaffected by shocks and by
individuals’ decisions. While these assumptions are clearly at odds with the real world, they
permit us in the first instance to clarify basic principles and tradeoffs in the design of social
protection policies.18
    For purposes of the numerical analysis, we assume that there are 300 agents, each de-
scribed by a skill and initial capital stock pair. We allocated agents along the skill continuum,
with 25% each in the intrinsically chronically poor and upwardly mobile ranges, and half
the agents in the intermediate ability range where endowments matter to their accumulation
and welfare trajectories. Each agent was then assigned a random initial capital stock drawn
from a uniform distribution over the zero to ten range. While in any existing economy we
would expect there to be a correlation between skill and observed capital stock, this random
assignment of capital creates an experimental environment in which to study asset dynamics
under alternative social protection schemes.
    The diagram in the northwest corner of Figure 2 shows the initial distribution of ability
and wealth in this stylized economy. Each symbol on the graph represents the initial position
of an individual agent or household dynasty. The solid line is the Micawber Threshold under
the stochastic environment, while the dashed line is again the asset poverty line. The other
graphs in the figure–to be discussed below–show the evolution of endowment positions under
under alternative social protection policies.
    While we can simply focus on the trajectories of agents given their initial endowment
positions, we also employ a set of summary measures to track the performance of the stylized
  18
     When shocks are correlated across households, asset and other prices will begin to covary with household
income.     The implications of this covariance can be important as Carter, Little, Mogues and Negatu
(2007) discuss empirically in the case of Ethiopia. Zimmerman and Carter (2003) theoretically examine the
implications of such asset price covariance, showing that it can create another type of poverty trap.



                                                     13
                     Figure 2: Asset Evolution with and without Social Protection


                            Initial Distribution                                              Year 50 Autarchy
                10




                                                                                  10
                8




                                                                                  8
                                                                  Capital, kj50
Capital, kj1

                6




                                                                                  6
                4




                                                                                  4
                2




                                                                                  2
                0




                                                                                  0

                     1.00      1.05         1.10      1.15                             1.00      1.05         1.10      1.15
                              Intrinsic Ability, αj                                             Intrinsic Ability, αj

                        Year 50 Needs−based                                                    Year 50 Triage
                10




                                                                                  10
                8




                                                                                  8
Capital, kj50




                                                                  Capital, kj50
                6




                                                                                  6
                4




                                                                                  4
                2




                                                                                  2
                0




                                                                                  0




                     1.00      1.05         1.10      1.15                             1.00      1.05         1.10      1.15
                              Intrinsic Ability, αj                                             Intrinsic Ability, αj




                                                             14
economy under alternative social protection regimes:19

   1. GNI defined simply as the sum of the incomes of the 300 agents. Note that this measure
      will evolve over time based on capital accumulation (or deaccumulation) as well as the
      shift of households between the low and high productivity regimes.

   2. Standard static poverty measures based on the Foster-Greer-Thorbecke (FGT) family
      of measures:                                      γ
                                     y   1 X yp − yj
                                   Pγ =                                             (2)
                                         n y <y     yp
                                                          j      p


       where n is total number of individuals, yp is income poverty line, yi is individual j’s
       income, and γ is the usual FGT sensitivity parameter. We will specifically focus on
       the popular headcount (P0y ) and poverty gap (P1y ) measures. As discussed above, we
       set the poverty line yp at the level of income that a medium skilled individual would
       produce in steady state if she had access only to the low technology.

   3. A novel measure of unnecessary deprivation, Dγy . This measure resembles the FGT
      poverty gap measure, in that it continues to focus just on those with current income
      beneath the income poverty line, yp , but with the important refinement that rather
      than comparing individuals’ realized income against yp , current income is compared
      instead against the income level associated with the household’s optimal capital stock
                                          ∗              ∗
      given its innate skill endowment, k (αj ) = max{kH   (αi ), kL∗ (αj )}, if its initial wealth
      endowment did not constrain equilibrium selection, as it does for some households of
      intermediate ability. As with the FGT measure, γ is a sensitivity parameter, with
      γ=0 offering a headcount of those who suffer unnecessary deprivation, γ=1 measuring
      the money metric gap between potential and current well-being, and γ > 1 placing
      greater weight on larger underperformance relative to potential. In our subsequent
      calculations, we report only the γ=1 variant. Thus, we define Dγy as

                                                                             ∗
                                                                                             !γ
                                       1         X                   f (αi , k (αj )) − yj
                               Dγy =                                             ∗                    (3)
                                       n        yj <yp                 f (αi , k (αj ))
                                                       ∗
                                           yj <f (αj ,k (αj ))



This measure captures unnecessary deprivation, in that chronically poor individuals who
                                                        ∗
achieve their steady state income level (i.e., f (αj , k (αj )) = yj ) realize their full potential
  19
    In work not reported here, we also analyzed the impacts of the different policies using a conventional
Benthamite social welfare function as well as the dynamic poverty measures suggested by Calvo and Dercon
(2007). The qualitative story told by these measures is similar to that which can be gleaned from the
measures discussed here.


                                                         15
and have zero weight in this measure, as do the non-poor (for whom yj > yp ). Instead, the
“potential gap” captures mainly those of intermediate skill who are trapped in a low-level
equilibrium or those who are presently far from their long-run equilibrium (e.g., upwardly
mobile individuals with very low initial endowments). This measure is impractical in em-
pirical work, since it relies on an estimate of steady-state capital holdings conditional on
unobservable ability; it is nonetheless helpful as a conceptual tool for distinguishing unnec-
essary poverty from that which is unavoidable given individuals’ immutable endowments and
the economic environment in which they operate.
    These economic core measures permit us to track over time both the social costs (foregone
output and unexploited technological opportunities) and the human costs (low standards of
living and unnecessary deprivation) of poverty traps.


2.2    Baseline Case of No Social Protection
The northeast panel of Figure 2 shows the asset distribution after 50 years of simulated
history for our stylized economy. As can be seen, the asset distribution (which was originally
randomly distributed independently of the ability distribution) has bifurcated, with a strong
positive correlation between innate ability and wealth. One set of individuals has comfortably
settled above the Micawber Frontier at the high technology steady state. The other group
is at the low level steady state, below the asset poverty line. There are quite a few poor
individuals in the middle ability group whose potential to reach the high equilibrium has
been blocked by their low initial asset levels, or realized) asset shocks, that locked them
below the Micawber Frontier.
    With no exogenous technical change or growth in productive inputs to stimulate growth
and modest investment incentives for a large portion of the population, GNI in this baseline
economy is relatively stagnant over time as reflected in the “autarchy” line in the northwest
quadrant of Figure 2. This reflects the fact that the positive accumulation and associated
productivity gains of those above the Micawber Frontier is offset by the lost potential – and
wealth deaccumulation and productivity decline – of many of those trapped below it. The
decline among some sub-populations is manifest in the disadoption of the high technology,
use of which falls from roughly 60% to only 40% of the population. Further reflection of
this economic bifurcation is found in the increasing levels of poverty, measured both as a
poverty headcount (northeast quadrant) as well as by the poverty gap indicator (southwest
quadrant) and our unnecessary deprivation measure (southeast quadrant). Income inequality
(not shown) declines modestly over the first decade of the simulations, then increases above
the initial level by year 25 as households converge on their α-conditional long-run equilibria.


                                              16
            Figure 3: Economic Evolution under Alternative Social Protection Policies


                               GDP                                                        Poverty Headcount
     600




                                                                    0.5
     550




                                                                    0.4
                                                                    0.3
     500




                                                                    0.2
     450




            0      10     20          30       40     50                   0   10           20           30       40   50

                               year                                                               year

                                           Autarcy         Needs−based         Triage



                           Poverty Gap                                                  Unnecessary Deprivation
     0.10




                                                                    0.25
     0.08




                                                                    0.20
     0.06




                                                                    0.15
     0.04




                                                                    0.10
     0.02
     0.00




                                                                    0.05




            0      10     20          30       40     50                   0   10           20           30       40   50

                               year                                                               year




The lackluster performance of the base case poverty trap economy illustrates both the human
and aggregate economic costs of poverty traps. The next sections consider alternative policy
regimes that might lead to better outcomes.


3    Poverty Dynamics and the Targeting of Unanticipated
     Social Protection
This section examines the impact of reactive food aid or unanticipated social protection poli-
cies on the stylized economy studied in the prior section. The label unanticipated signals that
these policies are implemented ex post of shocks and we assume away agents’ anticipation
of the resulting transfers and the behavioral response that would follow from such anticipa-

                                                     17
tion. This oversimplification is made simply to help understand more clearly how poverty
dynamics shift in response to different sorts of social protection policies. In particular, we
seek to illustrate clearly the value of addressing the purely ex post effects of asset shocks,
even if agents do not expect transfers. Section 4 relaxes the assumption that households fail
to anticipate and respond to social protection policies.
    For all alternatives, we assume that the social protection agency20 has access to an annual
income stream or budget of that amounts to 2.5% of initial GNI.21 This amount was chosen
because it is insufficient to lift all initially poor individuals above the poverty line, though it
is enough to substantially close the poverty gap. We further assume that the social protection
agency has access to full information, including household ability and asset holdings, realized
shocks and knowledge of the production technology. While these are strong assumptions,
using them to explore targeting of this limited assistance budget helps further illustrate the
workings of the multiple poverty trap economy.


3.1     Poverty and Aid Traps under Progressive, Means-tested Cash
        Transfers
Under the progressively-targeted or needs-based scenario, the agency uses its budget only
for progressively targeted, humanitarian/cash transfers. After each production cycle, it
                                                               P
calculates the total poverty shortfall for the economy, S = yj <yp (yp − yj ). If the available
budget exceeds the shortfall ( BS > 1), then all poor individuals are given transfers to increase
their income to the level of the poverty line. If BS < 1, then each poor individual is given
transfers that move them to an income level equal to BS yp . Note that this targeting methods
makes the largest transfers to the least well-off. Once individuals receive the transfer, they
make their consumption versus investment decision according to maximization of problem
1 above and assume that future transfers will never occur. Section 4 relaxes this strong
assumption, but for now it helps to understand the different effects of alternative designs.
    The impact of this needs-based assistance regime on asset distribution can be seen in
the southwest diagram in Figure 2. The figure is quite similar to that under autarchy (the
northeast panel), except that asset levels are somewhat higher for those below the poverty
line, especially among lower ability persons, reflecting a transfer rule based on realized income
levels. Turning to Figure 3, we see that the poverty headcount and unnecessary deprivation
  20
     We use the broad term social protection agency to encompass local or national government as well as
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that might respond to shocks.
  21
     We ignore the source of taxation that generates these resources and the associated distortionary effects
on the economy. They could be conceptualized as either external resources (brought in by a donor, an NGO
or a relief agency), or as domestic tax resources transferred from another sector of the national economy.



                                                     18
measures follow a trajectory nearly identical to that which emerges absent social protection.
The FGT(1) poverty gap measure is substantially lower under needs-based assistance than
without the assistance, reflecting the added resources introduced into the system exogenously.
But we can also see that the FGT(1) steadily rises after year 10 of the simulation. GNI is
higher in the economy with needs-based transfer, but purely due to the extra 2.5% of GNI
assumed available each year.
    In a world where budgets for transfers are available exogenously (e.g., via unrequited
transfers associated with overseas development assistance), progressively-targeted transfers
that flow mainly to the chronically poor of low innate ability plainly reduces income and
asset poverty, if only because there are added resources in this scenario. However, these
transfers do not fundamentally alter the economy’s dynamics. Indeed, the troubling irony
is that poverty grows in this economy in spite of these transfers as some agents suffer asset
shocks that drop them into poverty but then receive insufficient transfers to enable them to
climb back out of poverty on their own. Transfer policies that are designed to respond to one
poverty trap mechanism–low innate ability–systematically fail to address the other poverty
trap in this economy by failing to prevent more people from inadvertently falling into the
trap over time.
    These results signal what might be termed a relief trap. By failing to stem the flow
of intermediate ability individuals below the Micawber Frontier, the fixed humanitarian
assistance budget becomes less and less able to meet the needs of those below the poverty
line. If the social protection agency (or the international community) were intent on holding
poverty at, say, year 10 levels, then increasing fractions of total public expenditures would
need to be devoted to aid budgets to accommodate the inflow of the unnecessarily poor
who have suffered severe asset shocks and fallen into the basin of attraction of their low-
level equilibrium. We abstract here from the standard public finance problems of raising
revenues, but clearly the growing demands for transfers would have to be met either through
increasingly distortionary taxation or through reducing funds available for developing new
technologies, building schools and infrastructure, or other interventions (not modeled here)
that are aimed at boosting productivity. Poverty traps can thus, in a very direct way, create
relief traps for purely progressively targeted social protection programs.


3.2    Sate of the World Contingent Transfers
As the prior simulations make clear, in our model asset risk creates an ever increasing
amount of unnecessary deprivation that eventually overwhelms the capacity of cash transfers
to provide relief. This observation suggests that a social protection scheme targeted at


                                             19
the vulnerable in the vicinity of the Micawber Frontier–i.e., a safety net designed to stem
the increase in unnecessary poverty–can potentially generate a win-win-win scenario, with
higher rates of improved technology adoption and GNI growth, reduced poverty (especially
for intermediate ability groups), and less stress on the social protection budget with which
it serves those of low innate ability who are intrinsically chronically poor.
    To explore this idea, we initially analyze an admittedly harsh “triage” policy regime in
which the social protection agency provides transfers to households according to the following
rules:

   1. The budget, B, is first allocated to individuals recently below the Micawber Frontier
      by negative shocks. Denote these threshold-based transfers as State of the World
      Contingent Transfers (SWCTs). An individual j is eligible for a SWCT of amount
      SW CTj = k̃(αj ) − θt [ijt + (1 − δ)kjt ] if ijt + (1 − δ)kjt > k̃(αj ) and θjt [ijt + (1 −
      δ)kjt ] < k̃(αj ). In words, if an individual was above the Micawber Frontier prior to
      the most recent asset shock, but below it afterward, the agency provides a transfer to
      move the household back to the Micawber Frontier. If the total budget (SW CT =
      P
         j=1 SW CT j ) exceeds the total eligible transfers, then all individuals pushed below
      the threshold are given an asset transfer to lift them back to it. If the budget is
      insufficient, then it is allocated first to those closest to the Micawber Frontier so as to
      minimize the increase in the headcount of needless poverty.

   2. If there is any remained budget after step 1 (i.e., if B > SW CT ), then those mid-
      ability individuals already below the Micawber Frontier (due to low initial inheritance
      or prior bad luck not stemmed by a SW CT transfer) are given priority for cargo net
      transfers that lift them over the Micawber Frontier.22 Analogous to stage 1, total
      potential spending on cargo net transfers is calculated (denote this total amount as
      CN ). If CN > B − SW CT , then the budget is again prioritized in order to minimize
      headcount poverty, by first helping the most vulnerable, defined as those closest to the
      Micawber Frontier.

   3. If B > SW CT +CN , then the residual budget is allocated according to the progressive
      or needs-based formulation discussed in the previous sub-section.

Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the results of this assistance regime for our stylized poverty trap
economy. The results stand in strong contrast to autarchy and needs-based assistance sim-
ulations. As shown in the southeast panel of Figure 3, by year 50, all needless poverty is
  22
    The term "cargo net" was coined by Barrett (2005) and refers to transfers intended to lift people above
– or help people climb over – thresholds at which accumulation dynamics bifurcate, as distinct from safety
nets, which prevent people from falling beneath those same thresholds.

                                                    20
eliminated and the headcount of total poverty levels off at 25%, the share of the population
that is intrinsically chronically poor by construction. Technology adoption is high, as is GNI
(and GNI growth). In the longer-run, this triage approach to development assistance plainly
outperforms needs-based assistance by any of these metrics.
    However, the southwest diagram in Figure 3 illustrates a core ethical challenge associated
with vulnerability-targeted social protection. The FGT(1) poverty gap measure is lower
under progressively-targeted cash transfers for the first 8-10 years of the simulation because
needs-based assistance flows primarily to the least well-off while the stylized vulnerability-
targeted policies are aimed at those nearest the Micawber Frontier. Paradoxically, after
8-10 years, those who are poor are better off under VTCT design because it reduces the
number of people needing assistance, allowing the fixed social protection budget to provide
more generous support to those who inevitably need it. But, prior to that time, individuals
who are poor, and especially the poorest, are better off under needs-based targeting. The
results for (asset or income) inequality (not shown) are qualitatively similar, with needs-
based transfers generating lower inequality in the economy over the first nine years, but
threshold-based transfers generating lower inequality over longer horizons. These results
underscore the difficult tradeoffs inherent to the design of social protection policy, both over
time and across sub-populations of the poor:

         • Do we prioritize reducing the depth of poverty for the poor today or the poor tomorrow?

         • Do we focus on helping those who, with a bit of assistance, can then pull themselves
           out of poverty by their bootstraps, or on those who will suffer low living standards in
           the absence of assistance of indefinite duration?

In the presence of multiple poverty trap mechanisms, these tradeoffs become especially
sharp.23


4          Moral Hazard and the Design of Anticipated Social
           Protection
The analysis in Section 3 revealed the paradoxes and challenges of social protection in an
economy characterized by poverty traps that take several forms. That analysis, however was
    23
    In additional simulations not reported here, we considered whether these tradeoffs could be mitigated
by mixing different kinds of transfers and/or by reallocating budgets intertemporally through borrowing.
While these alternatives can reduce the magnitude of the tradeoffs reported here somewhat, they cannot be
eliminated entirely. This underscores the unavoidable nature of the targeting tradeoffs in both cross-section
(between different sub-populations of the poor and vulnerable) and over time in a multiple poverty trap
economy.

                                                     21
incomplete as it assumed that individuals do not anticipate social protection benefits. This
lacunae is especially important for state of the world contingent transfers that are targeted
at the vulnerable. Such transfers operate as a form of insurance, and as discussed in the
introduction above, might be expected to alter ex ante investment incentives for households
both above and below the Micawber frontier itself.
    In this section we therefore relax the assumption that contingent transfers are unan-
ticipated and consider households’ rational response to them. While we could in principle
analyze endogenous response to anticipated, progressively-targeted cash transfers, we here
limit our attention to anticipated of vulnerability-targeted social protection schemes.24


4.1     Positive and Negative Moral Hazard
We expect two kinds of household response to safety net transfers. First, since safety net
transfers mitigate asset risk, households are willing to accumulate more assets ceteris paribus.
This is canonical moral hazard, in that the provision of some insurance induces increased
risk taking.25 In this model, accumulation of assets subject to stochastic shocks is the only
risk-taking behavior available to agents. But asset accumulation is socially desirable in
this setting, as it increases productivity and adoption of improved production technologies,
increases GNI and reduces poverty. We therefore call this incentive effect “positive moral
hazard.”
    Second, because the safety net transfers are conditional (on pre- and post-shock asset
holdings) and given the standard intertemporal tradeoff between current consumption and
saving for future consumption, ceteris paribus households have an incentive to satisfy the
transfer condition as often as possible so as to receive extra resources. If some external
agency or government will insure them against falling into a poverty trap, households do
not need to self-insure through asset accumulation to the same degree, thereby creating a
disincentive to invest–equivalently, reducing the need for precautionary savings–that runs
counter to social objectives. We therefore label this effect “negative moral hazard.”
    For a middle ability person with k̃(α) = 5, Figure 4a shows expected asset losses as a
function of level of capital stock held with (the dashed, red line) and without (the solid,
green line) the vulnerability targeted contingent transfer scheme. As can be seen, there
  24
     This analytical choice is primarily made for analytical convenience as under the triage policy developed
in Section 3, the magnitude of cash transfer payments is itself uncertain, depending on the vagaries of the
weather that dictate the residual budget left for such transfers. Clearly, we would expect cash transfers
to discourage private accumulation (Hubbard et al. (1995) give an empirical example showing how means-
tested social insurance programs discourage precautionary savings in the United States). By ignoring these
disincentive effects, we are thus overerstating the possible efficacy of cash transfers.
  25
     Recognize that risk is increasing in asset holdings because θ is a multiplicative shock and independent
of k. Therefore, stochastic losses are greater when k is larger.

                                                     22
                Figure 4: Nature’s Tax Rates under Contingent Social Protection
               (a) Expected Asset Losses                                         (b) Marginal Tax Rates




is zero chance of asset losses right at this threshold, and expected asset losses above the
threshold will always keep the individual at or above k̃. When these contingent transfers of
the vulnerability targeted social protection are anticipated, optimization problem 1 can be
rewritten as follows:


                      ∞
                      X
 max             Eθ         β t u(cjt )
  cjt
                      t=0

subject to:
                 cjt ≤ kjt + f (kjt )
                 f (αj , kjt ) = αj max[fH (kjt ), fL (kjt )]
                           
                           k̃(α ) if (f (k ) − c ) + (1 − δ)k > k̃(α ) and (k + (f (k ) − c ) (θ
                                  j        jt       jt             t      j   jt      jt    jt    jt+1 − δ) < k̃(α
                 kjt+1 =
                           (k + f (k ) − c ) (θ            − δ) otherwise
                                    jt     jt       jt    jt+1

                 kjt ≥ 0

This is the same as the problem specified in Section 2 except for the important change in
the law of motion governing kjt+1 now that households are aware of and respond to the
contingent transfers.26
 26
      The household problem at period t can be represented in Bellman Equation form as:

                                 V (kt ) ≡ max {u(f (α, kt ) − it ) + βE [V (kt+1 |kt , it )]}
                                               it
                                                                 Z
                               where E [V (kt+1 |kt , it )] = V (kt+1 (kt , it , θt , kg , δ))dΩ(θt )
                                                  (
                                                   kg if it + (1 − δ)kt > kg and θt [it + (1 − δ)kt ] < kg
                  kt+1 (kt , it , θt , kg , δ) =
                                                   θt [it + (1 − δ)kt ] otherwise


                                                           23
                                    Figure 5: Ex Ante Impacts of Anticipated Social Protection
                                                     (b) Probability of Low Equilibrium under Social Protec-
(a) Probability of Low Equilibrium under Autarchy (%)tion (%)


                        10                                                 100                            10                                              1.0




                         8                                                 80                              8                                              0.8




                                                                                                           6                                              0.6
 Initial Capital, kj1




                                                                                     Initial Capital,k1
                         6                                                 60




                                                                                                           4                                              0.4
                         4                                                 40



                                                                                                           2                                              0.2
                         2                                                 20



                                                                                                           0                                              0.0
                         0                                                 0                                   1.00   1.05               1.10      1.15
                             1.00    1.05              1.10         1.15
                                                                                                                             Intrinsic Ability,α
                                            Intrinsic Ability, αj




    Figure 5 illustrates the impact of the anticipation of contingent transfers on the proba-
bility of chronic poverty. For ease of comparison, Figure 5a repeats those probability when
these transfers are not anticipated. Comparing 5b with 5a, we can see that substantially
fewer endowment positions are likely to end up chronically poor. This additional accumula-
tion induced by the presence of contingent transfers at the (autarchy) Micawber Frontier is
precisely represents positive moral hazard.
    While the vulnerability-targeted contingent transfers incentive upward mobility, they also
have a discouraging effect on further accumulation that takes households beyond the safety
of k̃(α) where assets are fully protected. A large swatch of middle ability agents end up in
long-term equilibrium at exactly k̃(α). This behavior represents class negative moral hazard
as the presence of the implicit insurance provided by the contingent transfer lead individuals
to undertake behaviors that make contingent payments more likely.
    Figure 4 illustrates the intuition for the emergence of this new insured outcome. Note that
nature essentially acts as an unreliable tax collector in this model, probabilistically taking
away some fraction of assets every period. Figure 4a shows expected asset losses as a function
of level of capital stock held. The solid (green) line shows these expected losses absent the
contingent social protection scheme. Under the multiplicative risk specification, this is linear
with a constant expected marginal tax rate of 1.7% (under the numerical assumptions used
to analyze our model). This marginal tax rate is shown by the corresponding horizontal line
in Figure 4b.



                                                                                24
    Under the precisely targeted contingent transfer scheme, expected losses drop to exactly
zero at k̃(α), as shown by the dashed line in Figure 4a. Beyond that asset level, expected
losses begin to increase eventually becoming identical to expected losses absent this form of
social protection.27 Figure 4b shows the implied marginal tax rates under this scheme. As
can be seen, under the discrete probability structure used to analyze the model, the marginal
tax rate abruptly jumps from zero to 10%, and then slowly decreases to the natural tax rate
of 1.7% as capital stocks accumulate beyond the indemnity payment threshold. This sharp
and discontinuous elimination of social protection as the individual moves away from the
insured point k̃(α) discourages accumulation and leads to a class of agents who settle in at
the new k̃(α) equilibrium.


4.2     Using Index Insurance and Co-pays to Implement State of the
        World Contingent Social Protection
Negative moral hazard and the attraction of k̃(α) as a new equilibrium reflects in part the
extremely precise targeting of the contingent transfers (and sharp jump in marginal tax
rates) that define the vulnerability-targeted social protection scheme. However, this kind of
precise targeting is itself of dubious relevance in the real world where neither realized shocks,
asset levels, nor individual skills are easy to observe. Together, these observations raise the
question as to whether something akin to contingent social transfers can be implemented
using a market-based microinsurance scheme. Index insurance, which delivers payouts to
policy holders on the basis of a pre-determined index, could be particularly useful. Using
index insurance poses four potential advantages:

   1. Cheap to observe an index that signals shocks;

   2. Rely on self-selection through the purchase of insurance, obviating the need to observe
      skill;

   3. Requires a co-payment, reducing costs and changing incentives; and,

   4. Because of cost reduction, it may eliminate the need for a precisely-targeted subsidy
      in order to avoid sharp discontinuities.

In a recent paper, Janzen et al. (2016) employ a dynamic model similar to that developed
here, while ignoring skill heterogeneity. The analysis compares an autarchy scenario in which
insurance is unavailable, and a targeted insurance subsidy scenario in which the government
  27
     With bounded shocks, there will be a capital stock such that even largest shock cannot reduce assets to
k̃(α), the level where contingent payments kick in.

                                                    25
                     Figure 6: Costs of Alternative Social Protection Schemes




pays half of the commercial insurance premium (assuming a 20% markup) for all households
that hold assets less than the level required to generate an average income equal to 150%
of the poverty line. In all cases, the simulation assumes that households behave optimally
based on the price of insurance and the dynamic choice problem displayed above.
    The Janzen et al. (2016) analysis shows a 50% insurance subsidy (offered across the board
to all but the wealthiest agents) can induce investment and upward mobility (positive moral
hazard), but without the negative moral hazard seen in section 4.1 above. Importantly,
they show that under the assumptions of their model,28 the total social protection budget
(defined as funds for the insurance subsidy plus funds for cash transfers needed to close the
poverty gap for all poor households) quickly becomes lower under a combined insurance-cash
transfer scheme than under a pure cash transfer scheme. As shown in Figure 6, total costs
are in fact higher in the short run under the hybrid scheme, but they become lower as the
induced upward mobility eventually reduces the cost of cash transfers. Under their numerical
assumptions, the present value of total social protection expenditures is 16% lower under
the hybrid scheme.
  28
    The parameters of the model deviate from those used in the other simulations in this paper. While
the results are not directly comparable, the findings are still insightful. Notably, the Janzen et al. (2016)
model must assume some level of basis risk (the difference between realized losses and the index). The model
assumes relatively low basis risk. In practice, this is likely to overestimate the benefits of index insurance if
basis risk is high.



                                                       26
   The feasibility of using index insurance to offer contingent protection has been extensively
studied in the semi-arid regions of northern Kenya. Chantarat et al. (2012) and Mude et al.
(2009) describe the initial contract design, while impact evaluation results on the ex post
and ex ante effects of the insurance are reported in Jensen et al. (2014) and Janzen and
Carter (2016). While demand issues remain a problem in practice (if not in theory!), the
government of Kenya under its Kenya Livestock Insurance Program is currently trying to
build on this insurance model to deliver contingent social protection.


5    Conclusions
This paper has put forward a dynamic stochastic model of a stylized poverty trap economy in
which asset risk plays a major role and heterogeneity of individual ability creates two types
of chronic poverty. Some people are chronically poor because their innate ability condemns
them to a low standard of living. Others suffer unnecessary deprivation simply because they
inherit insufficient productive capital to reach the critical asset or ’Micawber’ frontier at
which it becomes optimal to make the short-term sacrifices necessary to accumulate assets
and (probabilisitically) escape chronic poverty.Each of these two poverty trap mechanisms
invites a different policy response. When both types of chronic poverty co-exist, therefore,
tradeoffs inevitably arise in developing cost-effective poverty reduction strategies.
    Using this framework, we show that purely progressively-targeted social relief–such as
cash transfers–can fall prey to an aid trap in which income support to the poorest of the poor
crowds out asset protection for those of intermediate ability and wealth who are vulnerable to
asset shocks and becoming themselves poor over time. Members of this latter group steadily
fall into avoidable chronic poverty, adding to the pool of individuals suffering unnecessary
deprivation and needing income support. As a result, while purely progressively-targeted
social protection initially reduces the depth of poverty, the lot of the poor deteriorates over
time due to increasing competition for limited social protection resources. Moreover, an
unadorned, purely progressively-targeted system of social protection does not appreciably
change the numbers of poor, nor does it enhance wealth accumulation, economic output or
adoption rates of improved technologies.
    We then show that a hybrid policy, which issues SWCTs to vulnerable-but-not-indigent
households, eliminates unnecessary deprivation, empowers upward mobility and boosts growth
through endogenous asset accumulation and adoption of improved technologies. While this
hybrid policy still confronts important tradeoffs among different poor people and over time,
this theoretical exercise establishes the potential gains to social protection that targets vul-
nerability, not just low current well-being, and in so doing creates economic multipliers.

                                              27
However, we show that despite these gains, household anticipation of SWCTs discourages
some from accumulating assets beyond the range where they remain eligible for social pro-
tection transfers. A key question then becomes whether the balance between positive and
negative moral hazard can be altered by changing the mode of delivering contingent trans-
fers. Drawing on the work of Janzen et al. (2016), we show that imprecisely targeted partial
subsidies for index insurance can achieve the benefits of SWCTs and strike a better bal-
ance between positive and negative moral hazard, encouraging upwardly mobility but not
artificially braking it with means-tested cutoffs. While there are a plethora of challenges to
implementing SWCTs via an insurance mechanism, in theory at least a hybrid social protec-
tion system that mixes insurance subsidies and cash transfers is a more cost-effective way to
address chronic poverty in risk-prone regions like Northern Kenya. 29
    Ultimately, the key finding of this paper is that poverty traps characterized by multiple
equilibria can have a pronounced effect on the performance and appropriate design of policies
intended to stimulate poverty reduction, economic growth and uptake of improved production
technologies. There are potentially large returns to developing and using knowledge about
critical asset thresholds to target assistance to the vulnerable non-poor. The co-existence of
populations facing different sorts of poverty traps, however, also raises unavoidable, thorny
tradeoffs among distinct cohorts of the poor, as well as difficult intertemporal tradeoffs
between current and future poverty reduction.




 29
      At the time of this writing, this hybrid approach was just being implemented in Northern Kenya.


                                                    28
Appendix 1: Parameters and Other Details for Numerical
Simulation
This section provides additional detail on the formal model used to generate the results
discussed in the main body of the paper.
    The functional specification for the utility function u(·) is

                                                  c1−σ
                                                   t   −1
                                       u(ct ) =
                                                    1−σ

   The probability density of θt is assumed to be:
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                              0.90   if θt = 1.0
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             0.05    if θt = 0.9
                             density of θt =
                                             
                                             
                                              0.03   if θt = 0.8
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             0.02    if θt = 0.7

    The other structural parameter values are assumed as follows: σ = 1.5, δ = 0.08, β = 0.95,
γL = 0.3, γH = 0.45, E = 0.45.
    We discretize continuous variables k and α as follows: k = {0.05, 0.10, . . . , 15.00} and
α = {0.960, 0.965, . . . , 1.190}.
    For the simulation of the stylized economy of 300 individuals we draw α from N(1.070, 0.0552 ),
with the mean and variance chosen so that ex ante proportion of low, middle, and high type
individuals (defined relative to the stochastic Micawber Frontier) would be 25%, 50%, and
25%, respectively. We draw k1 from Uniform[0.1, 10.0] and assume that k1 and α are statis-
tically independent from each other.
    We specify poverty line as follows. The asset level which generates income exactly equal
to the poverty line satisfies the following equation:

                                        yp = f (α, kp ).

where yp is income-based poverty line. That asset level obviously depends on α and we denote
it by kp (α). We assume that an intermediate ability individual would fall below the income
poverty line if he used the low technology and thus set poverty line by kp (α = 1.070) = 2.8
and thus yp = 1.46.




                                              29
References
Azariadis, Costas, and John Stachurski (2005) ‘Poverty traps.’ In Handbook of Economic
  Growth, ed. Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, vol. 1, Part A (Elsevier) chapter 5,
  pp. 295 – 384

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, N. Goldberg, D. Karlan, R. Osei, W.Pariente, J. Shapiro, B. Thuys-
  baert, and C. Udry. (2015) ‘A multifaceted program causes lasting progress for the very
  poor: Evidence from six countries.’ Science

Barrett, Christopher B., and Michael R. Carter (2013) ‘The economics of poverty traps and
  persistent poverty: Policy and empirical implications.’ Journal of Development Studies

Barrett, Christopher B., Michael R. Carter, and Munenobu Ikegami (2013) ‘Poverty traps
  and social protection’

Barrett, Christopher B., Paswel Phiri Marenya, John McPeak, Bart Minten, Frank Place,
  Jean Claude Randrianarisoa, Jhon Rasambainarivo, and Justine Wangila (2006) ‘Welfare
  dynamics in rural kenya and madagascar.’ Journal of Development Studies 42(2), 248–277

Bastagli, Francesca, Jessica Hagen-Zanker, Luke Harman, Valentina Barca, Georgina Sturge,
  and Tanja Schmidt (2016) ‘ash transfers: what does the evidence say?’ Technical Report,
  Overseas Development Institute

Buera, Francisco J. (2009) ‘A dynamic model of entrepreneurship with borrowing constraints:
  theory and evidence.’ Annals of Finance 5(3-4), 443–464

Calvo, Cesar, and Stefan Dercon (2009) ‘Chronic poverty and all that: The measurement of
  poverty over time.’ In Poverty Dynamics: Interdisciplinary Perspectives, ed. Tony Addison,
  David Hulme, and Ravi Kanbur (Oxford University Press) chapter 2

Carter, Michael R., and Christopher B. Barrett (2006) ‘The economics of poverty traps and
  persistent poverty: An asset-based approach.’ Journal of Development Studies 42(2), 178–
  199

Carter, Michael R., and Munenobu Ikegami (2009) ‘Looking forward: Theory-based measures
  of chronic poverty and vulnerability.’ In Poverty Dynamics: Interdisciplinary Perspectives,
  ed. Tony Addison, David Hulme, and Ravi Kanbur (Oxford University Press) chapter 6

Carter, Michael R., and Sarah A. Janzen (2015) ‘Social protection in the face of climate
  change: Targeting principles and financing mechanisms.’ World Bank Policy Research
  Paper 7476

                                             30
Chantarat, Sommarat, Andrew G. Mude, Christopher B. Barrett, and Michael R. Carter
  (2012) ‘Designing index-based livestock insurance for managing asset risk in northern
  kenya.’ Journal of Risk and Insurance pp. no–no

Deaton, Angus (1991) ‘Saving and liquidity constraints.’ Econometrica

Elbers, Chris, and Jan Willem Gunning (2005) ‘Growth and risk: Analytical and empirical
  issues.’ mimeo.

Gertler, Paul J, Sebastian W Martinez, and Marta Rubio-Codina (2012) ‘Investing cash
 transfers to raise long-term living standards.’ American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics 4(1), 164–192

Ghatak, Maitreesh (2015) ‘Theories of poverty traps and anti-poverty policies.’ World Bank
 Economic Review pp. 1–29

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes (1995) ‘Precautionary saving
 and social insurance.’ Journal of Political Economy 103(2), 360–399

Hurrell, Alex, and Rachel Sabates-Wheeler (2013a) ‘Kenya hunger safety net programme
 monitoring and evaluation component: quantitative impact evaluation final report: 2009
 to 2012.’ Technical Report, Oxford Policy Management, June

  (2013b) ‘Kenya hunger safety net programme monitoring and evaluation component: quan-
  titative impact evaluation final report: 2009 to 2012.’ Technical Report, Oxford Policy
  Management

Janzen, Sarah A., and Michael R. Carter (2016) ‘After the drought: The impact of microin-
  surance on consumption smoothing and asset protection.’ NBER Working Paper

Janzen, Sarah A., Michael R. Carter, and Munenobu Ikegami (2016) ‘Asset insurance mar-
  kets and chronic poverty’

Jensen, Nathaniel D., Christopher B. Barrett, and Andrew G. Mude (2014) ‘Index insurance
  and cash transfers: A comparative analysis from northern kenya’

Kraay, Aart, and David McKenzie (2014) ‘Do poverty traps exists? assessing the evidence.’
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3), 127–148

Kray, A., and D. McKenize (2014) ‘Do poverty traps exist? assessing the evidence.’ Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 28(3), 127–148


                                           31
Krishna, Anirudh (2006) ‘Pathways out of and into poverty in 36 villages of andhra pradesh,
  india.’ World Development 34(2), 271–288

Kwak, S, and S Smith (2013) ‘Regional agricultural endowments and shifts of poverty trap
 equilibria: Evidence from ethiopian panel data.’ Journal of Development Studies

Loury, Glenn C. (1981) ‘Intergenerational transfers and the distribution of earnings.’ Econo-
  metrica 49(4), 843–867

Lybbert, Travis J., Christopher B. Barrett, Solomon Desta, and D. Layne Coppock (2004)
  ‘Stochastic wealth dynamics and risk management among a poor population.’ The Eco-
  nomic Journal 114(498), 750–777

Maldonado, Jorge Higinio, Rocío del Pilar Moreno-Sánchez, John Alexander Gómez, and
 Viviana León Jurado, eds (2016) Protección, Producción, Promoción: Explorando Siner-
 gias entre Protección Social y Fomento Productivo Rural en América Latina (Ediciones
 UNIANDES)

McPeak, John, and Christopher B. Barrett (2001) ‘Differential risk exposure and stochastic
 poverty traps among east african pastoralists.’ American Journal of Agricultural Eco-
 nomics 83, 674–679

Mude, Andrew G., Sommarat Chantarat, Christopher B. Barrett, Michael R. Carter,
 Munenobu Ikegami, and John McPeak (2009) ‘Insuring against drought-related livestock
 mortality: Piloting index based livestock insurance in northern kenya.’ Working Paper,
 International Livestock Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya

Nashold, Felix (2013) ‘Welfare dynamics in pakistan and ethiopia – does the estimation
  method matter?’ Journal of Development Studies

Santos, Paulo, and Christopher B. Barrett (2011) ‘Persistent poverty and informal credit.’
  Journal of Development Economics 96(2), 337–347

  (2016) ‘Heterogeneous wealth dynamics: On the roles of risk and ability.’ working paper,
  Cornell University

Skiba, A. K. (1978) ‘Optimal growth with a convex-concave production function.’ Econo-
  metrica 46(3), 527–539. pdf copy

Subramanian, Shankar, and Angus Deaton (1996) ‘The demand for food and calories.’ Jour-
  nal of Political Economy 104(1), 133–162


                                             32
