                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   EDUCATION QUALITY AND TEACHING PRACTICES

                                          Marina Bassi
                                          Costas Meghir
                                          Ana Reynoso

                                       Working Paper 22719
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22719


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                             October 2016, Revised June 2019




The authors would like to thank two anonymous referees and the editor of the Journal for their
comments. We are grateful to Daniel Alonso for his valuable assistance in the analysis of the
data. We also thank Esteban M. Aucejo, Martha Bailey, Hoyt Bleakley, Eric Hanushek, Dean
Yang, and Paul Rodhe for helpful comments and suggestions. We would also like to recognize
the support of the Ministry of Education of Chile (Division of General Education and Studies
Department) in the different stages of this project. Costas Meghir benefited from funding by the
Cowles foundation and the ISPS. Ana Reynoso was funded by the IADB. All errors and opinions
are our own. The findings and conclusions expressed in this report are solely those of the authors
and do not reflect the view of the IDB, its Executive Directors, the countries they represent, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marina Bassi, Costas Meghir, and Ana Reynoso. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Education Quality and Teaching Practices
Marina Bassi, Costas Meghir, and Ana Reynoso
NBER Working Paper No. 22719
October 2016, Revised June 2019
JEL No. I21,I24,I25,I3

                                         ABSTRACT

Improving school quality with limited resources is a key issue of policy. It has been suggested
that instructing teachers to follow specific practices together with tight monitoring of their
activities may help improve outcomes in under-performing schools that usually serve poor
populations. This paper uses a RCT to estimate the effectiveness of guided instruction methods as
implemented in under-performing schools in Chile. The intervention improved performance
substantially and by equal amounts for boys and girls. However, the effect is mainly accounted
for by children from relatively higher income backgrounds and not for the most deprived. Based
on the CLASS instrument we document that quality of teacher-student interactions is positively
correlated with the performance of low income students; however, the intervention did not affect
these interactions. Guided instruction can improve outcomes, but it is a challenge to reach the
most deprived children.

Marina Bassi                                    Ana Reynoso
Inter American Development Bank                 Department of Economics
1300 New York Avenue, N.W.                      University of Michigan
Washington, D.C. 20577                          611 Tappan Avenue
marinab@iadb.org                                Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                                areynoso@umich.edu
Costas Meghir
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
and IZA
and also NBER
c.meghir@yale.edu
1     Introduction

Improving the quality of education for children from lower socioeconomic backgrounds is key to offering equal

opportunity and arresting the intergenerational transmission of poverty. However, achieving this can be chal-

lenging in practice. For example observational studies as well as studies with randomized assignment of students

to teachers have concluded that teachers can have a large impact on performance (Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain

(2005) and Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014) and for Ecuador Araujo, Carneiro, Cruz-Aguayo, and Schady

(2016)). However this literature has been unable to identify what makes a good teacher; and even if it did,

turning around the quality of teachers to a sufficient extent will likely prove far too difficult and slow. So

the natural question is whether we can improve outcomes by identifying and implementing innovative teaching

practices and relying on the existing human resources; solving this problem can have major policy implications

for most countries in the world.

    An experiment in Chile provides a unique opportunity to address this question. The educational psychology

literature focusses on the method of instruction as an approach to improve school performance. The basic

principle is that it is possible to compensate for low teacher skills by providing them with specific prepackaged

classroom material and directions for teaching to any group of students in standardized ways. These methods

can be controversial and there is an active debate on the extent to which prescriptive methods can be successful.

While advocates of minimal instructional guidance argue that students learn best when they discover concepts

by themselves, those who believe in guided instruction argue that the cognitive architecture of the human brain

is such that students’ learning is maximized when teachers directly explain the concepts that students are

required to know (Kirschner, Sweller, and Clark, 2006).

    Guided instruction methods, in turn, come in many forms. They are distinguished by the degree of discretion

that teachers have to adapt instruction according to the characteristics of the particular group of students they

are facing (Ganimian and Murnane, 2014). These methods are usually complemented by training teachers to

support them in the use of these instruction materials. This method is known in the literature as scripted

instruction and became very popular ever since the launch of high scale educational programs like Success for

All and DISTAR in the United States (Slavin, Lake, Chambers, Cheung, and Davis, 2009).

    In this paper we contribute to the understanding of the effectiveness of direct instruction approaches in

schools that serve deprived populations, by analyzing the impact of a large-scale guided instruction program in

Chile aimed at low performing schools. We focus on the performance of students in the national standardized

Math, Language, and Science tests and our results are based on a school-level randomized trial.

    The program in question, known as Plan Apoyo Compartido (henceforth, PAC), was implemented by the

Chilean Ministry of Education in 2011. The main intervention of the program was to support teachers through

a modified method of instruction by adopting a more prescriptive model. Teachers in treated schools received

detailed classroom guides and scripted material to follow in their lectures. The program was intended to be

implemented gradually, so only a group of eligible schools was invited to participate in the first year. Our

measure of students’ learning is their performance in the Chilean standardized Education Quality Measurement



                                                       2
System evaluations (henceforth SIMCE evaluations, for its name in Spanish). We concentrate the analysis on

students who were in their fourth grade of elementary school in years 2011 and 2012 and attended eligible

schools.

    Our results suggest that the program had positive and significant effects, particularly for kids from the

most advantaged backgrounds within treated schools (students in schools with higher socioeconomic status

or from higher income families within our lower income population). Overall, the program improves Reading

test scores by about 10% of a test score standard deviation the first year of implementation. Program effects

increase significantly in the second year: test scores improve in all subjects in between 9% and 13% of a test

score standard deviation. All these effects are statistically significant. Moreover, kids in schools with high

socioeconomic status participating in the program improved SIMCE scores by 20% of a test score standard

deviation with respect to comparable kids in control schools. Finally, students from high-income families see

the greatest benefits from the program, their test scores improving by between 10% and 20% of a test score

standard deviation. All these results are strongly robust to adjustments in our inference strategy to control for

multiple testing.1

    To better understand the impact of PAC on students’ test scores we analyze the effects of the program on

the quality of teacher-students interactions based on the CLASS (Classroom Assessment Scoring System; see

Pianta, Mashburn, Downer, Hamre, and Justice (2008).2 A random subsample of treatment and control schools

from the PAC program where invited to participate in the CLASS experiment. The experiment involved filming

several hours of classroom teaching and coding them to score teachers’ interactions with their students based

on very specific teachers’ behaviors that coders look for. We first show that CLASS scores correlate positively

and significantly with students’ performance, and particularly for those from lower income background. Then,

we show that PAC did not cause significant improvements in CLASS scores, which may explain why low income

students were more modestly impacted by the PAC.

    Our study offers an important contribution to the literature on understanding and improving education

quality. We are specifically testing a program that is easily scalable and which does not make inordinate

demands on human resources, but which, according to a well established literature, can offer real improvements

in pupil performance. From a methodological point of view the experimental design on a particularly large

number of schools offers the power needed to detect even relatively small effect sizes. Second, we provide the first

assessment of the interaction between a large scale instruction intervention and the CLASS in producing learning

outcomes. The use of CLASS as a tool for understanding the mechanisms through which the intervention works,

by implementing it on both treatment and control groups is new in the literature.3

    The paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the program intervention, the experimental

design and the data used in this paper. Section 3 describes the identification and inference strategies. Section
   1 A recent paper by Araujo, Carneiro, Cruz-Aguayo, and Schady (2016) focuses on the relationship between the quality of

teacher-students interactions and test scores in Ecuador. Their study finds that one standard deviation increase in the quality
teacher-students interaction results in approximately 10% of a standard deviation of higher students’ tests scores.
   2 also used in Araujo, Carneiro, Cruz-Aguayo, and Schady (2016) also used the CLASS in their experiment
   3 He, Linden, and MacLeod (2009) also evaluates a scripted Reading preschool program in Mumbai, India and Albornoz, Anauati,

Furman, Luzuriaga, Podestá, and Taylor (2017) evaluates the effects of teacher training interventions in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Unlike theirs, our paper focuses on fourth grade primary school students.



                                                                3
4 presents the main results of the paper. Section 5 studies the importance of teacher-students’ interactions to

improve performance and the impact of PAC on these interactions. Finally, section 6 concludes.



2     Experimental design, data, and randomization check

2.1     Plan Apoyo Compartido (PAC)

PAC was implemented by the Chilean Ministry of Education in 2011 as a targeted educational policy providing

technical and pedagogical support to schools historically performing below average in the national standardized

test, SIMCE. It aimed at improving student’ learning outcomes in Math and Language from pre-K to fourth

grade (and, additionally, in Natural and Social Sciences for students in third and fourth grades), changing

practices inside the classroom and the school. The PAC targeted low performing public and subsidized private

schools nationwide.4 We describe the design and implementation of the PAC next.


PAC design The design of PAC included five components and was implemented in six-week cycles (see Figure

1). The first component, called “effective implementation of the national curriculum”(indicated [1] in the figure),

consisted in the development of unified pedagogical material and planning tools distributed to teachers. These

tools included an annual curricular programming, a series of teaching materials designed for each six-week

cycle, and a set of daily planning activities to be used by teachers in the classroom. The second component

(indicated [2] in the figure) consisted of promoting a school culture and environment that encourages learning. A

manual was developed and delivered to schools to guide the implementation of the ideas. The third component

(indicated [3] in the figure) was the use of student evaluations as a tool for guiding teaching. This component

included the development of four types of tests to monitor progress in students learning: a diagnostic test to

determine the initial level of academic skills and knowledge administered at the beginning of the school year,

intermediate and final tests to determine students’ progress, and students’ performance reports. Each of these

testing instruments was applied in different moments of the semester to help analyze students’ performance in

Math and Language (MINEDUC, 2013). It is worth noting that unlike the SIMCE tests, these instruments

were not standardized tests and could be applied voluntarily by PAC schools. The fourth component (indicated

[4] in the figure) was defined as the “optimization of the use of school time for learning in the classroom”, and

consisted in promoting class planning and frequent class observation in schools to provide feedback to teachers.

Finally, the last component known as “promotion of teachers’ professional development” (indicated [5] in the

figure) aimed at promoting frequent internal school staff meetings to discuss students’ progress.
   4 The Chilean system of education includes three types of schools: public schools, subsidized private schools, and private schools.

Public schools are both financed and administered by the public sector; subsidized private schools are administered by private
agencies but receive funding from the State in the form of vouchers per attending student; finally, the third group includes schools
that are administered privately and tuition is paid by the students’ families.




                                                                  4
                                         Figure 1: Design of Plan Apoyo Compartido†




             Stage:                            [3]                                               [1]                          [3]
                            Diagnostic Test              Curriculum implementation                     and       Final Test
                                                                  school culture [2]


             Cycle:                            1           2                 3               4         5     6




                                  Every cycle (6 weeks):
                                                                                 [1]
                                                   • Teaching material
                                                                                   [1]
                                                   • Students’ workbook
                                                                   [3]                                 [3]
                                                   • Period test         and students’ reports
                                                                                 [4]
                                                   • Class observation
                                                                                       [5]
                                                   • Feedback to teachers
            †
                Source: Chilean Ministry of Education




   A central feature of the Program’s design to assist the implementation and monitoring of the PAC activities

was the creation of two support teams - one internal and one external to schools - expected to work closely

together. The first team, the Education Leadership Team (henceforth ELE, from its name in Spanish), consisted

of the school principal, the head of the technical and pedagogic office of the school, and two distinguished

teachers. The second group, the Team of Technical and Pedagogic Advisors (henceforth ATP), comprised three

representatives of the regional Department of Education (the DEPROV), aimed at providing external support

to the ELE teams. Each ATP visited its assigned schools every 6 to 7 weeks to advise the ELE on the use of

the teaching material, on the development of a diagnosis of the school’s strengths and weaknesses, and on the

analysis of the students’ tests scores to study progress (MINEDUC, 2013).


Monitoring and assessment of PAC implementation at the school level The Ministry of Education

collected information on the ATPs visits to schools and its findings. Still, as part of the effort to assess the

impact of the Program (which included this paper’s analysis), the Chilean Ministry of Education designed

two instruments, mainly focused on gathering evidence on the extent to which teachers and schools used the

pedagogic material provided by the Program, implemented PAC components, and received the support of ELEs

and ATPs.

   The first instrument was a protocol specifically developed to observe and code class videotapes on key as-

pects of the program.5 Independent raters were asked to observe the videos and indicate whether the program

intervention activity is observed in the classroom or not, establish if teachers in the classroom implemented
  5 The   protocol followed to code videos resembles the CLASS protocol described in section 5.



                                                                         5
the scripted instruction method, and determine if teachers organized their classroom according to the program

guidelines. The key aspects that were observed in both PAC and control schools were class structure, encour-

agement of critical thinking, norms and schedule, and evaluation of students’ performance. In Appendix A

we present the correlation between participating in PAC and the average score in these relevant dimensions of

the program implementation. The data indicates that PAC schools are observed to perform better in the PAC

objectives within the classroom. The difference between treated and control schools is only significant when

it comes to the enforcement of norms and schedule. PAC classrooms are 5.8 percentage points more likely to

follow the norms and schedule relative to non- PAC schools. Within this dimension, a particularly interesting

aspect concerns the use of prepacked material by the teachers. Coders were asked to indicate if they observe

teachers in the classroom using special workbooks as a pedagogic resource (the scripted class manuals, or ”PAC

book” in the case of the treated schools). PAC schools are 23 percentage points more likely to use the scripted

workbooks in class relative to non-PAC schools. The difference is significant at the 1% level.

    The second instrument to assess the degree of implementation of the PAC at the school level was to interview

the head of the technical and pedagogic office of the school (henceforth JUTP, from its name in Spanish) and

a set of teachers within the schools that participated in the monitoring evaluation. These surveys gathered

information about the key ingredients of the program. For example, authorities were asked if their school

utilizes annual planning in class, whether students are periodically evaluated, whether the teachers understand

and explain norms of behavior to students, and the frequency with which the school organizes meetings between

teachers and authorities to monitor the performance of students (see figure 1).

    Table A2 shows the correlation between PAC treatment and the responses of JUTPs. The first three columns

are concerned with annual planning activities within the school. 93.38% of JUTPs in the sample respond that

the school engages in annual planning of the curriculum and we do not detect differences between PAC and

control schools in annual planning. However, columns (1) to (3) evidence that PAC schools are significantly more

likely to have the annual planning performed by the PAC authorities or by the ELE team and significantly less

likely to leave the curriculum design to teachers. This evidence may be an indication of one of the dimensions

in which teachers in PAC schools were supported by the authorities. Columns (4) and (5) provide evidence of

two additional dimensions of support to teachers. The evidence presented in column (4) indicates that PAC

schools are observed about 34.2% more times by the ELE team relative to control schools. Moreover, column

(5) indicates that teachers in PAC schools receive feedback after these observations in about 30.5% more times

than control schools. Finally, teachers’ responses are consistent with the JUTPs answers, although we do not

detect significant differences between PAC and control schools in teachers’ responses.6 For example, consistent

with the JUTPs reports, teachers in PAC schools are more likely to having their classrooms observed and to

receive feedback after observations.
   6 The vast majority of teachers in the sample respond positively to the questions. It is worth remarking that the fact that all

teachers, including PAC teachers, implement the key program instruments is reassuring of the implementation of PAC.




                                                                6
2.2     Eligibility and Randomization

Among public and subsidized private schools in Chile, PAC considered two main eligibility criteria to define

the target group of schools: first, the school’s baseline average SIMCE score for the years between 2005 and

2009 in Math and Language should be below the national average (252 points out of 500); and second, there

should be at least 20 students per level on average from pre-K to fourth grade.7 2,286 schools met these criteria

and were ranked by their 2005-2009 average SIMCE scores in Language and Math. The bottom 1,000 schools

were automatically considered eligible. Since participation in the program was voluntary, refusal to participate

was expected, so in order to reach a target of around 1,000 eligible schools in the first year of the program, the

Ministry increased the sample within each DEPROV by 50%, going up in the SIMCE ranking.8 Of the resulting

1,480 eligible schools 632 located in “small” DEPROVs (DEPROVs with 40 schools or less) were allocated to

the program automatically and do not form part of the evaluation and analysis. The remaining 848 schools

located in “large” DEPROVs were randomly allocated to treatment and control groups. Five schools in the

randomization are excluded from the analysis because they show missing information on school and students’

characteristics in both the 2011 and 2012 data sets. All in all, of the 843 schools considered in this analysis,

648 were randomly selected to the treatment group and 195 were randomly selected to the control group.9


2.3     2012 CLASS intervention

The second part of this paper analyzes the relationship between teacher-students interactions and learning

outcomes. To measure the quality of teacher-students interactions, we use the well-known CLASS measurement

system Pianta, Mashburn, Downer, Hamre, and Justice (2008). The CLASS is an instrument used in the

Education literature to measure the quality of teacher-student interactions, as a proxy to teachers’ quality or

effectiveness.

    To produce the CLASS measures, a randomly selected group of 158 PAC schools (79 from the PAC treatment

group and 79 from the PAC control group) were invited to have their fourth grade classrooms videotaped for

four full lessons. The CLASS intervention took place in 2012, the second year of implementation of the PAC

program. After class observations, thoroughly trained coders watch and analyze the videotapes and assign a

score for teacher-students interactions in several dimensions (details will be presented in section 5).

    The CLASS experiment had an extremely good compliance: in the end, 137 invited schools agreed to

participate in the filming sessions and 185 classrooms within participating schools had lectures filmed. Non-

participation is fairly well balanced between the treatment and control schools.10 The sample of treated and

control schools that participated in the CLASS experiment is also well balanced in school pre-treatment char-
   7 The Ministry of Education also required that the schools administrators should have no sanctions related to the voucher

subsidies system in the previous three years.
   8 At this point some schools were excluded after consultation with DEPROV authorities either because of bad management or

because they were already receiving technical and pedagogical assistance from well-known agencies of pedagogical support in Chile.
   9 Two of the 843 schools in the randomization are missing from our 2011 data set. Therefore, we consider 841 schools in 2011.

Four of the 843 schools in the randomization drop out of our sample in 2012. Therefore, our analysis for 2012 is based on 839
schools. We discuss attrition in this section below.
  10 Among these 185 classrooms, 94 were in control PAC schools and 91 were in treatment PAC schools. Among the 91 classrooms

in PAC schools, in turn, 78 were participating in the PAC, while 13 were in schools invited to participate in PAC but did not
accept.



                                                                7
acteristics. These characteristics include the school income group, the past average SIMCE score of the school,

the experience of fourth grade teachers, the experience of the school principal, and the tenure at the school of

fourth grade teachers and the principal. For all these baseline characteristics we cannot reject the hypotheses

that they are equal among PAC and non PAC schools that participate in the CLASS experiment.


2.4    Data

The analysis in this paper relies on administrative data provided by the Ministry of Education. This data set

includes student level information on treatment status, test scores, and baseline demographic characteristics.

Table A3 in appendix B shows summary statistics of all the variables used in this paper, namely, test scores and

baseline characteristics, for the group of students that took each of the subject tests (post attrition samples).


2.5    Treatment- control balance and attrition

In our empirical results we exclude from the 2012 data those schools that implemented the CLASS observation

system because of Hawthorne effects (Landsberger, 1958) - an issue we return to in the results section. As we

show there, the CLASS intervention had impacts of its own thus contaminating the control schools that were

part of it. CLASS was randomly allocated in both treatment and control schools and thus there is no bias in

excluding these schools.

   Table A4 in the Appendix shows summary statistics and randomization checks at the school level. The

evidence shows that the randomization at the school level was successful: all pre-treatment school characteristics

are balanced across PAC and control schools. Moreover, the result of an F-test of joint significance of school

baseline characteristics on random assignment indicated that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that no

variable jointly predicts treatment.

   Table A5 in the Appendix, displays a set of randomization checks for the entire population of fourth grade

students (the pre attrition sample) and for the three post attrition samples (Reading, Math, and Science test

takers). The table is divided in three panels, corresponding to the 2011 cohort, the 2012 cohort that excludes

schools participating in the CLASS intervention, and the whole 2012 sample. Each panel displays the results of

a test of differences in means of attrition rates and baseline characteristics across treatment status, and a test

of joint significance of the impact of baseline characteristics on treatment status.

   In general, attrition rates in our sample are very low and baseline characteristics are balanced in both, the

pre attrition and the post attrition samples. In 2011 there is no student that missed all three subject tests in

the sample. When analyzing attrition rates by subject for this cohort (not reported in the table), only 2.06% of

students missed the Reading test, 2.08% missed the Math test, and 1.97% missed the Science test. Moreover,

attrition rates are balanced between the treatment and control groups, as shown in the first three rows of the

2011 panel of Appendix Table A5. There, the statistic reported is the difference in attrition rates between the

treatment and control groups. These differences are very small: relative to the control group, there is 0.7% less

students missing the Reading test and 0.1% more students missing the Math and Science tests in the treatment



                                                        8
group. However, all p-values indicate that these differences are not significant.

    The next set of rows show the results of a test of differences in means of baseline characteristics. Most

baseline characteristics are balanced even among the students that did not drop out of the data. The exceptions

are low income and mother and father incomplete high school : test takers in the treatment group are less

likely to be from a low income family and less likely to have a parent with incomplete high school. Even when

the p-value indicates that these differences are individually significant, the magnitude of the economic effect

is extremely small, around 2%. Moreover, the last row of the 2011 panel shows that taken together, baseline

characteristics do not significantly predict whether a student is in the treatment or the control group, even in

the post attrition samples. The statistic reported is the F-statistic of the joint test, and p-values indicate that

we cannot reject the null hypothesis that baseline characteristics do not jointly determine the random allocation

to the program.

    The conclusions from the 2012 cohort are similar. First, attrition rates are higher than in the 2011 cohort,

but still low. In this cohort 15% of students missed the Reading test, 15.26% missed the Math test, and 15.36%

missed the Science test (statistics not reported in the table). However, differences in attrition rates between

treatment and control groups for 2012 are small and insignificant. Being in the treatment group is associated

with about 1% lower probability of sitting for the Reading, Math, and Science tests relative to the control group,

but these differences are not significantly different from zero, which suggests that the higher overall attrition in

2012 does not bias our results of the impact of PAC on SIMCE.

    As further corroborative evidence panel B in Table A5 shows that the 2012 subsample excluding schools

contaminated by the CLASS intervention is also balanced: all baseline characteristics are jointly insignificant

in explain treatment status, as evidenced by the F-test. Individually, all baseline characteristics are balanced

between treatment and control groups, with the exception of Nbr years failed (the number of grades a student

had to retake prior to the fourth grade), which difference is economically negligible in magnitude and statistically

only marginally significant.

    In sum, we find no evidence that the experimental design was compromised in any way. In both cohorts the

difference in the proportion of attritors is negligible in magnitude and not significant and the randomization

was successful in balancing baseline characteristics, even for the post attrition samples.



3     Estimation and inference

Our results explore overall effects as well as heterogeneous treatment effects by school and students’ demographic

characteristics. In our heterogeneity analysis we first analyze results by school socio-economic status. Second,

we define four groups of students based on the interaction between the gender of the student and her house-

hold income (Female- Low income, Female- Medium-High income, Male- Low income, and Male- Medium-High

income).

    The focus on income is mainly motivated by the need to understand whether such programs are particularly

helpful for the most deprived, or by contrast they reinforce resources provided by parents. In general there


                                                         9
is ample evidence showing an association between income and wealth with child outcomes. Whether such

association extends to responses to interventions is an open and important question. Gender is also important;

girls tend to perform better than boys in Reading and worse than boys in Math and Science (OECD, 2015).

These outcomes may be related to teachers’ practices. Using the same sample of fourth grade teachers in Chile

as this paper, Bassi, Mateo Dı́az, Blumberg, and Reynoso (2018) show that teachers in fact pay more attention

to boys than girls, and those differentiated behaviors are correlated with worse performance in SIMCE in Math

and Science among the girls. It is thus important to understand whether there are substantial differences in the

response to interventions.

    The results we present are obtained by a regression at the individual student level



                                      SIM CEijgk = βgk + γgk Tij + Xijg δgk + ijgk                                             (1)


where SIM CEijgk is the test score of student i, in school j, in demographic group g, and in subject k =

{M ath, Language, Science}. This is measured in units of a standard deviation of the control group (which we

will refer to as SD units henceforth). Tij is is a dummy indicating whether the student attended a school j

that was randomized into the program (PAC); Xijg is a vector of student-school characteristics that includes

baseline characteristics;11 and ijgk is a random error term, which because of randomization is uncorrelated

with treatment assignment.

    Not all schools assigned to the program actually implemented it: there is non-compliance in both the 2011

and the 2012 cohorts. Table 1 shows take up rates of schools considered eligible to the program, for both years

2011 and 2012 and for the total schools that were ever considered eligible.

                               Table 1: Randomization and implementation, school level

                                                         All schools     2011 sample         2012 sample
                                                                         Implemented      PAC
                                                         No      Yes     No     Yes        No       Yes
                                                 No      185     10      194     0         115      10
                   Randomized into PAC
                                                 Yes     150     498     155    492        164      413
                   Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. All schools refers to the 843 schools that
                   were considered eligible by the program and considered in the program evaluation at some
                   point. The 2011 sample consists of the 841 schools that were originally included in the
                   program evaluation sample. The 2012 sample consists of the 702 schools that remained in
                   the program evaluation sample in the second year and were randomly excluded from the
                   CLASS intervention (that is, 839 schools that continued in 2012 minus 137 schools that
                   participated in CLASS). Implemented PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the
                   school participated in PAC and zero otherwise. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable
                   that takes value one if the school that randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero
                   otherwise.


    In 2011 about 23% of schools randomized into the program did not implement it. In this case if we replace

the randomization indicator Tij with whether treatment actually took place and then use the randomization

indicator as an instrument we will identify the effect of treatment on the treated because noncompliance is only

one sided. In 2012 however, we have two sided noncompliance, with 8% of schools not assigned to the program
   11 The covariates include, whether the student lives in a household with at least one parent and/or siblings; whether the student

lives in a household with members of the extended family; the number of times the student failed a school year; mother’s education:
dummies for “no education”, “incomplete primary”, “primary”, “incomplete high school”, “high school”, “some college”, “college
+”; father’s education (same dummies as mother education).



                                                                10
by the randomization actually getting it.12 IV in this case identifies the LATE parameter under the additional

monotonicity assumption that randomization either does not change treatment status or induces the school to

adopt the program but never the reverse.13 In all cases using as treatment variable the original randomization

(Tij ) provides an unbiased estimate of the intention to treat parameter (ITT), namely the effect of having been

offered the program.

   At the student level Table 2 shows that for the 2011 cohort 76% of students were exposed to it as a result of

the school being assigned to receive PAC. No student in the control group was exposed. The percentage varies

slightly by demographic groups because the composition of the schools is not uniform. For the 2012 cohort

the percent of exposed students as a result of being randomized into the program is 63%; some student in the

control group did however receive the treatment. Table A9 in the appendix shows similar conclusions for the

whole sample of 2012 schools.


                             Table 2: First stage. Dependent variable: Implemented PAC.

                                                                           2011
                                      All                         Girls                                     Boys
                                                    Low Income High Income                     Low Income High Income
 Randomized into PAC                0.761∗∗∗           0.775∗∗∗          0.721∗∗∗                0.769∗∗∗         0.745∗∗∗
                                   [.734;.788]        [.746;.803]       [.68;.761]              [.707;.782]      [.74;.797]
 Observations                         31384              10938             2330                    11492            2581
                                                                           2012
                                      All                         Girls                                      Boys
                                                    Low Income High Income                     Low Income High Income
 Randomized into PAC               0.6321∗∗∗           0.6528∗∗∗        0.6226∗∗∗                0.6509∗∗∗        0.6455∗∗∗
                                  [.575; .683]       [.596; .704]      [.561; .682]             [.589; .697]     [.591; .706]
 Observations                        29905                8740             2225                     8894             2622
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. The dependent variable is Implemented PAC, a dummy variable that takes
 value one if the student attends a school that participated in PAC and zero otherwise. Randomized into PAC is a dummy
 variable that takes value one if the student attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero
 otherwise. All refers to all students pooled together. Low Income is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student’s
 family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos, the minimum wage in such country. High Income is a dummy that
 takes value one if Low Income= 0. 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. ∗∗∗ Variable significant at the
 1% level. Clustering at the school level. The 2012 sample excludes schools that implemented CLASS.


   In deriving standard errors and carrying out inference we cluster at the school level, which is the randomiza-

tion unit. Since we will be splitting the sample by demographic characteristics and testing families of hypotheses

we adjust the p-values for multiple testing using the step-down procedure of Romano and Wolf (2005). The

resulting p-value is the Family wise error rate (FWE), namely the probability that we incorrectly identify one

coefficient as significant in the entire group of hypotheses being tested. We use 1000 bootstrap replications to

compute all standard errors and confidence intervals.
 12 Table   A8 in the appendix shows a similar picture when all 2012 schools are considered.
 13 See   Imbens and Angrist (1994).




                                                                11
4        Main Results

4.1      CLASS, Hawthorne Effects and the 2012 sample

As mentioned earlier, in order to better understand how PAC works and how it may affect teacher practices

it was decided to implement the CLASS observation system in a random subset of 137 PAC treatment and

PAC control schools. The CLASS was effectively another intervention consisting of videotaping lectures in full

knowledge of the teachers within randomly selected PAC control and PAC treated schools. The question is

whether CLASS had an effect in itself, thus contaminating the control group. Exploiting the fact that CLASS

was randomly allocated, we estimate the treatment effect of receiving CLASS by comparing the outcomes for

children in whose schools CLASS was implemented to those in which it was not, among the schools that did

not implement the PAC (PAC controls). The mere implementation of CLASS significantly improved SIMCE

scores by 23%, 18% and 21% of a standard deviation for Reading, Math and Science respectively. However,

CLASS had no additional effect on learning outcomes for children in the PAC treatment group.14 This is a

characteristic example of the so called Hawthorne effects (Landsberger, 1958; Levitt and List, 2011) which lead

to productivity increases when people feel they are being monitored.15 The implication is that by including

schools that received CLASS in our evaluation sample we would blunt the estimated effects of the PAC; hence

we exclude all 2012 schools in treatment and control that implemented CLASS. Importantly since CLASS was

randomly allocated, this causes no bias, but instead produces results that correctly reflect the PAC intervention.

The estimates that include the CLASS sample are presented in Appendix E for completeness.


4.2      Overall effects

                                             Table 3: Impact of PAC on SIMCE

                                                              Intention to treat effect (ITT)
                                          Reading                          Math                                   Science
 Randomized into PAC                         .108                           .087                                  .055
                                          [.06;.15]                      [.03;.14]                              [.01;.1]
                                            (.01)                          (.02)                                  (.06)
 Control Group Mean                        243.83                         236.12                                235.18
 Control Group SD                           50.38                          47.17                                 44.83
 Number of Clusters                          842                             843                                   843
 Observations                               56193                          56116                                 56104
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Implemented PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student attends
 a school that participated in PAC and zero otherwise. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the
 student attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. The effects shown are in units
 of the control group standard deviation. 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Romano-Wolf step down
 p-values from the two sided test accounting for all3 hypotheses are shown in parenthesis. All regressions include cohort fixed effects.
 Clustering at the school level. The 2012 sample excludes schools that implemented CLASS.



We start by showing in Table 3 the overall Intention to Treat (ITT) effects of the experiment pooling the data

from the two cohorts together and controlling for cohort fixed effects. In all Tables that follow we report results

without covariates (other than cohort effects when we pool them). Appendix F reports the results when we
 14 Detailed results in Table A10 in appendix D.
 15 In other contexts observation has been shown to reduce teacher absentees, which can also have an impact on performance
(Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan, 2012).


                                                                 12
include covariates. In this and all Tables that follow we report 95% confidence intervals (CI) in square brackets

and RW stepdown p-values in parentheses, both computed using the bootstrap.

   The impacts on Reading and Math are both large, and significant even controlling for multiple testing. The

results for Science are smaller and the Romano Wolf (RW) stepdown p-value is 0.06. Overall the conclusion

from this table is that the intervention was successful in improving learning standards. In what follows we first

consider how the program worked for separate cohorts and we then proceed with heterogeneity analysis.


4.3    Effects by Cohort

Table 4 shows the effects of the program on SIMCE test scores for students in the 2011 and the 2012 cohorts

separately. The top panel of the Table shows the ITT estimate while the bottom panel reports the corresponding

instrumental variables (IV) results where the explanatory variable is actually receiving PAC and the instrument

is being randomized into PAC; the parameter is interpreted as the effect of treatment on the treated for the 2011

cohort where all those randomized out were actually excluded from the program (one sided noncompliance),

while for the 2012 cohort it is interpreted as the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE) under the additional

assumption of monotonicity, since there is two sided noncompliance. The RW stepdown p-values allows for all

6 hypotheses (Reading, Math and Science in each of the two years).


                                     Table 4: Impact of PAC on SIMCE by cohort

                                                             Intention to treat effect (ITT)
                                                   2011                                       2012
                                Reading            Math           Science   Reading         Math                       Science
 Randomized into PAC               .095             .068            .033       .127          .117                       .089
                                [.04;.15]        [.01;.13]       [-.03;.09] [.07;.19]     [.04;.19]                  [.03;.15]
                                  (.02)            (.22)            (.56)     (.01)         (.03)                      (.04)
                                                              Instrumental Variables (IV)
 Implemented PAC                   .125             .089            .044         .2          .184                       .139
                                 [.05;.2]        [.01;.17]       [-.04;.12]  [.11;.3]     [.06;.31]                  [.06;.24]
                                  (.02)            (.22)            (.56)     (.01)         (.05)                      (.05)
 Control Group Mean              244.79           235.76           236.84    242.42        236.65                     232.72
 Control Group SD                 49.97            47.10            44.09     50.94         47.26                      45.80
 Number of Clusters                840              841              841        702           702                       702
 Observations                     30736            30731           30765      25457         25385                      25339
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Implemented PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student attends
 a school that participated in PAC and zero otherwise. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the
 student attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. The effects shown are in units
 of the control group standard deviation. 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Romano-Wolf step down
 p-values from the two sided test accounting for all 6 hypotheses in each panel (ITT and IV) are shown in parenthesis. Clustering at
 the school level. In the second panel the instrument is Randomized into PAC. The 2012 sample excludes schools that implemented
 CLASS.


   Considering the results for the ITT and the corresponding ones for IV we find that Reading improved by

about 0.10 of a SD in 2011, giving an IV coefficient of 0.125 (RW pva;ue 0.02), revealing a large impact in the

schools that actually received the PAC. There is also a 0.07 improvement in Math in the same year, that is

individually significant (see CI) but not so once we account for multiple testing (see RW p-value). The remaining

effects for 2011 are not significant.

   The effects in the 2012 sample are strong: test scores in all subjects improve between 0.09 and 0.13 of SD


                                                               13
units relative to control schools, and the effects are all significant, even accounting for multiple testing. The

effects are larger than those in 2011, which is consistent with the program maturing and being better embedded

in the implementing schools. Indeed, the fraction of classrooms with teachers who are hired in 2012 or who are

substitute teachers in the school is only 13.37%, implying improved experience levels with PAC implementation

in the second year. So these results point to the persistent and even improving success for the program overall.

Table A14 in appendix F shows that these results are robust to including covariates in the specification.16


4.4     Heterogeneity Analysis

Given the overall impacts of the program we now investigate whether these differ across gender and socioe-

conomic status, which are sources of disparities in performance. We will be focussing on three groups: Boys

and Girls; children from low Income households versus higher income; and low versus Higher SES schools. We

define low income background as children from families with a monthly income less than 300,000 Chilean pesos

(US$ 600 in 2011), which is the minimum wage. The SES status of the school is defined by the government

based on an index of parental education and income and a vulnerability index.17 In our sample of PAC eligible

schools Lower SES schools are overrepresented, reflecting the fact that underperforming schools tend to serve

lower SES students. Our Low SES group includes the schools classified by the government as belonging to the

Low and medium-Low groups.

    The heterogeneity analysis is important for targeting, program improvement and understanding how to

reduce important educational deficits: there are large disparities among the groups and a key question is

whether the program reduces such inequalities and more generally how it affects the outcomes of each category.

Table 5 shows the difference in the SIMCE scores, in standard deviation units, for the control group in both

cohorts between boys and girls and between children from lower and higher income families. We also show

differences between children in low and higher SES schools.

    Girls perform better in Reading and worse in Math and Science while children from higher income groups

are performing uniformly better than lower ones. We also find differences between low and higher SES schools,

although these are not significant. Nevertheless, it is still interesting to consider the impact of the program

across types of school because policy makers often target policies based on overall school composition and

because the peer structure is different. We start by considering how the program affected different SES type

schools and then we move to gender and family background differences.
   16 The 2012 results including the CLASS subsample are shown in Table A11 in appendix E. These show a decline in the impact of

the program. However, this is fully explained by the fact that CLASS raised the performance of the control schools (non PAC) in
which it was implemented, as we documented earlier. For further corroboration we also show in section 2 that the PAC intervention
was well implemented in 2012.
   17 The Education Quality Assurance Agency, responsible for the SIMCE, classifies schools into socioeconomic categories based on

four variables: mothers’ years of education, fathers’ years of education, monthly income reported by parents, and a vulnerability
index developed by the Ministry of Education. The first three variables are obtained from SIMCE parents questionnaires. The
average value among parents of the corresponding students grade is calculated for each of these variables. A cluster methodology
is applied with these four variables to classify schools (for each grade level in which SIMCE is applied) into five socioeconomic
categories: low, medium-low, medium, medium-high, high. Appendix Table A7 shows the distribution of Chilean schools according
to their SES along with the distribution in the PAC sample of eligible schools.




                                                               14
  Table 5: Differences in performance in the control group, by demographic characteristics and school SES

                                                         Reading                      Math                         Science
 Girls - Boys                                               .219                       -.07                        -.094
                                                          [.19;.25]                [-.11;-.03]                 [-.13;-.05]
 Low Income - Higher Income student                         -.109                     -.145                        -.217
                                                        [-.16;-.06]                [-.21;-.08]                 [-.28;-.16]
 Low SES - Higher SES School                                -.054                     -.011                        -.069
                                                         [-.15;.05]                 [-.13;.1]                   [-.17;.03]
 Number of Clusters (Control Schools)                        194                       194                          194
 Notes: Table shows pairwise differences in performance for students in the control group by demographic characteristics. SES
 variables refer to the school Socio Economic Status as described in this section 4. Low Income is a dummy variable that takes
 value one if the student’s family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos, the minimum wage in such country. 95%
 bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets.



   Heterogeneity analysis can be particularly susceptible to false positives (i.e. finding significant results when

there are none) because the number of hypotheses being tested is multiplied. Thus for each case we compute

RW stepdown p-values for the entire set of hypotheses involved as specified below. Moreover, for this analysis

we pool the 2011 and the 2012 data (allowing for cohort effects) so as to increase statistical power.


4.4.1   Effects by School Socio-Economic status


         Table 6: Impact of PAC on SIMCE by school socio economic status, with cohort fixed effects

                                                Low SES                                          Medium SES
                                    (1)              (2)                (3)           (4)              (5)                (6)
                                Reading            Math              Science       Reading           Math             Science
 Randomized into PAC               .079             .051               .015          .197             .223               .191
                                [.03;.13]        [-.01;.11]         [-.04;.07]      [.1;.3]        [.11;.34]          [.09;.29]
                                  (.02)             (.24)              (.67)         (.01)           (.01)              (.01)
 Control Group Mean              243.04            235.82             234.50        248.37          237.84             239.14
 Control Group SD                 50.12             47.29             44.85         51.61            46.43              44.54
 Number of Clusters                 706              707                707           194             194                194
 Observations                     43637            43544              43537         12480            12497              12492
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student
 attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. SES variables refer to the school Socio
 Economic Status as described in section 4. The effects shown are in units of the control group standard deviation (SD). 95%
 bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. RW step down p-values allowing for all 6 hypotheses from the two
 sided tests are shown in parenthesis. All regressions include cohort fixed effects. Clustering at the school level. Schools that
 implemented CLASS are excluded from the 2012 sample.


   Table 6 shows the effects of the PAC program on test scores in each of the two SES school groups. The main

conclusion from this table is that the program was most successful in schools with higher socioeconomic status

among eligible schools: in the Medium SES group the program increased test scores in Reading and Science by

about 0.20 of SD units and in Math by over 0.22 of SD units. All effects for the Medium SES schools are highly

significant with stepdown p-values of at most 0.01 adjusting for all six hypotheses being considered. These are

remarkable improvements. But even more remarkable from a policy perspective is the fact that the program

did not increase the performance in the Low SES schools by nearly as much, despite the fact that the baseline

performance is similar as shown above. In fact, we reject the hypothesis that the impact of PAC on SIMCE

scores are equal for kids in Low SES schools vs kids in Medium SES schools. We aggregate the test scores

of different subjects by obtaining the first principal component of test scores within each group and we reject


                                                               15
the hypothesis that PAC effects on aggregate test scores are equal for the Low and High SES groups (p-value

of 0.015). We also reject equality of coefficients when we compare each SIMCE subject separately instead of

taking the principal component (p-values of 0.056 for Reading, 0.022 for Math, and 0.006 for Science).18


4.4.2     Effects by gender and family income

We now turn to differences by gender and household income, both sources of disparities in performance. We

are particularly interested in how impacts vary between children of different SES backgrounds because it has

been a challenge to improve outcomes for the most deprived populations. In addition, gender disparities in

educational performance may partly explain male/female differences in labor market outcomes, including in

wages and informality rates.

   Appendix Tables A17 and A18 show differences between boys and girls and low and higher income back-

ground students respectively. We find that overall there are no significant differences in impacts between boys

and girls and the estimates are almost the same. However, we find that the impacts for students from higher

income backgrounds are approximately twice those of the students from low income families: the reading score

improved by 0.167 SD units (p-value 0.01) for the higher income group and only 0.089 SD units (p-value 0.01) for

the lower group. The Math score improvements were 0.143 (p-value 0.01) and 0.074 (p-value 0.08) respectively.19

We now look at this in greater detail by considering gender and income background differences jointly.

   The results are shown in Table 7 that pools the two years together and includes cohort fixed effects in the

regression.20 The table presents 12 impacts and the RW stepdown p-values provide significance levels accounting

for the fact we are considering these multiple hypotheses. We also report 95% confidence intervals.

   The main conclusion from Table 7 is that the program produced significant impacts for the Reading scores for

boys from both income groups as well as for girls from a higher income backround. It also improved significantly

the Math performance of boys from the higher income group. Specifically, Reading scores for higher income

children improve by 0.135 SD units for boys (RW p-value 0.02) and 0.203 SD units for girls (RW p-value 0.01)

relative to kids in control schools. The Reading scores for boys in the lower income families improved by 0.10

SD units (RW p-value 0.01). We also find that a 0.18 SD units improvement in the Math scores for boys from

the higher income group (RW p-value 0.01). Given the adjustment for multiple hypotheses testing these are

particularly strong results. If we were using the conventional single hypothesis p-values many more of these

12 effects would have been classified as significant - for example see the individually significant improvements,

implied by the 95% confidence intervals, in Math for lower income boys and girls; however the chance that these

are false positives is quite high given the adjusted p-values.21

   All in all, these results suggest that the PAC had a large and significant effect on the performance of fourth

grade boys and girls from relatively higher income backgrounds. This is clear evidence that the structured
 18 See Table A15 in appendix F for results including covariates in the specification.
 19 p-values  reported are RW stepdown for 6 hypotheses.
  20 Once again, the 2012 sample exclude the contaminated CLASS sample. Table A13 in appendix E shows the 2012 results that

include the sample contaminated by the CLASS intervention.
  21 Results from the estimation of the model with covariates are shown in tables A15 in the appendix and are very similar.




                                                            16
         Table 7: Impact of PAC on SIMCE by students’ gender and income, with cohort fixed effects

                                                                                Girls
                                              Low Income                                            High Income
                                Reading          Math               Science             Reading        Math          Science
 Randomized into PAC              .075            .067                .043                .203           .102          .065
                                [.02;.13]        [0;.13]            [-.01;.1]           [.11;.3]        [0;.2]      [-.03;.15]
                                  (.10)           (.32)               (.38)              (.01)          (.32)          (.38)

 Control Group Mean              250.34           233.87            232.23              253.93         242.73         242.24
 Control Group SD                48.33             45.62            43.01               49.22          46.44          45.88
 Number of Clusters               835               835              835                  761            761           760
 Observations                    19222            19245             19201                4494           4484           4493
                                                                                Boys
                                              Low Income                                            High Income
                                Reading           Math              Science             Reading         Math         Science
 Randomized into PAC              .101             .081               .048                 .135          .179          .087
                                [.05;.15]       [.02;.14]           [-.01;.1]           [.06;.21]      [.1;.26]      [.01;.17]
                                  (.01)           (.18)               (.38)               (.02)          (.01)         (.32)

 Control Group Mean               239.1           238.10            237.45              246.75         243.96         246.09
 Control Group SD                 51.18            48.04            45.42               52.93          48.68          46.59
 Number of Clusters                836              836              836                  780            781           781
 Observations                     19895           19873             19888                5098           5102           5083
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student
 attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. Low Income is a dummy variable
 that takes value one if the student’s family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos, the minimum wage in such
 country. High Income is a dummy that takes value one if Low Income= 0. The effects shown are in units of the control group
 standard deviation (SD). 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets.RW step down p-values allowing for all
 6 hypotheses from the two sided tests are shown in parenthesis. All regressions include cohort fixed effects. Clustering at the
 school level. Schools that implemented CLASS are excluded from the 2012 sample.


teaching intervention holds real promise. However, the effects on the lower income children are much smaller

and when we break them down by gender, the only significant effect is confined to Reading and to boys only.

Thus the program, improved quality of education overall and improved the performance of boys and girls by

the same amount, but did not reduce the disparities between socioeconomic groups. Thus, we need further

understanding on how to improve the performance of children from lower SES backgrounds. Noting that lower

parental income is associated with lower baseline achievement (as shown in Table 5), the difficulty of intervening

successfully for the most disadvantaged is consistent with much of the literature that shows complementarities

between investments in children and earlier achievement (Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach, 2010; Attanasio,

Meghir, and Nix, 2019b). It is also consistent with the results of other school interventions: for example

Machin, McNally, and Meghir (2010) show that an inner city school intervention in England improved most

the performance of the children with higher achievement, although they also showed that the largest effects

were observed in under resourced schools, which is not surprising. This raises the urgency of how to design

interventions for the most deprived populations and is likely to involve programs specifically targeted to address

developmental deficits of children in deprived populations from a very early age (Attanasio et al., 2014, 2019a;

Gertler et al., 2014).

   In the next section we use the Classroom Assessment Scoring System (CLASS) to see whether the program

affected the way teachers and students interact.




                                                               17
5     The 2012 CLASS experiment and students’ learning

The small and growing literature that studies what characteristics of teachers matter the most for students’

learning has recently started to focus on the quality of within classroom teacher-students interactions (Araujo,

Carneiro, Cruz-Aguayo, and Schady, 2016). In this section we study how important are teacher-students

interactions to improve students’ learning in our context, and whether the PAC had any positive impact on

the quality of teacher-students interactions. As a preview of our results, we find that higher quality of teacher-

students interactions are associated with better test scores of low income students but are not correlated with

test scores of high income students. Moreover, we find that the PAC was not successful in improving teacher-

students interactions by this measure.


5.1     Measuring the quality of teacher-student interactions

The main instrument used in this paper to measure teacher-student interactions is the CLASS in its Upper

Elementary version (fourth to sixth grade, see Pianta, Mashburn, Downer, Hamre, and Justice (2008)). The

CLASS is an instrument used in the Education literature to measure the quality of teacher-student interactions,

as a proxy to teachers’ quality or effectiveness. To produce the CLASS measures, thoroughly trained coders

watch and analyze videotaped classes and assign a score for teacher-students interactions in 11 dimensions.

These dimensions can be grouped into three main domains: Emotional Support, Classroom Organization, and

Instructional Support.22 Coders look for very specific teachers’ behaviors in each dimension, which are well

described in the CLASS protocol that guides coders for their scoring.

    There are several studies that link better student outcomes (both in learning and in the development of

socioemotional skills) with teachers’ scores in CLASS. Araujo, Carneiro, Cruz-Aguayo, and Schady (2016)

present a brief review of this literature for the US and perform a study for Kindergarten children in Ecuador.

However, to the best of our knowledge, no study in the literature analyses the effect of CLASS on test scores

for elementary school kids in developing countries.

    In 2012, fourth grade teachers in participating schools were videotaped for four full lessons (see section 2.3

for details on the random selection of PAC schools to participate in the CLASS intervention). A total of 185

teachers were filmed following the CLASS protocol.23

    The coding was done by 10 coders and a supervisor carefully trained and selected.24 Each of the four school

hours filmed per teacher was divided into 15-minute segments and one segment per hour was coded (for a total
  22 Emotional support includes the dimensions of Positive Climate, Negative Climate, Regard for Student Perspectives, and Teacher

Sensitivity; Classroom Organization includes the dimensions of Effective Behavior Management, Instructional Learning Formats,
and Productivity; and Instructional Climate includes the dimensions of Language Modeling, Concept Development, Analysis and
Inquiry, and Quality of Feedback.
  23 The fieldwork and coding according to CLASS was coordinated and implemented by a team of the Centro de Politicas Compara-

das de Educacion from the Universidad Diego Portales, which had already applied CLASS for the evaluation of another program
in Chile, Un buen Comienzo (Yoshikawa, et al. 2013).
  24 The coders had to take a two-day training course provided by a Teachstone certified trainer, who also had the experience of

applying CLASS to the Chilean context. After the course, coders took a four-hour online test (developed by Teachstone), that asks
the candidate to watch and code five segments of model videos. The candidate is approved when achieving a reliability rate of at
least 80% in all videos and at least in two of the videos the same reliability in all CLASS dimensions. Only the candidates that
passed the test were certified to be CLASS coders in this evaluation. In addition, before starting the coding of the videos for the
PAC evaluation, coders participated in another training course to adapt their knowledge of CLASS to the Chilean context. The
training included watching and coding videos of Chilean teachers, which were previously coded by experienced CLASS coders.



                                                                18
of 760 segments) in each of the CLASS dimensions. Following the CLASS protocol, the score on each dimension

was based on a 1 to 7 scale (”low” for scores 1-2, “medium” for scores 3-5, and “high” for scores 6-7). The final

CLASS scores for each domain consisted of the average across dimensions within the corresponding domain.

For the coding, videos were randomly assigned to the 10 certified coders. The coding process lasted five weeks.

During the first week of coding, 100% of the videos were double coded. The double-coding was expected to be

gradually reduced in the following weeks if reliability rates remained above 80%.25 Overall, 52% of the videos

were double coded, with an average reliability rate of 84.2%.26 This inter-coder reliability is comparable to

that found in other studies. For example, Araujo, Carneiro, Cruz-Aguayo, and Schady (2016), Brown, Jones,

LaRusso, and Aber (2010) report an inter-coder reliability rate of 83% for the 12% of the classroom observations

which were double-coded.27


5.2     CLASS, Teacher Performance and program effects


             Table 8: Association between CLASS and SIMCE 2012, by school socio economic status

                                                          Low SES                                    Medium SES
                                                (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)        (6)
                                            Reading          Math         Science       Reading          Math      Science
 CLASS first principal component               .085           .085           .083          .029           .011       .029
                                            [.06;.11]      [.06;.11]      [.06;.11]     [-.03;.08]     [-.09;.09] [-.05;.09]
                                              (.01)          (.01)          (.01)          (.53)          (.83)      (.60)

 SIMCE Score Mean                            247.934       241.684        236.145        260.803         252.08       250.099
 SIMCE Score SD                               51.984        48.961         47.098         48.858         45.899        44.11
 Number of Clusters                             114          114             114            22             22            22
 Observations                                  3608          3572           3582           720            713           713
 Notes: SES variables refer to the school Socio Economic Status as described in section 4. The effects shown are in units of the
 corresponding SIMCE test score standard deviation (SD). 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. All
 outcomes in this table are tested jointly to control for the Familywise Error Rate using the Romano-Wolf step down method.
 Step down p-values from the two sided test are shown in parenthesis. Clustering at the school level.



   In Tables 8 and 9 we report the association between CLASS and SIMCE scores for the 2012 cohort by school

SES and in Table 9 by gender and student family icome. The effects reported are in SD units of the SIMCE

score for the corresponding demographic group and subject.

   Table 8 shows that performance in CLASS is significantly and positively associated with the test scores of

students in the most disadvantage schools. Consistently, the most striking result from table 9 is the association

between better student-teacher interactions (reflected in a higher CLASS score) and the performance of low

income students. In effect, one additional standard deviation in the principal component of CLASS scores

is associated with a higher SIMCE test score for low income students of between 0.15 and 0.20 of SD units.

For higher income students, effects are smaller and in some cases insignificant. These results are potentially

important and consistent with the finding that teachers have a large causal impact on student performance (see
 25 Coding  is considered reliable if the difference between the two coders’ score is less than 2 points for each CLASS dimension.
 26 When   a coding was not considered not reliable, a supervisor did a third coding, which was the final score attributed to that
teacher.
  27 Araujo, Carneiro, Cruz-Aguayo, and Schady (2016) get a higher inter-coder reliability rate (93%) double-coding 100% of the

videos.



                                                               19
           Table 9: Association between CLASS and SIMCE 2012, by students’ gender and income

                                                                           Girls
                                                      Low Income                          High Income
                                               (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
                                           Reading        Math     Science     Reading        Math      Science
 CLASS first principal component              .158         .161       .143        .159         .028        .066
                                           [.09; .24]   [ .09;.24] [.06;.21]   [.08;.23 ]   [-.08;.13] [ -.02;.15]
                                              (.01)        (.01)     (.01)        (.01)        (.69)      (.33)

 SIMCE Score Mean                           253.862        239.124       234.441     265.009            252.042      246.767
 SIMCE Score SD                              49.475         47.855        44.145      47.939             49.585       45.668
 Number of Clusters                            128           128            128        102                102          102
 Observations                                 1415           1404          1403        297                296          298
                                                                                 Boys
                                                        Low Income                                   High Income
                                               (7)            (8)        (9)               (10)          (11)       (12)
                                           Reading          Math      Science           Reading         Math      Science
 CLASS first principal component              .187           .201       .194               .126          .105       .198
                                           [ .13;.24]     [ .13;.26] [ .13;.26]        [ .02;.24 ]      [0;.22]  [ .09;.33]
                                              (.01)          (.01)      (.01)              (.2)          (.33)      (.02)

 SIMCE Score Mean                           244.621        245.274       239.259        254.037         252.437      250.899
 SIMCE Score SD                              53.15          48.746       49.304         50.999           49.422      46.764
 Number of Clusters                           129            129           129            109             109          109
 Observations                                1472            1461         1461            365             360          361
 Notes: Low Income is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student’s family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean
 pesos, the minimum wage in such country. High Income is a dummy that takes value one if Low Income= 0. The effects shown
 are in units of the corresponding SIMCE test score standard deviation (SD). 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown
 in brackets. All outcomes in this table are tested jointly to control for the Familywise Error Rate using the Romano-Wolf step
 down method. Step down p-values from the two sided test are shown in parenthesis. Clustering at the school level.


Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005)). Taken at face value the results imply that moving a lower income student

from a bottom 2% of teachers to the top 2% can improve outcomes of low income students by close to one

standard deviation. There is no causality implied or presumed by these results, which may be entirely due to

sorting of better low-income students to better teachers (say because of more pro-active parents). However, it

does pose an interesting question as to whether improving interactions could actually lead to better performance

for low income students. We thus examine whether the CLASS score was affected by the program.



The impact of PAC on CLASS Table 10 shows the result of regressing CLASS scores on treatment

allocation and covariates. The results consistently suggest that the program has no significant effect on teacher-

classroom interactions in 2012. Given that CLASS is ranked based on interactions that may somehow be

discouraged by the PAC intervention, it may well be that CLASS is not a particularly good way of understanding

the mechanisms through which the PAC operated. It may also be that the improvements we observed relate to

practices not captured by CLASS, namely the more structured approach to lesson planning and the monitoring

of students. On the other hand the loss in sample size has meant that these estimates are not as precise as we

would desire. However, the association of CLASS scores with better performance of low income students suggests

that improving outcomes for deprived populations should focus more on how teachers interact with low income

students, as well as improving practices tested with this intervention. It is important to remember that, after

all, the scripted instruction intervention was successful; moreover, while the impacts are concentrated among


                                                              20
                                  Table 10: Impact of PAC on CLASS, classroom level

                                                Dependent variable: CLASS first principal component
                                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)                               (4)
                                        OLS                   IV                  OLS                                IV
 Randomized into PAC                   -0.5274                                   -0.2361
                                    [-1.128;.093]                             [-1.318;.107]

 Implemented PAC                                                -0.6153                                            -0.2697
                                                             [-.878;.338]                                        [-.992;.38]

 Covariates                              No                       No                       Yes                       Yes
 Observations                            185                      185                      184                       184
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the school
 was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. Implemented PAC is a dummy variable that takes value
 one if the school participated in PAC and zero otherwise. In columns (2) and (4) we instrument actual participation in PAC
 with the random assignment to PAC. Covariates include an indicator of the income group the classroom belongs to, the type of
 administration of the school (private or public), average SIMCE scores of the school for the period 2005-2009, general experience
 of the teacher and the school principal, and tenure of the teacher and the principal in the school. 95% bootstrapped confidence
 intervals are shown in brackets. Clustering at the School level.


the relatively better off, the population we are studying is already lower-income and attending underperforming

schools.



6     Discussion and Conclusions

Improving quality of education has proved to be a major policy challenge. While the quality of teachers seems

to be of central importance the policy question remains, particularly because it is not clear what constitutes

a priori a good teacher. One possibility is to consider more structured teaching methods, that define carefully

what teachers are supposed to do and monitor the progress of students throughout the year. This is the idea

underlying PAC (Plan Apoyo Compartido) the program we are analyzing in this paper and which was launched

in 2011 in Chile. Through standardized teaching material (class preparation) and through the support of internal

and external pedagogic teams, the program aimed at reducing the gap, as measured by the standardized test

SIMCE, between the poorest student population and the national average. The program was designed with a

gradual implementation, which implied that only half of eligible schools could be offered the program. These

were selected randomly, which forms the basis of our evaluation.

    The results for the first 2011 cohort of implementation were encouraging implying overall improvements in

Reading. In the second year of the program, the effects increase for all subjects and become significant also

for Math and Science. When we break down the impacts by school socioeconomic status (SES) we find that

the positive effects of the program are concentrated among children in schools with higher SES. Moreover,

heterogeneous effects by students’ gender and family income reveal positive and significant effects particularly

for students originating from relatively higher income families. Importantly the effects are the same for boys

and girls. Overall, it seems that the program can improve outcomes, but it mainly improves results for the

relatively better off.28

    In order to begin understanding what lies behind these results we used the CLASS system to record classroom
 28 PAC    was discontinued in 2014 by the entering administration of the Ministry of Education.



                                                                21
sessions and score teacher-student interactions. CLASS is a well-documented instrument in the education

literature that uses a very rigorous protocol to score the ways students and teachers interact along various

dimensions (class organization, instructional support and emotional support, measured in 11 different sub-

dimensions). We find that CLASS scores are correlated with SIMCE results: a better CLASS score is associated

with better performing students, particularly among those from lower income backgrounds. No causality should

of course be attributed since it may well be the case that teachers interact better when they are interacting with

better performing students. We then examine whether the program shifted the CLASS score, by improving

teacher-student interactions and we find no effect at all. However, since CLASS altered the performance of the

control group it is hard to interpret this result: in other words the group that was observed via CLASS is not

comparable to the one that was not.

   Despite the overall success of the program, the urgent question of how to improve outcomes of children

from the most deprived backgrounds remains. As much research seems to show the answer may lie in Early

Childhood Development Programs, which attempt to ensure that children from the most deprived backgrounds

have better cognitive development and access to improved opportunities from the earliest possible age, making

them potentially better placed to benefit from schooling.




                                                       22
References

F. Albornoz, M. V. Anauati, M. Furman, M. Luzuriaga, M. E. Podestá, and I. Taylor. Training to teach science:

  experimental evidence from Argentina. Discussion Papers 2017-8, University of Nottingham, CREDIT, 2017.

M. C. Araujo, P. Carneiro, Y. Cruz-Aguayo, and N. Schady. A helping hand? Teacher quality and learning

  outcomes in kindergarten. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(3):1415–1453, 2016.

O. Attanasio, C. Fernandez, E. Fitzsimons, S. Grantham-McGregor, C. Meghir, and M. Rubio-Codina. Using the

  infrastructure of a conditional cash transfer programme to deliver a scalable integrated early child development

  programme in Colombia: a cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ - British Medical Journal, 349:g5785,

  2014.

O. Attanasio, S. Cattan, E. Fitzsimmons, C. Meghir, and M. R. Codina. Estimating the production function

  for human capital: Results from a randomized controlled trial in colombia. American Economic Review,

  forthcoming, 2019a.

O. Attanasio, C. Meghir, and E. Nix. Investments in children and the development of cognition and health in

  india. NBER Working Paper No. 21740, 2019b.

M. Bassi, M. Mateo Dı́az, R. L. Blumberg, and A. Reynoso. Failing to notice? Uneven teachers’ attention to

  boys and girls in the classroom. IZA Journal of Labor Economics, 7(1):9, Nov 2018.

J. L. Brown, S. M. Jones, M. D. LaRusso, and J. L. Aber. Improving classroom quality: teacher influences and

  experimental impacts of the 4rs program. Journal of Educational Psychology, 102(1):153, 2010.

R. Chetty, J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff. Measuring the impacts of teachers I: evaluating bias in teacher

  value-added estimates. American Economic Review, 104(9):2593–2632, 2014.

F. Cunha, J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach. Estimating the technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill

  formation. Econometrica, 78(3):883–931, 2010. doi: 10.3982/ECTA6551.

E. Duflo, R. Hanna, and S. P. Ryan. Incentives work: Getting teachers to come to school. American Economic

  Review, 102(4):1241–78, June 2012.

A. J. Ganimian and R. J. Murnane. Improving educational outcomes in developing countries: Lessons from

  rigorous impact evaluations. Working Paper 20284, National Bureau of Economic Research, July 2014.

P. Gertler, J. Heckman, R. Pinto, A. Zanolini, C. Vermeerch, S. Walker, S. Chang, and S. Grantham-McGregor.

  Labor market returns to an early childhood stimulation intervention in Jamaica. Science, 344:998–1001, May

  2014.

F. He, L. L. Linden, and M. MacLeod. A better way to teach children to read? Evidence from a randomized

  controlled trial. Unpublished manuscript. New York, NY: Columbia University, 2009.



                                                       23
G. Imbens and J. Angrist. Identification and estimation of local average treatment effects. Econometrica, 62

  (2):467–475, 1994.

P. A. Kirschner, J. Sweller, and R. E. Clark. Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: an

  analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching.

  Educational Psychologist, 41(2):75–86, 2006.

H. A. Landsberger. Hawthorne revisited. Distribution Center, NYS School of Industrial and Labor Relations,

  Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14850, 1958.

S. D. Levitt and J. A. List. Was there really a hawthorne effect at the hawthorne plant? An analysis of the

  original illumination experiments. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1):224–38, January

  2011.

S. Machin, S. McNally, and C. Meghir. Resources and standards in urban schools. Journal of Human Capital,

  4(4):365–393, 2010. doi: 10.1086/658634.

OECD. The ABC of gender equality in education: aptitude, behaviour, confidence. Paris, France: OECD

  Publishing, 2015.

R. C. Pianta, A. J. Mashburn, J. T. Downer, B. K. Hamre, and L. Justice. Effects of web mediated professional

  development resources on teacher child interactions in pre kindergarten classrooms. Early Childhood Research

  Quarterly, 23(4):431–451, 2008.

S. G. Rivkin, E. A. Hanushek, and J. F. Kain. Teachers, schools, and academic achievement. Econometrica, 73

  (2):417–458, 2005.

J. P. Romano and M. Wolf. Stepwise multiple testing as formalized data snooping. Econometrica, 73(4):

  1237–1282, 2005.

R. E. Slavin, C. Lake, B. Chambers, A. Cheung, and S. Davis. Effective reading programs for the elementary

  grades: a best-evidence synthesis. Review of Educational Research, 79(4):1397–1466, 2009.




                                                      24
Appendix A                   Evidence on implementation of PAC

         Table A1: Correlation between participation in PAC and PAC dimensions, classroom level analysis

                                  (1)                      (2)                     (3)                      (4)               (5)
                            Class structure        Reflective thinking      Norms and schedule          Evaluation      Use of manual
 Implemented PAC                0.0129                   0.0369                 0.0582∗∗                  0.0279          0.2300∗∗∗
                               (0.0238)                 (0.0291)                (0.0225)                 (0.0281)          (0.0733)

 Constant                       0.4589∗∗∗              0.5397∗∗∗                    0.7390∗∗∗            0.8730∗∗∗          0.1619∗∗∗
                                 (0.0171)               (0.0175)                     (0.0153)             (0.0200)           (0.0354)
 Observations                       179                    179                         179                  179                179
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Implemented PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the school
 participated in PAC and zero otherwise. ∗∗ Variable significant at the 5% level. ∗∗∗ Variable significant at the 1% level. Clustering
 at the School level.



          Table A2: Correlation between participation in PAC and PAC components, school level analysis

                                          (1)         (2)         (3)                      (4)               (5)
                                         Annual planning performed by                      Support to teachers
                                                                                     ELE classroom       Feedback
                                      PAC team        ELE team          Teachers      observations      to teachers
             Implemented PAC          0.2546∗∗∗        0.1888∗∗         -0.1830∗∗      1.1593∗∗∗         1.1176∗∗∗
                                       (0.0641)        (0.0858)          (0.0810)       (0.3991)          (0.3826)

             Constant                   0.0385∗        0.3974∗∗∗        0.7692∗∗∗       3.3924∗∗∗            3.6582∗∗∗
                                        (0.0219)        (0.0558)         (0.0481)        (0.2442)             (0.2439)
             Observations                  136             136              136             137                 137
             Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. ELE refers to the Education Leadership Team (consisting
             of the school principal, the head of the technical and pedagogic office of the school, and two distinguished
             teachers, as described in section 2). Implemented PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the
             school participated in PAC and zero otherwise. ∗ Variable significant at the 10% level. ∗∗ Variable significant
             at the 5% level. ∗∗∗ Variable significant at the 1% level. Robust standard errors in parenthesis.




Appendix B                   Summary Statistics

The names of columns indicate the set of students over which summary statistics are calculated.

   Columns labeled Reading, Math, and Science test takers indicate the pool of students that took each of the

corresponding subject tests. This corresponds to the post attrition sample, since for each test, there is a small

set of students that did not take the test (we discuss the section 2.5).

   Sub-columns labeled PAC=0 and PAC=1 refer to treatment status. PAC is a dummy variable that takes

value one if the student goes to a school that was invited to participate in the program through the randomiza-

tion, and zero otherwise. In what follows, we refer to the set of students such that PAC=0 as the control group

and to the set of students such that PAC=1 as the treatment group.

   In turn, the table is divided in three panels, 2011, 2012-excluding CLASS sample, and 2012, indicating the

fourth grade cohorts considered in this paper.

   The names of rows indicate the variable for which we show summary statistics.

   SIMCE scores (Reading, Math, and Science) refer to the grade obtained by students in the SIMCE subject

tests.

                                                                   25
   Baseline characteristics indicate characteristics of the students that do not change because of treatment.

They include student demographic characteristics and education of parents. Student demographics are Female

(a dummy variable that takes value one if the student is a female and zero otherwise), Low income (a dummy

variable that takes value one if the student’s family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos, or

around 600 dollars at that time),29 Nuclear, Extended, and Other family (three dummies that indicate the

family structure of the student), and Nbr years failed (a count variable that captures the number of primary

school years the student had to retake previous to the forth grade). Mother’s and father’s education refer to

the highest education level reached by the student’s mother and father. These include No education, Incomplete

primary, Primary, Incomplete high school, High school, Incomplete college, and college.




  29 SIMCE includes a 1 to 9 scale for the income reported by the parents in the questionnaire that they complete. We consider

“low-income” those reporting in categories 1 to 4. It is important to note, tough, that students in our sample belong mainly to
low-middle income families in Chile.


                                                              26
                                                         Table A3: Summary statistics - post attrition samples

                                          Reading test takers                           Math test takers                         Science test takers
                                      PAC=0                PAC=1                  PAC=0                PAC=1                 PAC=0                PAC=1
                                 Obs. Mean SD       Obs. Mean         SD     Obs. Mean SD        Obs. Mean       SD     Obs. Mean SD        Obs. Mean       SD
                                                                             Panel A: 2011
     SIMCE scores:
     Reading                     6886   245    50     23850   248      50
     Math                                                                    6903   236    47     23828   238    48
     Science                                                                                                            6911   237    44     23854   238    44
     Baseline characteristics:
     Students demographics
     Female                      6554   .472   .499   22861   .484      .5   6653   .473   .499   23152   .484     .5   6660   .473   .499   23162   .484   .5
     Low income                  6219   .841   .366   21470   .813     .39   6235   .841   .366   21490   .813    .39   6244   .841   .366   21502   .813   .39
     Nuclear family              6886   .613   .487   23850   .617    .486   6903   .613   .487   23828   .619   .486   6911   .613   .487   23854   .617   .486
     Extended family             6886   .244    .43   23850   .239    .426   6903   .244    .43   23828   .239   .426   6911   .244    .43   23854   .239   .427
     Other family                6886   .143    .35   23850   .144    .352   6903   .143    .35   23828   .143    .35   6911   .143    .35   23854   .143   .35
     Nbr years failed            6187   .238   .527   21353   .232    .531   6202   .239   .528   21367   .232   .531   6211   .239   .528   21387   .232   .531
     Mother’s education
     No education                6201   .007   .086   21352   .006    .078   6215   .007   .086   21374   .006   .077   6225   .008   .087   21387   .006   .078
27




     Inc. primary                6201   .179   .383   21352   .174    .379   6215   .178   .383   21374   .174   .379   6225   .178   .383   21387   .174   .379
     Primary                     6201    .17   .375   21352   .164     .37   6215    .17   .375   21374   .164    .37   6225   .169   .375   21387   .164   .37
     Inc. high school            6201   .235   .424   21352   .218    .413   6215   .235   .424   21374   .218   .413   6225   .236   .425   21387   .219   .413
     High school                 6201   .324   .468   21352   .341    .474   6215   .324   .468   21374   .341   .474   6225   .324   .468   21387   .341   .474
     Inc. college                6201   .034   .182   21352   .038    .191   6215   .034   .182   21374   .038   .191   6225   .034   .181   21387   .037   .19
     College                     6201   .051    .22   21352   .059    .235   6215   .051    .22   21374   .059   .235   6225   .051    .22   21387   .059   .235
     Father’s education
     No education                5992   .008   .089   20577   .008    .089 6006    .008   .09 20597  .008        .089   6013   .008   .089   20611   .008   .09
     Inc. primary                5992    .17   .376   20577   .158    .364 6006     .17  .376 20597  .157        .364   6013    .17   .376   20611   .157   .364
     Inc. primary                5992    .16   .366   20577   .162    .368 6006     .16  .367 20597  .161        .368   6013    .16   .366   20611   .162   .368
     Inc. high school            5992   .248   .432   20577    .23    .421 6006    .248  .432 20597   .23        .421   6013   .247   .431   20611    .23   .421
     High school                 5992   .329    .47   20577   .345    .475 6006    .328  .469 20597  .344        .475   6013   .328    .47   20611   .344   .475
     Inc. college                5992   .036   .187   20577   .043    .202 6006    .036  .187 20597  .043        .203   6013   .036   .187   20611   .043   .203
     College                     5992    .05   .217   20577   .056    .229 6006     .05  .219 20597  .056         .23   6013    .05   .218   20611   .056   .229
                                                              Panel   B: 2012-excluding CLASS sample
     SIMCE scores:
     Reading                     4685   242    51     20772   249      52
     Math                                                                    4658   237    47     20727   242    49
     Science                                                                                                            4654   233    46     20685   237    46
     Baseline characteristics:
                                                      Table A3: Summary statistics - post attrition samples (continued)

                                          Reading test takers                           Math test takers                             Science test takers
                                      PAC=0                PAC=1                   PAC=0               PAC=1                     PAC=0                PAC=1
                                 Obs. Mean SD       Obs. Mean           SD    Obs. Mean SD       Obs. Mean           SD     Obs. Mean SD        Obs. Mean         SD
     Students demographics
     Female                      4412   .481    .5     20342   .481     .5    4293    .484     .5    19900   .483     .5    4290   .483     .5    19848   .482    .5
     Low income                  3946   .792   .406    18045   .779    .415   3960    .793    .405   18119   .779    .415   3954   .793    .405   18067    .78    .415
     Nuclear family              4685   .563   .496    20772   .572    .495   4658    .569    .495   20727   .576    .494   4654   .569    .495   20685   .576    .494
     Extended family             4685   .234   .423    20772    .25    .433   4658    .237    .425   20727   .252    .434   4654    .236   .425   20685   .252    .434
     Other family                4685   .203   .402    20772   .177    .382   4658    .195    .396   20727   .172    .377   4654   .195    .396   20685   .172    .378
     Nbr years failed            3947   1.25   .592    18055   1.217   .561   3962    1.253   .595   18129   1.218   .561   3956   1.251   .593   18076   1.218   .56
     Mother’s education
     No education                3836   .007    .08    17474    .006   .075   3852    .007    .082   17554   .006    .075   3847   .006     .08   17505   .006    .075
     Inc. primary                3836   .178   .383    17474    .163    .37   3852    .179    .384   17554   .164     .37   3847   .179    .383   17505   .163    .369
     Primary                     3836   .173   .379    17474    .169   .374   3852    .175     .38   17554   .168    .374   3847   .174    .379   17505   .169    .375
     Inc. high school            3836   .217   .412    17474    .212   .408   3852    .217    .412   17554   .211    .408   3847   .217    .412   17505   .211    .408
     High school                 3836   .333   .471    17474    .351   .477   3852    .331    .471   17554    .35    .477   3847   .332    .471   17505    .35    .477
     Inc. college                3836   .038   .191    17474     .04   .197   3852    .038    .192   17554    .04    .197   3847   .038    .192   17505    .04    .196
     College                     3836   .054   .225    17474     .06   .237   3852    .054    .226   17554    .06    .238   3847   .054    .225   17505   .061    .239
28




     Father’s education
     No education                3675    .01   .097    16720    .007   .083   3686    .009  .097     16804   .007    .083   3682    .01    .097   16756   .007    .083
     Inc. primary                3675   .155   .362    16720    .158   .364   3686    .155  .362     16804   .158    .364   3682   .155    .362   16756   .157    .364
     Primary                     3675   .176   .381    16720    .162   .368   3686    .176  .381     16804   .162    .369   3682   .174    .379   16756   .162    .369
     Inc. high school            3675   .221   .415    16720    .218   .413   3686    .221  .415     16804   .218    .413   3682   .221    .415   16756   .219    .414
     High school                 3675   .351   .477    16720    .352   .478   3686     .35  .477     16804   .351    .477   3682   .351    .477   16756    .35    .477
     Inc. college                3675   .037   .189    16720    .044   .206   3686    .037  .189     16804   .045    .206   3682   .037    .189   16756   .045    .207
     College                     3675   .051    .22    16720     .06   .237   3686    .051  .221     16804   .059    .236   3682   .051     .22   16756    .06    .237
                                                                              Panel   C: 2012
     SIMCE scores:
     Reading                     7141   246    51      23353    248     52
     Math                                                                     7095    239     47     23273   242     49
     Social Science                                                                                                         7105   235     47     23226   237     46
     Baseline characteristics:
     Students demographics
     Female                      6773   .481    .5     22810    .481    .5    6572    .483     .5    22303   .482      .5   6580   .483     .5    22245   .482    .5
     Low income                  6048    .8     .4     20229    .783   .412   6065    .801    .399   20292   .783    .412   6063   .801    .399   20236   .783    .412
     Nuclear family              7141   .566   .496    23353    .572   .495   7095    .572    .495   23273   .576    .494   7105   .571    .495   23226   .575    .494
     Extended family             7141   .235   .424    23353    .248   .432   7095    .237    .425   23273    .25    .433   7105   .236    .425   23226   .249    .433
     Other family                7141    .2     .4     23353     .18   .385   7095    .191    .393   23273   .175     .38   7105   .193    .395   23226   .175    .38
                                               Table A3: Summary statistics - post attrition samples (continued)

                                   Reading test takers                           Math test takers                             Science test takers
                               PAC=0                PAC=1                   PAC=0               PAC=1                    PAC=0                 PAC=1
                          Obs. Mean SD       Obs. Mean           SD    Obs. Mean SD       Obs. Mean           SD    Obs. Mean SD         Obs. Mean      SD
     Nbr years failed     6050 1.243 .588 20242 1.219           .565   6068 1.245 .593 20305      1.22       .564   6066 1.243 .592 20248 1.219         .564
     Mother’s education
     No education         5873   .006   .076    19580    .006   .075   5894    .006   .077   19648    .006   .075   5891   .006   .076   19594   .006   .075
     Inc. primary         5873   .178   .383    19580    .166   .372   5894     .18   .384   19648    .167   .373   5891   .179   .384   19594   .166   .372
     Primary              5873   .173   .378    19580    .169   .375   5894    .173   .378   19648    .169   .375   5891   .172   .378   19594    .17   .376
     Inc. high school     5873   .214    .41    19580    .213   .409   5894    .214    .41   19648    .213    .41   5891   .214    .41   19594   .213   .409
     High school          5873   .338   .473    19580    .348   .476   5894    .336   .472   19648    .348   .476   5891   .337   .473   19594   .348   .476
     Inc. college         5873   .036   .187    19580    .039   .193   5894    .036   .187   19648    .039   .193   5891   .036   .187   19594   .039   .192
     College              5873   .055   .228    19580    .058   .235   5894    .055   .228   19648    .059   .235   5891   .055   .228   19594   .059   .236
     Father’s education
     No education         5630   .009   .092    18745    .007   .085   5647    .009   .092   18820    .007   .085   5644   .009   .092   18768   .007   .085
     Inc. primary         5630   .153    .36    18745    .158   .365   5647    .153    .36   18820    .158   .365   5644   .154   .361   18768   .158   .364
     Inc. primary         5630   .172   .377    18745    .165   .371   5647    .172   .377   18820    .165   .371   5644    .17   .376   18768   .165   .372
     Inc. high school     5630   .222   .416    18745    .217   .412   5647    .222   .416   18820    .217   .412   5644   .222   .416   18768   .218   .413
     High school          5630   .357   .479    18745    .351   .477   5647    .356   .479   18820     .35   .477   5644   .357   .479   18768    .35   .477
29




     Inc. college         5630   .035   .183    18745    .043   .203   5647    .035   .184   18820    .043   .204   5644   .035   .184   18768   .043   .204
     College              5630   .054   .225    18745    .058   .234   5647    .054   .226   18820    .058   .234   5644   .054   .225   18768   .059   .235
                                  Table A4: Randomization check, school level

                                           PAC=1                             PAC=0                   Diff. in means
                                  Obs       Mean        SD       Obs          Mean         SD        Stat.     p-val
Low SES                           651       .158       .365       197         .162         .37       -.004     .888
Medium-Low SES                    651       .631       .483       197         .675         .47       -.044     .254
Medium SES                        651        .21       .408       197         .162         .37       .048      .119
Public                            648       .645       .479       194          .67        .471       -.025     .518
Avg SIMCE 2005-2009               651      228.37    11.418       197        227.406     11.573       .964     .304
Avg SIMCE Reading 2010            648      249.552 18.435         195        248.872     17.933       .681     .644
Avg SIMCE Math 2010               648      227.755 19.303         195        226.174     17.069       1.58     .272
                                            Joint F-test p-value: 0.657
Notes: PAC=1 and PAC=0 denote the treatment and control groups, respectively. SES variables refer to the school Socio
Economic Status as described in section 4; Public is a dummy variable that takes value 1 if the school depends upon the
municipality; Avg. SIMCE refers to the average score in the SIMCE tests.




                                   Table A5: Randomization check, student level

                                                                  Post attrition samples
                             Pre attrition sample
                                               Reading test takers Math test takers Science test takers
                          Stat.        p-val   Stat.        p-val   Stat.      p-val    Stat.        p-val
                                             Panel A: 2011
Balancing of attrition rates and baseline characteristics (E(PAC=1) - E(PAC=0))
Proportion of attritors
Reading                   -.007        .258     n.a.         n.a.    n.a.       n.a.     n.a.         n.a.
Math                       .001         .67     n.a.         n.a.    n.a.       n.a.     n.a.         n.a.
Science                    .001        .784     n.a.         n.a.    n.a.       n.a.     n.a.         n.a.
Baseline characteristics:
Students demographics
Female                     .003        .758     .004        .688     .003      .709      .003        .728
Low income                 -.02        .048    -.019        .052    -.019      .052     -.019        .052
Nuclear family             .012        .324      .01        .383     .013      .269      .011        .355
Extended family           -.009        .284    -.012        .182     -.01      .241     -.009        .273
Other family              -.003        .786     .001         .88    -.003      .737     -.002        .851
Nbr years failed           -.01        .497    -.009        .539     -.01      .473     -.011        .464
Mother’s education
No education              -.001        .578    -.001        .582    -.001      .575     -.001        .553
Inc. primary               .005        .567     .006        .518     .005      .604      .005        .596
Primary                   -.004        .597    -.004        .559    -.004      .559     -.004        .597
Inc. high school          -.022        .007    -.022        .006    -.022      .008     -.022        .007
High school                .017        .131     .017        .127     .018       .12      .017        .129
Inc. college                 0         .923       0         .922       0       .891      .001        .858
College                    .004        .363     .004        .375     .004      .372      .004        .358
Father’s education
No education              -.001        .661    -.001        .774    -.001      .582     -.001        .694
Inc. primary              -.001         .92       0         .973    -.001      .901     -.001        .887
Inc. primary               .006        .446     .006        .437     .006      .462      .007        .414
Inc. high school           -.02        .015     -.02        .012    -.021      .012      -.02        .016
High school                .009        .372     .009         .38     .011      .307      .009        .376
Inc. college               .005        .186     .005        .237     .005      .188      .005         .19
College                    .001        .854     .001        .831     .001      .865      .001        .904
Test of joint significance of baseline characteristics: F-statistic (p-val)
                               1.18 (0.277)         1.18 (0.272)       1.17 (0.282)          1.15 (0.305)
                                 Panel B: 2012-excluding CLASS sample
Balancing of attrition rates and baseline characteristics (E(PAC=1) - E(PAC=0))
Proportion of attritors
Reading                    -.01        .309     n.a.         n.a.    n.a.       n.a.     n.a.         n.a.
Math                      -.014        .172     n.a.         n.a.    n.a.       n.a.     n.a.         n.a.
Science                   -.013        .201     n.a.         n.a.    n.a.       n.a.     n.a.         n.a.

                                                          30
                        Table A5: Randomization check, student level (continued)

                                                                      Post attrition samples
                         Pre attrition sample
                                                Reading test takers     Math test takers Science test takers
                          Stat.        p-val    Stat.     p-val         Stat.      p-val    Stat.   p-val
Baseline characteristics:
Students demographics
Female                    -.006        .565   -.005        .603     -.01       .371 -.008         .456
Low income                -.001        .935   -.002        .854    -.003       .831 -.003         .796
Nuclear family             .016        .298    .013        .424      .01       .531   .01         .519
Extended family            .006        .567    .004        .703     .005       .694  .004          .75
Other family              -.022        .215   -.017        .315    -.014       .394 -.014         .414
Nbr years failed          -.036        .076   -.032        .102    -.034       .082 -.032         .098
Mother’s education
No education                 0         .908   -.001        .638    -.001       .604 -.001          .71
Inc. primary              -.006        .561   -.008        .453    -.009       .434 -.008          .45
Primary                   -.002        .807      0         .995    -.002       .837    0          .999
Inc. high school          -.004        .671   -.005        .648    -.005       .647 -.006         .584
High school                .012        .347    .011        .387     .014       .296  .012         .372
Inc. college              -.003        .494   -.002        .699    -.002       .706 -.002         .665
College                    .004        .478    .004        .498     .004       .516  .005         .424
Father’s education
No education              -.003        .155   -.003        .173    -.003       .181 -.003         .184
Inc. primary               .011        .282    .008        .427     .008       .416  .007          .49
Inc. primary              -.014        .146   -.017        .076    -.017       .083 -.015         .125
Inc. high school          -.005        .636   -.001        .923    -.001       .919    0          .965
High school                .001        .927    .001        .912     .002       .898    0          .989
Inc. college               .005        .272    .005        .226     .005       .267  .005         .265
College                    .005         .36    .006        .288     .006        .31  .006          .29
Test of joint significance of baseline characteristics: F-statistic (p-val)
                               0.98 (0.483)        0.97 (0.496)        0.94 (0.523)       0.9 (0.575)
                                             Panel C: 2012
Balancing of attrition rates and baseline characteristics (E(PAC=1) - E(PAC=0))
Proportion of attritors
Reading                    -.01        .213    n.a.        n.a.     n.a.       n.a.  n.a.         n.a.
Math                      -.012        .125    n.a.        n.a.     n.a.       n.a.  n.a.         n.a.
Science                    -.01        .231    n.a.        n.a.     n.a.       n.a.  n.a.         n.a.
Baseline characteristics:
Students demographics
Female                    -.001        .909      0         .987    -.003       .771 -.002         .827
Low income                -.005        .652   -.006        .552    -.007       .492 -.007         .515
Nuclear family             .014        .299    .011        .405     .009       .515  .009         .498
Extended family            .003        .687    .001        .925     .002        .87  .001         .886
Other family              -.017        .251   -.012         .41     -.01       .481  -.01         .476
Nbr years failed          -.024        .123   -.019        .216    -.022       .155  -.02         .186
Mother’s education
No education               .001        .441      0         .771       0        .798  .001         .695
Inc. primary              -.003        .783   -.004        .655    -.005       .579 -.005         .591
Primary                    .001        .844    .003        .658     .003       .722  .004         .621
Inc. high school          -.001        .934      0         .973       0        .977 -.001          .95
High school                .004        .675    .003          .8     .005        .66  .003         .777
Inc. college              -.004          .3   -.003        .439    -.003       .456 -.003          .44
College                    .001        .922    .001        .908     .001       .897  .001         .783
Father’s education
No education              -.002        .338   -.002        .351    -.002       .327 -.002         .361
Inc. primary               .015        .061    .013        .122     .012       .138  .011         .172
Inc. primary              -.003        .692   -.005        .512    -.005        .55 -.003          .67
Inc. high school          -.006        .447   -.003        .707    -.002       .777 -.002          .81
High school               -.009        .355    -.01        .334     -.01       .339 -.011         .284
Inc. college               .005         .21    .006        .104     .005       .136  .006         .129
College                      0         .945    .001         .83     .001       .886  .001         .836


                                                   31
                              Table A5: Randomization check, student level (continued)

                                                                Post attrition samples
                               Pre attrition sample
                                             Reading test takers Math test takers Science test takers
                         Stat.       p-val    Stat.       p-val    Stat.     p-val    Stat.       p-val
Test of joint significance of baseline characteristics: F-statistic (p-val)
                             1.19 (0.268)         1.17 (0.282)       1.15 (0.300)         1.12 (0.332)
Notes: Pre attrition sample refers to the universe of students in the fourth grade. Post attrition sample refers to the sub sample
of students that took each of the subject SIMCE tests. The statistic (Stat.) reported in the balancing exercises is E(PAC=1) -
E(PAC=0), that is, the difference in means between the treatment and the control groups. The statistic (Stat.) reported in the
test of joint significance exercises is the F-test. Baseline characteristics include student demographics and Mother’s and father’s
education. Student demographics are Female (a dummy variable that takes value one if the student is a female and zero otherwise),
Low income (a dummy variable that takes value one if the student’s family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos,
the minimum wage in such country), Nuclear, Extended, and Other family (three dummies that indicate the family structure of
the student), and Nbr years failed (a count variable that captures the number of primary school years the student had to retake
previous to the forth grade). Mother’s and father’s education refer to the highest education level reached by the student’s mother
and father. These include No education, Incomplete primary, Primary, Incomplete high school, High school, Incomplete college,
and college.




                Table A6: Balancing of pre-treatment characteristics by gender, sample of test takers

                                                    Girls                                                 Boys
                                Reading            Math         Science               Reading            Math             Science
                              Stat. p-val       Stat. p-val Stat. p-val             Stat. p-val       Stat. p-val       Stat. p-val
                                                         Panel A: 2011
Students demographics
Low income                   -.025     .028     -.024    .034        -.024    .03   -.012    .326     -.012     .298    -.012     .313
Nuclear family                .005     .701      .013    .365         .011   .424    .009    .545      .008     .604     .006     .688
Extended family              -.005     .666     -.005    .665        -.003   .799    -.02    .091     -.017     .138    -.017     .142
Other family                 -.001     .958     -.008    .467        -.008   .442    .011    .219       .01     .361     .011     .278
Nbr years failed              .005     .757      .005    .765         .004   .789   -.026    .167     -.029     .136    -.029     .131
Mother’s education
No education                  .002     .384     .002     .326         .002   .377   -.004    .122     -.004      .1     -.004     .106
Inc. primary                 .008      .505     .008     .471        .008    .474     0       .99     -.003     .796    -.003     .812
Primary                      -.007     .498     -.007    .498        -.007   .484     0      .988       0       .987     .001     .889
Inc. high school             -.029     .009     -.028    .013         -.03   .008   -.015    .198     -.014     .202    -.014     .227
High school                   .022     .096      .02     .134        .021    .116   .014     .338     .017      .244     .015     .298
Inc. college                    0       .96       0       .98        .001    .779     0       .98       0       .978    -.001     .912
College                       .005     .488     .004     .512        .005    .487   .004     .495     .004      .474     .004     .462
Father’s education
No education                    0      .902        0     .926     0   .877          -.002    .443     -.003     .315    -.003     .381
Inc. primary                 .001      .941      .001    .927   .001   .96          -.001    .945     -.002     .859    -.002     .858
Inc. primary                 .013      .247      .013    .234   .014  .214          -.001     .96     -.001     .899    -.001     .945
Inc. high school             -.028     .009     -.028    .008 -.029 .008            -.011    .324     -.011     .316    -.009     .418
High school                   .007     .626     .007     .638   .007  .624            .01    .436      .013     .312      .01     .424
Inc. college                 -.001     .853     -.001    .908 -.001 .925             .009    .063      .009      .05     .009     .053
College                       .008     .124     .008     .138   .008  .143          -.005    .528     -.005     .524    -.005     .489
                                                          Panel B: 2012
Students demographics
Low income                     0       .991     -.001    .968          0     .983   -.004    .784     -.005     .774    -.006     .699
Nuclear family                .02      .275      .021     .25         .02    .253   -.005    .784     -.011     .499    -.009     .597
Extended family              -.019     .174     -.021    .149        -.021   .155    .017    .218      .018     .213     .016     .267
Other family                   0        .99        0     .997          0     .977   -.013    .441     -.007     .655    -.007     .641
Nbr years failed             -.037     .084     -.037    .088        -.035   .099    -.03    .233     -.032     .206     -.03     .228
Mother’s education
No education                  .001     .782     .001     .748        .001    .791   -.002    .538     -.002     .517    -.001      .66
Inc. primary                 -.011     .467     -.011    .492         -.01   .541   -.004    .738     -.005     .697    -.004     .732
Primary                      .001      .942     -.001    .917           0     .97   -.008    .511     -.008     .498    -.007     .579
Inc. high school             -.016     .255     -.014    .293        -.017   .225   .002     .906       0       .997      0       .976


                                                                32
         Table A6: Balancing of pre-treatment characteristics by gender, sample of test takers (continued)

                                                   Girls                                                  Boys
                               Reading             Math                 Science         Reading          Math             Science
                             Stat. p-val       Stat. p-val           Stat. p-val     Stat. p-val     Stat. p-val       Stat. p-val
High school                  .021   .213       .022    .204          .021    .221    .007    .642     .01    .527       .007   .664
Inc. college                   0    .976         0     .963            0     .973    -.002    .73    -.002 .728        -.003 .658
College                      .004   .599       .004    .618          .005    .499    .007    .363    .007    .376       .008   .328
Father’s education
No education                 -.004    .253     -.004     .254        -.004   .255    -.002   .518    -.002    .505     -.002    .511
Inc. primary                 .005     .715      .005     .693        .004    .772     .013   .306     .013    .318      .012    .351
Inc. primary                 -.023    .075     -.023     .069        -.022   .088    -.017   .153    -.017    .167     -.015    .238
Inc. high school              .014    .284      .014     .268         .014    .27    -.014   .254    -.013     .31     -.013    .306
High school                  -.008    .655     -.007     .665        -.008    .62     .013   .426    .013      .42      .011    .486
Inc. college                  .005     .39      .005     .415        .005    .387     .006   .304     .005    .416      .004    .442
College                       .011     .12      .011     .132        .011    .116     .002   .819    .001     .875      .002    .843
Notes: The statistic (Stat.) reported in the balancing exercises is E(PAC=1) - E(PAC=0), that is, the difference in means between the
treatment and the control groups. Baseline characteristics include student demographics and Mother’s and father’s education. Student
demographics are Female (a dummy variable that takes value one if the student is a female and zero otherwise), Low income (a dummy
variable that takes value one if the student’s family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos, the minimum wage in such
country), Nuclear, Extended, and Other family (three dummies that indicate the family structure of the student), and Nbr years failed
(a count variable that captures the number of primary school years the student had to retake previous to the forth grade). Mother’s
and father’s education refer to the highest education level reached by the student’s mother and father. These include No education,
Incomplete primary, Primary, Incomplete high school, High school, Incomplete college, and college.




                          Table A7: Percent of schools by Socio Economic Status (SES)

                            All Chilean schools        PAC eligible schools         PAC eligible schools excluding
                                                                                            CLASS sample
            SES             2011        2012           Treatment        Control     Treatment        Control
            Low              29          31               16.7           16.4          16.5             15.2
         Medium-low          35          32               60.2           66.7          59.7              68
          Medium             21          22               22.8           16.9          23.4             16.8
         Medium-high          9          10               0.31            0            0.34              0
            High              5          6                 0              0             0                0
              N             7740        7742              648            195           581              125
         Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido.PAC eligible schools refers to schools that were
         eligble to participate in the randomization. Treatment refers to schools randomly assigned to
         receive PAC and Control refers to schools randomly assigned not to receive PAC. SES variables
         refer to the school Socio Economic Status as described in this section 4.




Appendix C               Compliance rates including all PAC schools




                                                                33
                           Table A8: Randomization and implementation, school level

                                                         All schools      2011 sample 2012 sample
                                                                        Implemented PAC
                                                         No         Yes   No     Yes   No    Yes
                                                  No     176        19    194     0   176    19
                     Randomized into PAC
                                                  Yes    149        499 155      492  179    465
                     Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. All schools refers to the 843 schools
                     that were considered eligible by the program and considered in the program evalua-
                     tion at some point. The 2011 sample consists of the 841 schools that were originally
                     included in the program evaluation sample. The 2012 sample consists of the 839
                     schools that remained in the program evaluation sample in the second year. Imple-
                     mented PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the school participated in
                     PAC and zero otherwise. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value
                     one if the school that randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise.


                         Table A9: First stage. Dependent variable: Implemented PAC.

                                                                        2011
                                   All                        Girls                                   Boys
                                                 Low Income High Income                  Low Income High Income
                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)              (5)
Randomized into PAC             0.761∗∗∗           0.775∗∗∗           0.721∗∗∗             0.769∗∗∗         0.745∗∗∗
                               [.734;.788]        [.746;.803]        [.68;.761]           [.707;.782]      [.74;.797]
Observations                      31384              10938              2330                 11492            2581
                                                                        2012
                                   All                        Girls                                   Boys
                                                 Low Income High Income                  Low Income High Income
                                   (7)                (8)                (9)                  (10)             (11)
Randomized into PAC             0.624∗∗∗           0.634 ∗∗∗
                                                                      0.611∗∗∗             0.636 ∗∗∗
                                                                                                            0.629∗∗∗
                               [.577;.668]        [.586;.679]       [.555;.663]           [.575;.681]      [.585;.687]
Observations                      35835              10479              2587                 10709            3043
Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. The dependent variable is Implemented PAC, a dummy variable that takes
value one if the student attends a school that participated in PAC and zero otherwise. Randomized into PAC is a dummy
variable that takes value one if the student attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero
otherwise. All refers to all students pooled together. Low Income is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student’s
family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos, the minimum wage in such country. High Income is a dummy that
takes value one if Low Income= 0. 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. ∗∗∗ Variable significant at the
1% level. Clustering at the school level.




Appendix D                The impact of participating in CLASS on SIMCE

                          Table A10: Impact of participation in CLASS on SIMCE 2012

                                      PAC control group                                  PAC treatment group
                                (1)           (2)          (3)                      (4)          (5)           (6)
                             Reading        Math       Science                  Reading        Math         Science
In CLASS sample                .229           .18         .206                     -.043        -.014       -.024
                             [.14;.33]     [.08;.3]    [.11;.32]                [-.14;.06]    [-.12;.1]  [-.12;.07]

Not in CLASS Mean             242.416          236.65               232.72       248.774          241.99           237.227
Not in CLASS SD               50.941           47.259               45.799       51.551           49.13            46.173
Number of Clusters              195              195                  195          644             644               644
Observations                   7141             7095                 7105         23353           23273             23226
Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. In CLASS sample is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student attends
a school that was randomized into the CLASS intervention and zero otherwise. The effects shown are in units of the Not in CLASS
sample standard deviation. 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets.




                                                               34
Appendix E                Main results including all PAC schools

E.1     Overall effects

                                Table A11: Impact of PAC on SIMCE 2011 and 2012

                                                            Intention to treat effect (ITT)
                                                  2011                     2012-including contaminated schools
                                    (1)             (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                                Reading           Math           Science    Reading        Math         Science
 Randomized into PAC               .095            .068            .033         .04         .051       .012
                                [.04;.15]       [.01;.13]       [-.03;.09]  [-.01;.09]   [-.01;.11] [-.04;.07]
                                  (.01)           (.13)            (.34)       (.32)        (.27)      (.72)

 Control Group Mean             244.787         235.756         236.836     245.937     239.432    235.461
 Control Group SD                49.97          47.103           44.09       51.055      47.326     46.527
 Number of Clusters               840             841              841         839         839        839
 Observations                    30736           30731           30765       30494       30368      30331
                                                               Instrumental Variables
                                                  2011                    2012-including contaminated schools
                                   (7)             (8)             (9)        (10)        (11)          (12)
                                Reading           Math          Science    Reading       Math         Science
 Implemented PAC                  .125            .089            .044        .064        .081       .019
                                [.05;.2]        [.01;.17]      [-.04;.12]  [-.02;.15]  [-.01;.18] [-.06;.11]
                                 (.01)            (.13)           (.34)       (.32)       (.27)      (.72)

 Control Group Mean             244.787         235.756         236.836          245.937        239.432         235.461
 Control Group SD                49.97          47.103           44.09           51.055         47.326          46.527
 Number of Clusters               840             841             841              839            839             839
 Observations                    30736           30731           30765            30494          30368           30331
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Implemented PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student
 attends a school that participated in PAC and zero otherwise. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one
 if the student attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. The effects shown are in
 units of the control group standard deviation. 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. All 6 impacts in
 each panel are tested jointly to control for the Familywise Error Rate using the Romano-Wolf step down method. Romano-Wolf
 step down p-values from the two sided test are shown in parenthesis. Clustering at the school level. In the second panel the
 instrument is Randomized into PAC.



E.2     2012 results by school SES


Table A12: Impact of PAC on SIMCE 2012-including contaminated schools (ITT parameter), by school socio
economic status

                                                Low SES                                        Medium SES
                                    (7)              (8)                (9)         (10)           (11)               (12)
                                Reading            Math              Science      Reading         Math              Science
 Randomized into PAC               .021             .022               -.013        .094           .158               .075
                                [-.04;.08]       [-.04;.09]         [-.07;.05]    [-.02;.2]       [0;.31]          [-.05;.19]
                                   (.78)            (.78)              (.78)         (.5)          (.29)              (.64)

 Control Group Mean             244.809          238.789            234.125        252.828         243.391          243.702
 Control Group SD               51.155            47.545             46.651         49.913          45.774           44.906
 Number of Clusters               681              681                681             158             158              158
 Observations                    24097            23976              23951           6397            6392             6380
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student
 attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. SES variables refer to the school
 Socio Economic Status as described in section 4. The effects shown are in units of the control group standard deviation (SD).
 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. All outcomes in this table are tested jointly to control for the
 Familywise Error Rate using the Romano-Wolf step down method. The resulting step down p-values from the two sided tests
 are shown in parenthesis. Clustering at the school level.


                                                               35
E.3     2012 results by gender and income


Table A13: Impact of PAC on SIMCE 2012-including contaminated schools (ITT parameter), by students’
gender and income

                                                                              Girls
                                             Low Income                                            High Income
                                   (1)            (2)                (3)                 (4)            (5)           (6)
                               Reading          Math              Science             Reading         Math         Science
 Randomized into PAC              .039           .068               .025                .208           .117          .075
                               [-.03;.11]       [0;.15]           [-.04;.1]           [.09;.32]       [0;.24]     [-.03;.18]
                                  (.80)          (.57)              (.87)               (.01)          (.45)         (.74)

 Control Group Mean             251.989         236.495           232.941             256.406        244.927      242.931
 Control Group SD               49.769           46.37             44.465              49.098         47.692       46.727
 Number of Clusters               800             800                826                 680            679          679
 Observations                    10030           10005              9973                2533           2522         2520
                                                                              Boys
                                             Low Income                                            High Income
                                   (7)            (8)                (9)                 (10)           (11)        (12)
                               Reading          Math              Science             Reading          Math       Science
 Randomized into PAC              .046           .072               .031                 .026           .107        .013
                               [-.02;.11]       [0;.15]           [-.03;.1]           [-.06;.12]      [.01;.2]    [-.08;.1]
                                  (.74)          (.47)              (.87)                (.87)         (.45)        (.87)

 Control Group Mean             239.601         240.548           235.503             250.521        247.172      246.618
 Control Group SD               51.678          47.936             48.001              51.718         47.433       46.927
 Number of Clusters               803             803               803                  693            696          693
 Observations                    10235           10191             10182                2950           2946         2930
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student
 attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. Low Income is a dummy variable that
 takes value one if the student’s family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos, the minimum wage in such country.
 High Income is a dummy that takes value one if Low Income= 0. The effects shown are in units of the control group standard
 deviation (SD). 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. All outputs in this table are tested jointly to
 control for the Familywise Error Rate using the Romano-Wolf step down method. Romano-Wolf step down p-values from the
 two sided test are shown in parenthesis. Clustering at the school level.




                                                             36
Appendix F               Main results with covariates

                               Table A14: Impact of PAC on SIMCE 2011 and 2012

                                                           Intention to treat effect (ITT)
                                                  2011                                                2012
                                   (1)             (2)                 (3)           (4)              (5)                (6)
                               Reading           Math               Science       Reading            Math             Science
Randomized into PAC               .089            .059                .019          .112             .107              .076
                               [.04;.14]         [0;.12]           [-.03;.08]     [.06;.17]        [.04;.18]        [.02;.14]
                                 (.02)            (.13)               (.57)         (.01)            (.04)            (.06)

Control Group Mean              244.787          235.756         236.836    242.416                 236.65           232.72
Control Group SD                 49.97           47.103           44.09      50.941                 47.259           45.799
Number of Clusters                838              838             838        680                    680              680
Observations                     25894            25923           25949      20076                  20168            20117
                                                                Instrumental Variables
                                                  2011                                                 2012
                                   (7)             (8)                (9)            (10)             (11)               (12)
                               Reading           Math              Science        Reading            Math             Science
Implemented PAC                   .116            .077               .025           .172             .164              .117
                               [.05;.18]         [0;.15]           [-.05;.1]      [.09;.26]        [.06;.28]        [.04;.21]
                                 (.03)            (.14)              (.57)          (.01)            (.05)            (.07)

Control Group Mean              244.787          235.756           236.836        242.416           236.65           232.72
Control Group SD                 49.97           47.103             44.09          50.941           47.259           45.799
Number of Clusters                838              838               838            680              680              680
Observations                     25894            25923             25949          20076            20168            20117
Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Implemented PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student
attends a school that participated in PAC and zero otherwise. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one
if the student attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. The effects shown are in
units of the control group standard deviation. 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. In each panel, all
6 impacts are tested jointly to control for the Familywise Error Rate using the Romano-Wolf step down method. Romano-Wolf
step down p-values from the two sided test are shown in parenthesis. All regressions include covariates: whether the students lives
in a household with at least one parent and/or siblings; whether the student lives in a household with members of the extended
family; the number of times the student failed a school year; mother’s education: dummies for “no education”, “inc primary”,
“primary”, “inc high school”, “high school”, “some college”, “college +”; father’s education (same dummies as mother education).
Clustering at the school level. In the second panel the instrument is Randomized into PAC. The 2012 sample excludes schools that
implemented CLASS.




                                                              37
Table A15: Impact of PAC on SIMCE (ITT parameter), by school socio economic status, with cohort fixed
effects

                                                 Low SES                                               Medium SES
                                    (1)              (2)                  (3)                 (4)            (5)            (6)
                                 Reading           Math                Science             Reading         Math          Science
 Randomized into PAC               .073             .044                 .005                .204           .238           .202
                                 [.03;.12]        [-.01;.1]           [-.05;.06]           [.1;.31]      [.12;.35]       [.11;.3]
                                   (.02)            (.31)                (.90)               (.01)         (.01)           (.01)

 Control Group Mean               243.044          235.821            234.498              248.372       237.838         239.143
 Control Group SD                 50.123            47.287            44.845               51.608        46.427          44.543
 Number of Clusters                 706              706                706                  194           194             194
 Observations                      35616            35701              35684                10293         10329           10321
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the
 student attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. SES variables refer to the
 school Socio Economic Status as described in section 4. The effects shown are in units of the control group standard deviation
 (SD). 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. All outcomes in this table are tested jointly to control for
 the Familywise Error Rate using the Romano-Wolf step down method. The resulting step down p-values from the two sided
 tests are shown in parenthesis. All regressions include cohort fixed effects. All regressions include covariates: whether the
 students lives in a household with at least one parent and/or siblings; whether the student lives in a household with members
 of the extended family; the number of times the student failed a school year; mother’s education: dummies for “no education”,
 “inc primary”, “primary”, “inc high school”, “high school”, “some college”, “college +”; father’s education (same dummies as
 mother education). Clustering at the school level. The 2012 sample excludes schools that implemented CLASS.




Table A16: Impact of PAC on SIMCE (ITT parameter), by students’ gender and income, with cohort fixed
effects

                                                                                   Girls
                                               Low Income                                              High Income
                                    (1)             (2)                   (3)                 (4)            (5)            (6)
                                 Reading          Math                 Science             Reading         Math          Science
 Randomized into PAC               .077            .065                   .04                .158           .057           .022
                                 [.03;.13]        [0;.13]             [-.02;.09]           [.06;.25]     [-.04;.16]     [-.07;.11]
                                   (.08)           (.35)                 (.62)               (.04)          (.62)          (.68)

 Control Group Mean               250.338          233.869            232.225              253.927       242.733         242.244
 Control Group SD                 48.325            45.616            43.008                49.22        46.437          45.884
 Number of Clusters                 834              834                834                  757           757             756
 Observations                      17603            17624              17589                4254          4243            4252
                                                                                   Boys
                                               Low Income                                              High Income
                                    (7)             (8)                  (9)                 (10)           (11)           (12)
                                 Reading          Math                Science              Reading          Math         Science
 Randomized into PAC               .089            .068                  .04                 .116            .156          .058
                                 [.04;.14]        [0;.13]             [-.02;.1]            [.05;.19]      [.07;.24]     [-.02;.14]
                                   (.04)           (.35)                (.62)                (.05)          (.02)          (.62)

 Control Group Mean                239.1           238.095            237.453              246.745       243.962         246.087
 Control Group SD                 51.182            48.044            45.424               52.926        48.676          46.585
 Number of Clusters                 836              836                836                  773           774             774
 Observations 18217               18204             18221              4825                 4830          4810
 Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student
 attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. Low Income is a dummy variable
 that takes value one if the student’s family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos, the minimum wage in such
 country. High Income is a dummy that takes value one if Low Income= 0. The effects shown are in units of the control group
 standard deviation (SD). 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. All outcomes in this table are tested
 jointly to control for the Familywise Error Rate using the Romano-Wolf step down method. The resulting step down p-values
 from the two sided test are shown in parenthesis. All regressions include cohort fixed effects. All regressions include covariates:
 whether the students lives in a household with at least one parent and/or siblings; whether the student lives in a household with
 members of the extended family; the number of times the student failed a school year; mother’s education: dummies for “no
 education”, “inc primary”, “primary”, “inc high school”, “high school”, “some college”, “college +”; father’s education (same
 dummies as mother education). Clustering at the school level. The 2012 sample excludes schools that implemented CLASS.




                                                                 38
Appendix G                Results by gender and income (separately)

                   Table A17: Impact of PAC on SIMCE by gender, with cohort fixed effects

                                                  Girls                                              Boys
                                   (1)              (2)                (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)
                               Reading            Math             Science        Reading            Math           Science
Randomized into PAC               .109             .077               .058           .108             .097            .057
                               [.06;.16]        [.02;.13]           [0;.11]       [.06;.16]        [.04;.16]         [0;.11]
                                 (.01)            (.08)              (.12)          (.01)            (.02)            (.12)
Control Group Mean             249.751          234.539            233.059        239.225          238.243          237.943
Control Group SD                48.659           45.635              43.42          51.38           48.142          45.678
Number of Clusters                 835             836                836             837             838              838
Observations                     26068            26045             26006           28101            27953           27954
Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student
attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. The effects shown are in units of the
control group standard deviation (SD). 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. RW step down p-values
allowing for all 6 hypotheses from the two sided tests are shown in parenthesis. All regressions include cohort fixed effects.
Clustering at the school level. Schools that implemented CLASS are excluded from the 2012 sample.




               Table A18: Impact of PAC on SIMCE by family income, with cohort fixed effects

                                             Low income                                        High income
                                   (1)             (2)                 (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)
                               Reading           Math               Science       Reading          Math             Science
Randomized into PAC               .089            .074                .044           .167           .143              .071
                               [.04;.14]       [.01;.13]           [-.01;.09]     [.11;.23]      [.07;.21]           [0;.14]
                                 (.01)           (.08)                (.18)         (.01)          (.01)              (.18)
Control Group Mean             244.302         235.801              234.677       249.877         243.23            244.358
Control Group SD                 50.17           46.92               44.319        51.423         47.994              46.75
Number of Clusters                 842            842                  842            823           824                824
Observations                     39879           39985               39961          9801           9819               9806
Notes: PAC stands for Plan Apoyo Compartido. Randomized into PAC is a dummy variable that takes value one if the student
attends a school that was randomly assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. Low Income is a dummy variable
that takes value one if the student’s family monthly income is less than 300,000 Chilean pesos, the minimum wage in such
country. High Income is a dummy that takes value one if Low Income= 0. The effects shown are in units of the control group
standard deviation (SD). 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals are shown in brackets. RW step down p-values allowing for all
6 hypotheses from the two sided tests are shown in parenthesis. All regressions include cohort fixed effects. Clustering at the
school level. Schools that implemented CLASS are excluded from the 2012 sample.




                                                              39
