                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           INCOMPLETE DISCLOSURE:
                 EVIDENCE OF SIGNALING AND COUNTERSIGNALING

                                     Benjamin B. Bederson
                                        Ginger Zhe Jin
                                         Phillip Leslie
                                      Alexander J. Quinn
                                           Ben Zou

                                      Working Paper 22710
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22710


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2016, Revised February 2018




We thank three anonymous referees. We are grateful to Yang Yue for excellent research
assistance; to Elliot Anenberg, Liad Wagman, and attendees at the 2014 DC Industrial
Organization Day and the 12th Annual International Conference of Industrial Organization for
constructive comments; and to a number of Maricopa County government officials for patiently
answering our questions over the phone. All remaining errors are ours. We are grateful to the
Sloan Foundation for financial support. Part of the paper was revised when Jin is on leave at the
Federal Trade Commission. The opinions expressed here are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Trade Commission, any of its Commissioners, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are ours.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Benjamin B. Bederson, Ginger Zhe Jin, Phillip Leslie, Alexander J. Quinn, and Ben
Zou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Incomplete Disclosure: Evidence of Signaling and Countersignaling
Benjamin B. Bederson, Ginger Zhe Jin, Phillip Leslie, Alexander J. Quinn, and Ben Zou
NBER Working Paper No. 22710
October 2016
JEL No. D82,H75,I18,L15,L81

                                          ABSTRACT

In 2011, Maricopa County adopted voluntary restaurant hygiene grade cards (A, B, C, D). Using
inspections results between 2007 and 2013, we show that only 58 percent of the subsequent
inspections led to online grade posting. Although the disclosure rate in general declines with
inspection outcome, higher-quality A restaurants are less likely to disclose than lower-quality As.
After examining potential explanations, we believe the observed pattern is best explained by a
mixture of signaling and countersignaling: the better A restaurants use nondisclosure as a
countersignal, while worse As and better Bs use disclosure to stand out from the other restaurants.


Benjamin B. Bederson                             Alexander J. Quinn
Department of Computer Science                   School of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Maryland                           Purdue University
College Park, MD 20742                           West Lafayette, IN 47907
bederson@cs.umd.edu                              aq@purdue.edu

Ginger Zhe Jin                                   Ben Zou
University of Maryland                           Michigan State University
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
3115F Tydings Hall                               East Lansing, MI 48824
College Park, MD 20742-7211                      benzou@msu.edu
and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu

Phillip Leslie
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095
phleslie@amazon.com
              JEL: D82, H75, I18, L15, L81
              Keywords: quality disclosure, unraveling, voluntary disclosure, signaling,
         countersignaling, restaurant hygiene.



I.      Introduction
This paper documents and explains an incomplete and non-monotonic disclosure
of product quality. Theorists have argued that all firms should have incentives
to voluntarily disclose their product quality if disclosure is costless and truthful
via a third-party verification agency (Milgrom, 1981; Grossman, 1981; Jovanovic,
1982).1 When disclosure involves a positive cost, disclosure incentive is predicted
to increase with quality: all firms with quality above a certain threshold should
choose to disclose; and all firms below the threshold should remain silent (Jo-
vanovic, 1982). In contrast to these predictions, we observe an empirical setting
where disclosure is neither complete nor monotonic.
      The empirical setting is Maricopa County in Arizona. Every restaurant in Mari-
copa is subject to unannounced routine food safety inspections twice per year. In
October 2011, Maricopa adopted a voluntary letter grading system. Under this new
system, an inspector arrives for an unscheduled inspection and asks the restaurant
manager whether she would like to receive a letter grade (A, B, C, or D) and allow
the letter grade to be posted online after the inspection. If the answer is yes, the in-
spector will conduct the inspection, assign a letter grade according to the inspection
outcome, post the letter grade on the county official website, and give the restaurant
a physical report card with the letter grade. Whether, when and where to post the
     1 This
          is because the incentive to disclose is driven by consumers holding the pessimistic belief
that any non-disclosing firm must have the worst quality. Assuming that consumers are willing to
pay for higher quality and there is no cost to disclose, this pessimistic belief alone will motivate all
but the worst type of firms to disclose, in both monopoly and competitive markets.



                                                   2
physical grade card is up to the restaurant. What’s special about Maricopa’s grad-
ing system is that the detailed inspection results, along with the detailed metric for
calculating letter grades, are always available on the county website. Therefore, al-
though the disclosure is voluntary, the public can still impute the letter grade even if
the restaurant chooses not to disclose. This provides a unique opportunity to study
voluntary disclosure in an environment close to what classical disclosure theories
have assumed.
    Inconsistent with the theory, only 58 percent of restaurants in Maricopa chose
to disclose, and this percentage declined slightly during the first 18 months after
the introduction of the new grade card policy. As we expect, A restaurants are
more likely to disclose than Bs, and Bs are more likely to disclose than Cs and Ds.
Nevertheless, 49 percent of non-disclosing restaurants would have obtained a grade
A if they had chosen to disclose. More specifically, if we plot disclosure rate against
the total number of violations per inspection, the better As are less likely to disclose
than worse As, although the better Bs are more likely to disclose than worse Bs (and
the Cs and Ds).
    The literature has documented incomplete disclosure in many empirical set-
tings.2 But few papers document a pattern of disclosure that is not only incomplete
but also non-monotonic with quality (Harbaugh and To, 2016, is an exception).
Consistently, many theories attempt to explain incomplete disclosure but still pre-
dict a monotonic relationship between disclosure decision and the underlying qual-
ity.3 Two notable exceptions are Grubb (2011) and Feltovich, Harbaugh and To
   2 For example,   prior to the 1990 Nutrition Labeling and Education Act, many low-fat salad dress-
ings had a nutrition label, but most of the higher fat dressings did not provide a label, and there were
large fat content variations among the non-disclosing ones (Mathios, 2000). Similar incompleteness
exists in the disclosure of SUV roll-over risk, financial information of public companies, hazardous
substances in the workplace, toxic pollution, medical mistakes, and many other markets (Fung,
Graham and Weil, 2007). Typically, disclosure is not complete until the government mandates, or
threatens to mandate, disclosure.
    3 As summarized in Dranove and Jin (2010), theorists often attribute incomplete disclosure to



                                                   3
(2002, referred to as FHT hereafter) . In Grubb (2011), firms fear that today’s
disclosure implies a liability to disclose in the future; hence even the highest qual-
ity firms may choose non-disclosure due to dynamic concerns. If such dynamic
concerns are stronger for higher quality firms, we could observe the disclosure rate
decreasing or becoming non-monotonic with quality. FHT (2002) shows that, when
the quality information is coarse, sellers of best quality may use non-disclosure as
a countersignal to distinguish themselves from eager-to-disclose medium-quality
sellers. Following this logic, Harbaugh and To (2016) show an interesting exam-
ple that economics faculty avoid using titles such as “Doctor” or “Professor” in
voicemail greetings and course syllabi.
    We test both explanations in our data, as well as the classical disclosure the-
ory and other explanations such as grade uncertainty, consumer inattention, con-
sumer prior knowledge, and competition. We find evidence for both signaling and
countersignaling, but not for the dynamic concern as in Grubb (2011). More specifi-
cally, the disclosure rate declines monotonically across grades (from A to D), which
is consistent with the classical disclosure theory (with positive and heterogeneous
disclosure cost). But within A restaurants, those with better records on Yelp and
better historical inspection results are less likely to disclose.4 Moreover, this pat-
tern only holds for A restaurants, not for B, C, or D restaurants. We interpret this
as evidence for countersignaling at the highest end of the quality spectrum. The
evidence for signaling and countersignaling persists after we account for alterna-
tive explanations, although some alternative explanations do have power explaining
assumptions underlying the classical unraveling theory – for example, disclosure may not be costless
(Jovanovic, 1982), consumers may not understand the disclosed information (Fishman and Hagerty,
2003), firms may not know the truth (Matthews and Postlewaite, 1985), strategic concerns may
hinder disclosure in oligopoly (Board, 2009), and litigation risk may deter disclosure (Marinovic,
Skrzypacz and Varas, 2015).
   4 Yelp.com is a popular business listing and consumer review website mainly for restaurants and

other retail services.



                                                 4
some variations in disclosure.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the back-
ground. Section 3 describes the data and the sample. Section 4 presents evidence
for signaling and countersignaling and checks alternative explanations of the ob-
served patterns. Section 5 concludes.



II.       Grade Card (GC) Policy in Maricopa County
Maricopa County started to post detailed hygiene inspection records on the county’s
official website in 2007. Before October 2011, this process did not involve any
restaurant decision: records of all routine and follow-up inspections were posted on-
line for all restaurants. Offline, Maricopa followed a star-grading system in which
restaurants with hygiene conditions in the top 10 percent were awarded gold stars,
the next 10 percent were awarded silver stars, and the other restaurants received
no star.5 If a restaurant qualified for a gold or silver star, the restaurant received a
physical card with a star and could choose to post it anywhere in the restaurant.6
    On October 14, 2011, Maricopa County adopted a voluntary letter grade sys-
tem in which a restaurant is assigned a letter grade (A, B, C or D) at each routine
inspection. The letter grade is determined by violations of the items specified in
the inspection form, which are categorized into Priority (P), Priority Foundation
(PF) and Core. P items are those that have a quantifiable measure for controlling
hazards in cooking, reheating, cooling, or handwashing. A violation on a P item
is a major violation that directly contributes to increasing the risk of food-borne
   5 We   could not find any official documents on the exact percentages of restaurants eligible for
gold and silver stars. The reported percentages are based on our conversation with an inspector in
Maricopa.
   6 It is possible that gold and silver stars were reflected in the online database before the letter

grade system. However, because the Maricopa website changed to a new database system in July
2011, we cannot observe online whether a restaurant had a gold or silver star in its historical records.


                                                   5
illness or injury. PF items are those that support, facilitate or enable one or more
P items. PF items include those that require the purposeful incorporation of spe-
cific actions, equipment, or procedures by industry management, such as personnel
training, infrastructure or necessary equipment, hazard analysis and critical control
plans (HACCP), documentation or record keeping, and labeling. Core items com-
prise those items not designated as P or PF; these are usually related to general
sanitation, operational controls, standard operating procedures, facilities or struc-
tures, equipment design, or general maintenance.
   Figure 1 shows how the numbers of P, PF, and Core violations are used to cal-
culate the letter grade. A restaurant receives a letter A if the inspection finds no P
or PF violations. If a restaurant does not qualify for an A but has no more than one
P violation or two PF violations, it gets a B. A restaurant gets a C if it has no more
than two P violations and three PF violations. Finally, a restaurant’s grade drops
one level (e.g., A to B) if it has four or more Core violations. D is the lowest grade
possible.
   In this new system, posting of the grade card is voluntary both online and of-
fline. The restaurant has to decide, before the inspection starts, whether to have the
letter grade calculated and posted online. If it agrees to disclose, the letter grade
will be posted online. The restaurant also receives a physical card with the letter
grade for in-store posting, although the law does not specify where to post the card
or whether it must be posted at all. Figure 2 exhibits several screenshots of online
records after Maricopa adopted the grade card policy. Clicking on a restaurant’s
name brings up every inspection for that restaurant since July 2007. An inspection
can be routine or follow-up: routine inspections are unscheduled, while follow-ups
often focus on whether the restaurant has corrected the violations found in the last
routine inspection. The choice of disclosure is only relevant for routine inspections.
If the restaurant chooses to disclose the grade corresponding to a routine inspec-

                                          6
tion, the letter grade is shown next to the inspection date and inspection purpose.
If the restaurant chooses not to disclose, the record reports “not participating” in
the place of a letter grade. This way, non-disclosure is highlighted and therefore
distinguishable from not having been given a choice of disclosure. Regardless of
the letter grade, clicking on an inspection record leads to detailed violations found
during that inspection. If the inspection was conducted after the adoption of the
grade card policy, each violation is labeled “P”, “PF”, or “C” in the middle of a
large block of text describing the violation (the original text is not highlighted). Be-
cause the grading chart is posted on the same page as the detailed inspection result,
an interested consumer still has all the elements needed to calculate the letter grade.
Compared with disclosing restaurants, a non-disclosing restaurant simply hides its
letter grade behind one more click and some calculations.
   Because disclosing restaurants have the choice of posting the letter grade offline,
our research assistant picked one random neighborhood in Maricopa and checked
out restaurants there. Online Appendix Figure A presents two examples of physical
card posting in that neighborhood. Of the 26 restaurants he checked, five did not
participate in any disclosure (and therefore were labeled “not participating” in the
online database), 14 participated in online disclosure but did not post the letter
grade inside the restaurant, and the other seven disclosed both online and offline.
All the offline disclosing restaurants had an A grade. Six of the 14 online-only
disclosing restaurants had a B or C grade, and the remaining eight in this group had
an A grade. This neighborhood is clearly not representative of the entire Maricopa
County, but it highlights the facts that restaurants have discretion in both online and
offline postings, and that their disclosure decision depends on factors beyond the
underlying hygiene quality. The two examples in Appendix Figure A also highlight
the fact that restaurants have discretion regarding where to post the card inside the
restaurant if they choose to post offline. Given the difficulty of observing offline

                                           7
posting status for every restaurant, our empirical analysis focuses on the decision
of online posting only.
    Maricopa’s new grade system has received mixed reaction in the media. On
the one hand, the letter grade system is more salient to consumers than the pre-
vious star system, although it is still difficult for consumers to infer the grade of
non-disclosing restaurants; on the other hand, critics have expressed concern that
the county’s intention to maintain a friendly relationship with the industry may en-
courage dirty restaurants to opt out of posting and have little effect in reducing the
public health risk of food-borne illnesses. We believe it is necessary to understand
the incentives behind disclosure before drawing any welfare implications from the
letter grade policy.



III.       Data and Summary Statistics

III.A.     Data

Our main data come from the public website of the Maricopa County government.7
We scraped the website in March 2013. Our dataset contains inspection results from
July 2007 to March 2013 of 23,863 food installations, 19,719 of them with at least
one inspection since the adoption of grade cards. For each inspection, we know
the date of inspection, type of inspection (routine, follow-up, etc.), description of
each violation item from the Food Code, and letter grade or “not participating”
label after the adoption of grade cards. Because disclosure is relevant only for
routine inspections, we exclude all follow-up inspections. In total, there are 211,627
inspection records, of which 146,498 were from before the grade card policy. Of
   7 All records of inspections since July 2007 can be found on Maricopa County’s official website:
https://www.maricopa.gov/EnvSvc/OnlineApplication/EnvironmentalHealth/FoodInspections/Business.
The layout of the website has been changed slightly since we have extracted the data.


                                              8
the grade card policy records, 37,600 participated in online disclosure, and 27,529
chose “not participating”.
    Figure 2 shows one inspection record for Alexis Grill, a restaurant in Phoenix.8
It received a grade B in an inspection on August 8, 2013 and chose to disclose
its letter grade online. Before that, it had five inspections for which it did not
participate in grade posting. These were preceded by an inspection on January
31, 2012, the restaurant’s first inspection after Maricopa adopted the grade card
system, at which it chose to disclose and got a C. The website also contains all
inspections prior to the voluntary posting scheme, going back to July 2007, which
are listed below. Details of each inspection are available with one click on the
date. We show some details of the inspection conducted on August 8, 2013 (shown
on the right of the page), and of the inspection conducted on February 16, 2010
(shown on the bottom of the page). Both records have violation #14, corresponding
to the cleanliness of food-contact surface. However, the textual explanation of this
violation is slightly different and the letter “P” is only added after grade cards were
adopted. We can predict the letter grade for both disclosing and non-disclosing
restaurants after the introduction of grade cards, but it is difficult to do so for pre-
grade-card records. This is because the violations reported in pre-GC inspections
do not contain the labels “P”, “PF”, and “C”. Moreover, each violation code may
include multiple items in the county’s Food Code, and there is no guarantee that
items under the same violation code are always classified in the same P, PF, or C
category. In theory, we can use text matching to create a correspondence between
pre- and post-grade card violation codes and then define grades before grade card,
but we believe the outcome is likely to be noisy, as Maricopa revised its food code
when it adopted the grade card system.
   8 Thescreenshot was taken when we visited the website in 2014. When we scraped the website
in March 2013, the two latest inspections were not available.



                                             9
   Given this limitation and our interest in restaurants’ disclosure decision, we
focus on post-GC inspections. As shown in Online Appendix Figure B, the number
of violations per inspection has declined steadily since 2007, from between 1.5 and
2 before grade cards to roughly 1 after grade cards were adopted. The decline is
statistically significant, but it is unclear whether the drop is attributable to changes
in Food Code, the grade card policy, or both. It does not seem to have any structural
break after the grade card policy was adopted.
   Table 1 provides a more detailed data summary. For pre-GC inspections, we
report the number of total violations per inspection; after grade cards adoption,
we report summary statistics on the number of total, P, PF, and Core violations by
letter grade and disclosure status. According to Figure 1, P and PF violations are
more serious than C violations: while one extra P or PF violation tends to trigger a
downgrade in the letter system (the only exception is a B to C downgrade requires
two extra PFs), it takes four extra Core violations to do the same. For simplicity, we
construct a single weighted sum of violations per inspection after the adoption of
grade cards, counting each P or PF violation as four and each Core violation as one.
This continuous variable, referred to as WSUMVIOL, is more detailed than a letter
grade and allows us to look into the heterogeneity within each letter grade. For
example, the best A restaurant may have no violations at all; thus its WSUMVIOL
is equal to 0, while the worst A restaurant can have up to three core violations, which
implies a WSUMVIOL equal to 3. Similarly, the best B restaurant has either one P,
or one PF violation, or four Core violations, which corresponds to a WSUMVIOL
equal to 4, while the worst B restaurant can have a WSUMVIOL as high as 15.
One shortcoming of WSUMVIOL is that B and C restaurants may overlap in the
range between 8 and 15 because two PF and one P violations correspond to a B
grade, while two P violations correspond to a C grade. However, WSUMVIOL is
a monotonic proxy of quality within A and B. Given the fact that over 90 percent

                                          10
of post-grade card inspections fall in either the A or B range, and these restaurants
are the main focus of our discussion, we use WSUMVIOL to explore overall and
within-letter variations.


III.B.    Grade Distribution and Disclosure Patterns

Maricopa’s grade card system offers a rare opportunity to study voluntary disclo-
sure. In fact, several patterns in the raw data stand out, but they are only partially
consistent with the classical disclosure theories.
   The first data pattern is incomplete disclosure. Of all the routine inspections
conducted after the adoption of the grade card scheme, only 58 percent led to on-
line letter grade posting and this percentage declined slightly over time. Clearly, the
disclosure rate is much lower than the prediction from the most classical unraveling
theory that 100 percent will disclose (Milgrom, 1981; Grossman, 1981). One com-
mon explanation is heterogeneous disclosure cost (Jovanovic, 1982): though the
disclosure decision does not involve any monetary cost, the restaurant owner/manager
may not be on site at the inspection time, employees may have a hard time finding
the owner/manager in time, or the owner/manager may find it mentally demand-
ing to make any decision other than the default of non-disclosure. All of these can
contribute to a positive disclosure cost and discourage disclosure. It is also possi-
ble that a restaurant cannot fully anticipate the inspection outcome beforehand. If
the owner/manager is risk averse, the prospect of receiving an imperfect grade may
discourage disclosure as well.
   In light of the potential grade uncertainty, we examine the relative importance
of across- and within-restaurant variations. To what extent do inspection outcomes
vary over time within the same restaurant? How often do restaurants jump between
grades?


                                          11
   Table 2 shows the transition matrix of grades and disclosure decisions between a
restaurant’s previous and current inspections (we impute grades for non-disclosing
restaurants). Because only a small fraction of restaurants receive C or D, from now
on we group these two letter grades into one group, C/D. Disclosure decisions
are persistent over time. If a restaurant chose to disclose in the previous inspec-
tion, the probability of disclosure in the current inspection is 0.81. If a restaurant
chose not to disclose in the previous inspection, the probability of non-disclosure in
the current inspection is 0.71. The persistence in the disclosure decision is at least
partly driven by the persistence in inspection results: if a restaurant received an A
in the previous inspection, the probability to getting an A in the current inspection
is 0.73. If a restaurant received a B in the previous inspection, it has a probability
of 0.47 of getting an A in this inspection and is a lot more likely to receive a B than
a restaurant that received an A in the previous inspection (0.42 versus 0.23). In fact,
restaurant fixed effects alone account for 63 percent of the total variation in letter
grades and 72 percent of the total variation in disclosure decisions. Table 2 also
shows that, although the disclosure decision is made before the inspection result is
available, to some extent restaurants can predict what grade they will get and decide
accordingly. For a restaurant that received an A and chose to disclose in the previous
inspection, if it still gets an A in the current inspection, its probability of disclosure
is 0.87 (0.65/(0.65 + 0.091)). In comparison, if it gets a B in the current inspec-
tion, its probability of disclosure drops to 0.73 (0.164/(0.164 + 0.061)). In short,
the disclosure patterns described above seem more likely to be driven by across-
restaurant variation than by changes within a restaurant. This is the second pattern
from the raw data. This pattern is consistent with our assumption that restaurants
can anticipate inspection outcomes.
   Despite incomplete disclosure, the third data pattern is that disclosure rate varies
monotonically across letter grades. According to Table 1, 66 percent of A, 49 per-

                                           12
cent of B, and 30 percent of C/D choose to disclose. This pattern is consistent
with the classical disclosure theory: when every restaurant faces some disclosure
cost (which could be fixed or random), higher quality firms are more likely to dis-
close. It is also consistent with signaling, as disclosure alone is a positive signal to
consumers when higher-quality firms have more incentives to disclose.
    However, within-grade variations depict a rather different picture. As Table 1
shows, restaurants that would receive an A but choose not to disclose have even bet-
ter inspection outcomes (WSUMVIOL= 0.31) than those that get an A and choose
to disclose (WSUMVIOL= 0.34). This is inconsistent with the classical prediction
that higher-quality firms should be more likely to disclose. More interestingly, this
counterintuitive pattern only holds for A restaurants. For B and C/D restaurants, the
disclosing ones on average have better inspection outcomes than the non-disclosing
ones (in terms of WSUMVIOL scores, 1.9 versus 2.1 for Bs, and 4.2 versus 4.6 for
C/Ds).
    For a more direct comparison, Table 3 compares the characteristics of disclosing
and non-disclosing restaurants within each grade. We focus on each restaurant’s last
available inspection following the adoption of grade cards. This way, our sample
counts each restaurant equally no matter how frequently they have been inspected
in the raw data.9 The first two columns in Panel A present the mean of inspec-
tion outcomes for disclosing As and non-disclosing As. Disclosing As have worse
inspection outcomes by almost all measures (except for the number of P and PF vi-
olations, which by definition, are zero for restaurants receiving grade A), and these
differences are statistically significant (Column 3). This is in sharp contrast to the
differences between disclosing Bs and non-disclosing Bs, as shown in Columns 4
to 6. The disclosing Bs have better inspection outcomes than non-disclosing Bs by
most measures, and these differences are statistically significant.
   9 Inspection   frequency could vary by restaurants.


                                                  13
    One may argue that since the disclosure decision is made before the inspec-
tion is conducted, using the current inspection result can be misleading. Panel B
replaces current inspection outcomes with the average inspection outcomes before
the studied inspection, which are undoubtedly known to the restaurant before the
current disclosure decision. The differences in average previous inspection out-
comes between disclosing As and non-disclosing As are similar to those in panel
A, as are the difference between disclosing Bs and non-disclosing Bs. Panel C
compares the standard deviations of past inspection outcomes for disclosing and
non-disclosing restaurants. Again, the disclosing As tend to have greater variation
in their past inspection outcomes than non-disclosing As, but the disclosing Bs tend
to have smaller variation in past inspection outcomes than the non-disclosing Bs. In
short, the three panels of Table 3 reinforce the impression that disclosure patterns
within A are opposite to the disclosure patterns within B.10
    To further look into the heterogeneity within each letter grade, we define half-
marks within each letter grade based on WSUMVIOL. For restaurants receiving A,
we define “strong A”, denoted as A+, as restaurants with WSUMVIOL scores not
higher than the median WSUMVIOL score of all inspections that disclose as A. In
other words, disclosing or not, the A+ restaurants are at least as good as the typical
restaurant that displays grade A. Restaurants with an A or an imputed A that do not
qualify as A+ are defined as “weak A” restaurants and are denoted as A−. B + /B−
and CD + /CD− restaurants are defined in similar ways.11
    Figure 3 plots the average disclosure rate for each half-marked letter grade.
Consistent with the data summary tables, disclosure rate displays a salient “hump”
shape: in general, disclosure rate declines as the inspection result gets worse, but
  10 Table 3 tests the mean differences. We also test whether the distributions of disclosing and non-
disclosing restaurants within the same grade are the same. It follows the same structure as in Table
3. The mean tests and distribution tests reach similar conclusions.
   11 The median WSUMVIOL score cutoff is 0 for A+/A− , 5 for B+/B− , and 13 for CD+/CD−.




                                                 14
it increases from A+ to A−.12 Both the overall decline in disclosure rate and the
hump among A restaurants are substantial in magnitude. Grade A restaurants have
an average disclosure rate that is 17 percentage points higher than that of B restau-
rants (62.6 percent versus 45 percent), while the disclosure rate for C/D restaurants
is another 18 percentage points lower. In contrast, the disclosure rate of A+ restau-
rants is 7 percentage points lower than that of A− restaurants.13
    To summarize, raw data display many interesting patterns: disclosure is incom-
plete, disclosure difference is largely driven by cross-restaurant variations, disclo-
sure rate declines monotonically across grade, there is a non-monotonic “hump” in
disclosure rate between A+, A−, and B+, and the difference between disclosing
As and non-disclosing As contrasts with the difference between disclosing Bs and
non-disclosing Bs. We now proceed to tie these patterns to possible explanations.



IV.        Potential Explanations and Empirical Tests
There are at least six economic explanations that support some but not all of the
documented data patterns.

    • First, the classical disclosure theory with a positive disclosure and heteroge-
       neous cost may explain the declining disclosure rate from A to C/D but not
       why A+ restaurants are less likely to disclose than A− restaurants. We refer
  12 The   unraveling theory predicts that restaurants receiving a letter grade of A or B will all choose
to disclose, as they have an incentive to separate from restaurants with C/D grades. We do not
observe complete disclosure for A or B restaurants. This is not inconsistent with the unraveling
theory. The unraveling theory assumes perfect information to consumers, which is unlikely to hold in
this setting given the contrived design of the grade posting system. Restaurants also face uncertainty
as they have to commit to disclosure before inspection is conducted. Thus the overall declining
disclosure rate is consistent with a generalized version of the unraveling theory.
   13 The overall 66 percent of disclosure rate of A restaurants, as cited in Table 1, is computed from

all post-GC inspections. In Figure 3, the 60 percent versus 67 percent comparison between A+ and
A− restaurants is from restaurants’ last post-GC inspection. Among the last post-GC inspections,
the average disclosure rate for all A restaurants is 62.6 percent.


                                                  15
  to this classical theory as signaling.

• Second, the grade uncertainty facing risk-averse restaurants can explain why
  some restaurants choose non-disclosure even if the inspection outcome turns
  out to be good. However, according to panel C of Table 3, disclosing As face
  more uncertainty from past inspections than the non-disclosing As, but the
  opposite is true for disclosing and non-disclosing Bs.

• Similar difficulty applies to the third explanation – dynamic concerns. As ar-
  gued in Grubb (2011), a firm with excellent product quality in period t may be
  reluctant to disclose its high quality for fear that such disclosure may commit
  the firm to future disclosure or raise more doubts when it does not disclose
  the same amount of information in the future. Following this dynamic con-
  cern, the fear of unfavorable results in the future should be higher for firms
  that face more uncertainty within each grade, which we know is true within
  B but not true within A.

• The fourth explanation is consumer attention. If consumers do not pay at-
  tention to grade cards at all, disclosure is equivalent to non-disclosure for
  all grades. More realistically, if consumers pay more attention to the grade
  of some restaurants, these restaurants may have more motivation to disclose
  their grades. Selective attention could explain why disclosure is incomplete,
  but it brings up the question of why A+ restaurants receive less consumer
  attention than A− restaurants.

• Similarly, the fifth explanation lies in consumers’ prior information: if con-
  sumers already know an A restaurant is as clean as A, the restaurant may
  not bother to disclose. Prior information that is non-linear by quality could
  explain the hump in disclosure rate. But it is unclear why consumer prior

                                      16
      information is particularly weak in A−, or why that prior information is weak
      enough to give A− restaurants an extra incentive to disclose more than both
      A+ and B+.

   • The sixth explanation is the countersignaling theory laid out by FHT (2002).
      As detailed below, countersignaling focuses more on the non-monotonic dis-
      closure rate between A+, A− and B+ than on the other parts of the grade
      distribution.

Because the countersignaling explanation is the most complicated and it does not
rule out the other five explanations, we will organize our empirical test around sig-
naling and countersignaling. In the meantime, we control for variables that measure
grade uncertainty, dynamic concerns, consumer attention, and consumer prior in-
formation. This way, we allow multiple explanations to coexist but still look for
evidence of countersignaling.
   In the rest of this section, we first apply FHT’s countersignaling theory to our
setting and then define our econometric specification and key variables. Our results
discussion will start with basic evidence of countersignaling and other explanations
and end with extra evidence for countersignaling.


IV.A.    The Countersignaling Theory

According to FHT (2002), countersignaling may occur when a high-quality firm
finds it desirable to signal high quality through non-disclosure. In a job interview
example, FHT assume a setting with three types and two signals. Job candidates
can have high, medium, or low ability. They may signal their hidden ability through
an endogenous signal (sharing their GPAs) and an exogenous signal (a confidential
recommendation letter). Both GPA and the letter are noisy but in a different way.
On the one hand, high and medium types have good GPAs while the low type has

                                         17
bad GPAs. Thus GPAs separate high and medium from low, but not high from
medium. On the other hand, a recommendation letter is always good for high-
ability candidates, always bad for low-ability candidates, but can be good or bad
for the medium-ability candidates. Hence, the letter alone can separate high from
low, but not necessarily high from medium or medium from low. These two signals
are overlapped such that the combination of high GPA and good recommendation
letter is still not enough to distinguish the high type from some lucky mediums.
   FHT show that countersignaling can help to separate all three types, under some
conditions. In particular, the high type may prefer not to mention their high GPAs,
because this countersignaling action plus the favorable recommendation letter may
help them stand out from the medium candidates that disclose high GPAs and have
a good letter. In comparison, medium-ability high-GPA candidates cannot afford to
hide their high GPAs because they do not know the exact content of the letter when
they make the disclosure decision and high GPAs will clearly distinguish them from
the low-ability candidates even if the letter turns out bad.
   It is not difficult to translate this story into our setting, if we assume restaurants
can anticipate the inspection outcomes perfectly and we only focus on the high
end of the quality spectrum. The high, medium, and low types correspond to our
A+, A−, and B+. The high and low GPAs correspond to our grade A and grade
B, and disclosing GPA corresponds to disclosing A or B grade. From Yelp.com,
we also obtain other measures of restaurant quality as of 2014, and for now, let
us assume the restaurant’s future Yelp review is the second signal, similar to the
recommendation letter.
   One key assumption of FHT is that the exogenous signal is noisy, has a random
component (for at least the medium type), and its value is not known to the job
candidate when he/she makes the disclosure decision. If this signal is known be-
forehand, the game boils down to the standard disclosure game conditional on the

                                          18
realized signal. Since Yelp reviews are on-going, we believe it is reasonable to as-
sume that the content of future Yelp reviews is random and A+ restaurants may have
more confidence in obtaining favorable Yelp reviews than A− restaurants. (This is
actually an empirical question; we will test it later in the real data.) By this as-
sumption, the countersignaling equilibrium could occur in our setting, where A+
are reluctant to display their A grade, A− are eager to display their A grade, and
B+ do not bother to display their B grade because B+ is the worst in our three-type
world.
    This stylized story does not explain why more than 40 percent of B+ restaurants
do disclose their grade. This is because the above setting assumes away any types
below B+. Adding in the lower types gives B+ restaurants an incentive to show that
they are better than C or D. Whether there is another countersignaling incentive
among B restaurants will depend on the nature of the exogenous signal and the
number of types in the whole distribution (FHT 2002). Because our data summary
only suggests countersignaling among As, we believe it is reasonable to use FHT
(2002) to focus on the high end only.
    In short, the countersignaling theory of FHT could explain the hump in dis-
closure rate between A+, A−, and B+, but it alone does not explain the overall
declining disclosure rate from A to B to C/D. FHT also implies that evidence of
countersignaling can be found in the random nature of the exogenous signal and
how the distribution of that signal overlaps with half grades. We will come back to
test this in Section 4.4.




                                        19
IV.B.      Econometric Specification and Key Variables

To examine disclosure rate as a function of inspection results, we run a few versions
of the following regression:


(1)            DISit =α0 + βA+ · 1{grade=A+}it + βA− · 1{grade=A−}it

                          + βB+ · 1{grade=B+}it + βB− · 1{grade=B−}it

                          + βCD+ · 1{grade=CD+}it + Xi · αx + Zit−1 · αz

                          + λt + εit .


The unit of observation is a restaurant’s last observed post-grade card inspection.
We limit each restaurant i to only one observation in the regression because we
know most of the variations in disclosure are driven by cross-restaurant rather than
within-restaurant variations. Focusing on the last observed inspection allows the
market to settle in a relatively stable situation after Maricopa County rolled out its
grade card policy. That being said, we index t as the year-quarter of the studied
inspection so that we can define that restaurant’s historical variables up to t.14
      DISit is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the restaurant chooses to disclose. We
include a set of dummy variables for half grades; for example, 1{grade=A+}it is
an indicator variable that takes value 1 if the outcome of the inspection qualifies for
the A+ category. CD− is the left-out category; thus the coefficients associated with
the half grade dummies are interpreted as the increased probability of disclosure
for that grade relative to CD− restaurants. Xi indicates restaurant i’s time-invariant
characteristics such as chain status and characteristics of surrounding area.15 Zit−1
  14 We    have tried the same regression in the full post-grade card sample, while allowing lagged
variables to compute inspection history. Results are quantitatively similar to what is reported in this
paper.
   15 In all regressions we include whether the restaurant is listed on Yelp.com, and whether it belongs

to a restaurant chain. Results are the same without controlling for these covariates.


                                                  20
is a vector of restaurant i’s past inspection outcomes. λt is a full set of year-quarter
dummies. εit is the error term. We are interested in β s and how they vary by
half grades. In particular, we test the null hypotheses of βA+ > βA− and βB+ >
βB− . If signaling is the only story, neither null hypotheses would be rejected. If
countersignaling prevails for A restaurants and signaling explains the disclosing
behavior of other restaurants, we would expect βA+ < βA− but βB+ > βB− . For
easy coefficient interpretation across different versions, we report all regressions
from the linear probability model. Results are similar when we repeat everything in
probit or logit.
    As stated before, we organize the empirical tests around countersignaling, but
that does not rule out alternative explanations. Rather, we include variables sug-
gested by the other explanations and let the data speak to their validity.
    Consumer attention
    One explanation for incomplete disclosure is consumer inattention. If con-
sumers do not pay attention to the letter grade at all, disclosure is equivalent to
non-disclosure for all grades. This hypothesis does not speak to why there is a
hump in disclosure rate, but is still worth investigating. A plausible scenario is that
consumer attention to grade cards varies over time and restaurants are more likely to
disclose when consumers pay more attention to the grade card policy. If the timing
of inspections and restaurant quality are somewhat correlated (for example, restau-
rants with poor hygiene may be inspected more frequently), consumer inattention
could explain variations in disclosure rate.
    From LexisNexis we searched for local news about Maricopa’s grade card pol-
icy and could find a few news articles only around the time that Maricopa County
introduced the policy (October 2011). Therefore, it is possible that consumer at-
tention was heightened at the time of policy introduction. To account for overall
changes in media coverage, we include a full set of year-quarter dummies in all

                                          21
specifications of Equation 1.
   On the other hand, the physical presence of grade cards (posted on the door,
on the window, or inside a restaurant) may also remind consumers of the grade
card policy. Even if the local news stopped covering grade cards soon after its
introduction, consumer attention may linger over time and vary from one local area
to another depending on the disclosure rate in each area. To account for the effects
of history dependence, we classify restaurants into two groups: those that were
examined in the first 10 percent of inspections after grade card policy adoption
(which corresponds to the first three months after the introduction of grade cards)
are referred to as the “first-batch”; the rest are “non-first-batch.” Among the 19,719
restaurants in our sample, about 30 percent are first-batch. In their last observed
inspections, 58 percent of the first-batch restaurants chose to disclose, while only
52 percent of the non-first-batch restaurants disclosed. This difference could be
driven by more consumer attention when first-batch restaurants were inspected for
the first time after grade card adoption, combined with restaurants that disclosed
before being more likely to disclose again. A dummy of first batch is included in
all regressions.
   Other restaurant information available to consumers
   We use extra information extracted from Yelp.com, a popular online business
listing and consumer review website. As shown in Kang et al. (2013), a Yelp re-
view is correlated with restaurant inspection outcomes, but not all restaurants are
reviewed by Yelp, and most Yelp reviews focus on restaurant food and service rather
than hygiene. We obtain data on restaurants listed on Yelp from the 2014 Yelp Open
Dataset Challenge.16 This dataset includes all restaurants in the Phoenix area that
are listed on Yelp and had at least three reviews. We match restaurants in the inspec-
  16 The   dataset is available at http://www.yelp.com/dataset_challenge/, lasted checked on June 5,
2015.



                                                 22
tion dataset with restaurants in the Yelp dataset by name and address. We were able
to match 42 percent of restaurants in the inspection dataset. Among restaurants that
can be matched with the Yelp data, we define three measures of quality. A restau-
rant is “popular” if it has more than 60 reviews (the median number of reviews in
the matched sample). A restaurant has “good reviews” if it has 4 or more Yelp stars
(ranging from 1 to 5 with half star increments). A restaurant is “pricey” if it has 3
or 4 dollar signs on Yelp (ranging from 1 to 4 dollar signs, with 1 dollar sign indi-
cating that the average cost per person is below 10 dollars, 2 dollar signs for a range
between 11 and 30 dollars, 3 dollar signs for a range between 31 and 60 dollars,
and 4 dollar signs for above 61 dollars). These measures likely represent a better
information source for consumers than letter grades. As discussed above, the on-
line posting of actual hygiene inspection outcomes is long, requires multiple clicks,
and can be confusing; in comparison, Yelp is a popular website among restaurant-
goers, with easy-to-use information at one’s fingertip. On the other hand, there is
no reason to ascertain that consumers will perfectly observe all the Yelp variables
and draw perfect inference on restaurant quality.
   Note that the Yelp variables are subject to multiple interpretations. They could
be interpreted as a proxy for consumer prior knowledge before a restaurant decides
whether to disclose the grade card. Under this interpretation, the disclosure decision
should be conditional on the realized Yelp variables. Alternatively, the restaurant
may have difficulty predicting future Yelp reviews, and different confidence in fu-
ture Yelp reviews could create an incentive to countersignal. Whether we should
interpret the Yelp variables as consumer prior knowledge or as an element in the
countersignaling story is an empirical question.
   Among all the potential hygiene violations, one may wonder whether some are
more observable to consumers; bathroom cleanliness is an obvious example. To
address this point, we classify 12 violations as consumer observable violations, all

                                          23
of which are listed in Online Appendix Table B.17 As Table 3 shows, disclosing
As have significantly more observable violations than non-disclosing As, but the
opposite is true for B restaurants. If consumer observable violations constitute most
of consumer prior knowledge, this does not explain why the comparison between
disclosing and non-disclosing restaurants is reversed among As and Bs.
    Grade Uncertainty and Risk Aversion
    Because the restaurants do not know what their grade will be at the time they
make disclosure decisions, one explanation for non-disclosure is risk aversion to
potentially unfavorable results. We use the standard deviation of WSUMVIOL from
past inspections as a proxy for the grade uncertainty facing a restaurant at the be-
ginning of the current inspection. As Table 3 Panel C shows, disclosure decision is
negatively correlated with the mean of a restaurant’s historical WSUMVIOL score.
This is not surprising because a restaurant consistently receiving a bad inspection
outcome should be more reluctant to disclose, as disclosure is by and large a pos-
itive signal of underlying quality. However, if restaurants are risk averse to grade
uncertainty, we should find that the standard deviation of past WSUMVIOL influ-
ences disclosure negatively, conditional on the same mean of past WSUMVIOL.
For this reason, in some versions of the regression, we control for both the mean
and the standard deviation of WSUMVIOL from past inspections.
    Since restaurant quality is highly persistent over time, we would expect that
restaurants that receive an A+ in the current inspection are likely to be the very
high-quality restaurants in previous inspections as well. Knowing that, they are less
likely to disclose in the current inspection if countersignaling is at play. Because the
grade of the past inspection is known to the restaurant with certainty and presents no
  17 A violation is labeled as unobservable if the structure or procedure in question is behind the
kitchen door. For example, insects and rodents are observable to the consumers, while proper cook-
ing time and temperature are unlikely to be observable to consumers.



                                                24
risk. If we observe a hump shape in current disclosure rate based on past inspection
outcomes, we can argue that the hump shape cannot be driven by uncertainty and
risk aversion. To test this hypothesis, we construct half-marked grades based on the
second-to–the-last inspections and include them in the regression.
   Dynamic Concerns
   Dynamic concerns are related to risk aversion. As Grubb (2011) argues, even
if an A restaurant knows that it will get an A for sure this time, its owner/manager
may be reluctant to disclose the A grade because she is afraid that today’s disclo-
sure implies a commitment to disclose next time when the grade is below A. This
concern should be more severe for restaurants facing more grade uncertainty, so the
standard deviation of past WSUMVIOL can control for this story as well. More
realistically, restaurants may choose not to disclose once they already have an A
displayed from a previous inspection. Since A+ restaurants are more likely to have
received an A in the past, this could explain why A+ restaurants are less likely to
disclose later. To account for for dynamic concerns, we first include the letter grade
of the restaurant’s previous inspection. We also include a dummy equal to one if
the restaurant’s most recent disclosure is A. These are the restaurants that already
have an A displayed and are more likely to “play it safe” by not disclosing.
   Competition
   We also control for competition, although we have not mentioned it as an al-
ternative explanation for disclosure. One may argue that a restaurant’s disclosure
decision is subject to competition from other restaurants nearby. We attempt to cap-
ture this by three variables: the first variable is the number of restaurants in the same
ZIP code. Secondly, we use first-batch restaurants to define the fraction of competi-
tors in the same ZIP code that are likely to be pushed to disclose. If consumer
attention is heightened at the beginning of the grade card policy, which motivates
first-batch restaurants to disclose more, the disclosure of first-batch restaurants may

                                           25
raise consumer attention and make consumers more suspicious of a non-disclosing
restaurant nearby, even if that restaurant itself is not in the first batch. The share
of nearby restaurants in the first-batch intends to capture this spatial spillover ef-
fect. Thirdly, we compute the average WSUMVIOL of all restaurants in the same
ZIP code. If disclosure (or non-disclosure) functions as a signal to stand out from
competitors, it should depend on competitors’ WSUMVIOL.


IV.C.    Basic Evidence of Countersignaling and Other Explana-
         tions

Table 4 Column 1 reports the baseline version of Equation 1, including half grade
dummies, year-quarter dummies, and dummy variables indicating whether it is a
first-batch restaurant, whether it belongs to a restaurant chain, and whether it is
listed on Yelp. Consistent with the classical disclosure theory, the overall disclo-
sure rate declines as we move from better inspection outcomes to worse inspection
outcomes. However, among A restaurants, the disclosure rate of A+ restaurants is 5
percentage points lower than that of A− restaurants, and we can reject βA+ > βA−
with more than 99 percent confidence. On the other hand, the disclosure rate for B+
restaurants is 4.5 percentage points higher than that of the B− restaurants, and we
cannot statistically reject βB+ > βB− . Similarly, the disclosure rate of CD+ restau-
rants is about 5 percentage points higher than that of CD− restaurants. Across
grades, the disclosure rate of B+ restaurants is 20 percentage points lower than
that of A− restaurants, and the disclosure rate of CD+ restaurants is 12 percentage
points lower than that of B− restaurants. In other words, the disclosure pattern is
consistent with signaling except for the very high end, where the non-linear pattern
of A+, A− and B+ is consistent with countersignaling.
   Similar to what we have seen in the data summary, first-batch restaurants have


                                         26
a disclosing probability roughly 6 percentage points higher than non-first-batch
restaurants in their last observed inspections. This is consistent with first-batch
restaurants receiving more consumer attention and therefore having more incen-
tives to disclose.
    Column 2 adds the mean and standard deviation of the restaurant’s past WSUMVIOL.
Consistent with the signaling story, the coefficient of the mean of past WSUMVIOL
is negative, confirming that restaurants with better past scores are more likely to
disclose. In contrast, although grade uncertainty and risk aversion would predict a
negative coefficient on the standard deviation of past WSUMVIOL, that coefficient
turns out to be slightly positive and not statistically significant at any conventional
level, indicating that uncertainty about inspection result is not a good predictor
of disclosure decisions; if anything, restaurants with a more uncertain history are
slightly more likely to disclose. The hump-shaped disclosure pattern remains salient
after controlling for these variables, while we can easily reject βA+ > βA− but can-
not reject βB+ > βB− .18
    Column 3 includes the competition variables in addition to those already con-
trolled in Column 2. Being in a ZIP code with a higher fraction of restaurants in
the first batch is positively correlated with disclosure, while the number of nearby
competitors is negatively correlated with disclosure. The coefficient associated with
   18 One may still be concerned that the volatility of the inspection outcomes works differently for

As and Bs. Higher volatility in inspection outcomes for an A restaurant means more downward risk.
Therefore, the restaurant will be reluctant to disclose. Higher volatility in inspection outcomes for
a B restaurant could mean some upward risk, so a B restaurant may be willing to disclose in the
hope of getting an A. We interact mean and standard deviation of past WSUMVIOL scores with
whether the restaurant gets an A or a B in the current inspection. In the results not reported here,
we show that while a higher mean WSUMVIOL score is negatively correlated with the probability
of disclosure for both A and B restaurants, higher standard deviations of past WSUMVIOL scores
are slightly positively correlated with disclosure decisions for A restaurants (and not statistically
significant at conventional levels), and slightly negatively correlated with disclosure decisions for
B restaurants (statistically significant at the 10 percent level). Furthermore, we also use the mean
and standard deviation of getting an A as the alternative measure of past inspection outcomes, and
results are similar.


                                                27
mean WSUMVIOL score among the neighboring restaurants has a negative sign,
which suggests that a higher average quality of competitors is associated with a
higher probability of disclosure. Note that these variables do not attempt to identify
any causal spillovers between competing restaurants. Rather, we use the compe-
tition variables to control for potential spillovers between competitors or whatever
omitted variables may drive the interdependence of competitor decision. After these
controls, the coefficients β s still exhibit a hump shape with statistical significance.
    Column 4 accounts for dynamic concerns by including the letter grade of the
restaurant’s previous inspection. As expected, getting an A in the previous inspec-
tion is associated with a disclosure probability 10 percentage points higher than
getting a C or D. In comparison, getting a B is associated with a disclosure proba-
bility 3 percentage points higher than getting a C or D. To better control for not only
past inspection outcomes but also past disclosure decisions, Column 5 includes a
dummy indicating whether the most recent disclosed grade (before the current in-
spection) is an A. Having an A displayed from previous inspections is actually pos-
itively correlated with the probability of disclosure in the current inspection. It is
consistent with the signaling story where high-quality restaurants consistently have
high grades and choose to disclose. It is inconsistent with the concern that once a
restaurant gets an A, it will “play it safe” by choosing not to disclose in subsequent
inspections. In both Columns 4 and 5, the hump shape of disclosure rate remains
salient and statistically significant.19
    Column 6 includes half-marked grades defined based on the second-to-the-last
inspections. Since restaurant quality is persistent, A+ restaurants in the previous
  19 In results not reported here, we also test dynamic concerns by including a dummy indicating
whether the restaurant chose to disclose in the previous inspection, and the restaurant’s previous
disclosure decision interacted with the letter grade it received. The hump-shaped disclosure rate is
robust to these additional tests, too, although because restaurants’ inspection outcomes and disclo-
sure decisions are highly serially correlated (see the transition matrix in Table 2), the hump-shaped
pattern is only statistically significant at the 10 percent level.


                                                28
inspections are likely to remain A+. If countersignaling is at play, they will choose
non-disclosure in the current inspection and we should observe the hump-shaped
disclosure rate among A+, A−, and B+ restaurants based on the past inspection
outcomes. Column 6 shows exactly that: A+ restaurants in the previous inspection
have a disclosure rate that is 2 percentage points lower than that of restaurants that
received an A− in the previous inspection, while restaurants that receive a B+ in
the previous inspections have a disclosure rate that is 2 percentage points higher
than that of B− restaurants. We test the differences in these disclosure rates (φ ’s)
and show that the hump shape is statistically significant. Because the result of the
previous inspection is known to the restaurant, this hump shape is not affected by
potential uncertainty and risk-aversion concerns. At the same time, the hump shape
between A+, A−, and B+ restaurants as defined by current inspection outcomes
remain salient.Note that all columns of Table 4 have included a dummy for being
listed on Yelp. Thus consumer prior knowledge about the restaurant, as embodied
in the listing status on Yelp, does not explain away the hump shape of disclosure
rate.
    Finally, for robustness, we adopt an alternative definition of half-marked grades.
In all the regressions presented in Table 4, we define “+” and “−” within each letter
grade according to the disclosed outcomes of all restaurants in Maricopa. Maricopa
County covers an area of over 9,000 square miles and has more than 4 million res-
idents; arguably, a local restaurant may be more concerned with competitors down
the street than with restaurants across the county. To address this concern, we rede-
fine half marks within each letter grade relative to the median WSUMVIOL score of
the disclosed restaurants with the same letter grade in the same ZIP code, and re-run
the analyses in Table 4. We cluster the standard errors at the ZIP code level as the
key explanatory variables are now mechanically correlated within each ZIP code.
We also include the restaurant’s consumer observable violations as an explanatory

                                         29
variable, in case that enters consumer prior knowledge about the restaurant. The
coefficient associated with it is economically small and not statistically significant.
As Online Appendix Table A shows, results from this alternative definition are re-
markable similar to those presented in Table 4, although statistical tests are rela-
tively weaker because of error clustering.20 Most tests reject the null hypothesis
that βA+ > βA− at a statistical significance level between 0.05 and 0.1, while the
null hypothesis of βB+ > βB− cannot be rejected.


IV.D.      Further Evidence for Countersignaling

As FHT (2002) clarifies, countersignaling can only exist when there is another ex-
ogenous, noisy signal available in addition to the quality measure subject to disclo-
sure. Moreover, both the exogenous signal and the to-be-disclosed measure must
be coarse enough so that consumers cannot use just one of them to perfectly differ-
entiate all levels of true quality.
    For the Yelp variables to serve as the exogenous signal in countersignaling, it is
important to check their correlation with grade cards. As Figure 4 shows, the Yelp
variables are overall positively correlated with the vertical rank of letter grades over-
all, but their correlations are rather low and there is considerable overlap between
any two of them.21 More specifically, Panel D of Table 3 presents the means of the
Yelp variables by disclosure status and letter grade. Among A restaurants, the dis-
closing ones are less likely to be listed on Yelp than the non-disclosing ones. Con-
ditional on being listed on Yelp, disclosing A restaurants are less likely to have good
reviews or to be popular, although they are more likely to be pricey. In contrast, the
Yelp variables are not significantly different between disclosing B restaurants and
  20 If we use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors instead, the null hypothesis that β
                                                                                            A+ > βA−
can be rejected at the 1 percent level.
  21 The correlation of half-marked grades (with A+ denoted as 6 and CD− denoted as 1) with

“popular”, “good review”, and “pricey” is 0.08, 0.17, and 0.03, respectively.

                                                30
non-disclosing B restaurants. The A to B comparison is even more striking. When
it comes to Yelp variables, disclosing As look much more like the B restaurants
than like non-disclosing As. For example, roughly 22.5 percent of disclosing As
are popular on Yelp. This percentage is much closer to that of disclosing Bs (22.6
percent) and non-disclosing Bs (25.7 percent) than to that of non-disclosing As (46
percent). Similar patterns occur for the other Yelp variables as well. All of the
above is consistent with countersignaling at the high end of the quality spectrum.
   A more explicit test of countersignaling calls for a direct comparison between
“+” and “−” within letter grade. Following FHT (2002), countersignaling predicts
that an A+ restaurant is less likely to disclose if an extra and arguably better signal
is available to show that it is of high quality. We test this hypothesis by taking
Column 2 of Table 4 as the baseline and separately adding in each Yelp variable
and its interaction with half grades. We test whether the coefficient associated with
the interactive term with A+ is smaller than that of the interactive term with A−.
   Table 5 reports the results of these regressions. A+ restaurants are much less
likely to disclose than A− restaurants when they are listed on Yelp, or are popular
on Yelp, or receive good reviews on Yelp. The differences in magnitudes of the
coefficients are substantial and statistically significant. The only exception is for
pricey restaurants, for which we do not observe a significant difference in disclosure
rate between A+ and A− restaurants. We postulate that it may be because that being
pricey is not regarded as a good signal of quality.
   Recall that countersignaling only predicts a lower disclosure rate for A+ versus
A−, not B+ versus B−. This prediction is confirmed in Table 5: B+ restaurants are
more likely to disclose than B− restaurants, but overall their disclosure difference
does not vary by the Yelp variables. In other words, both the differential effect of
the Yelp variables on A restaurants and their lack of effect on B restaurants support
countersignaling.

                                          31
     It is important to note that these findings cannot be explained by simply treating
the Yelp variables as a proxy of consumer prior knowledge. Suppose that, before
the disclosure decision, a restaurant knows that consumers already consider it to be
good-quality because it has been listed on Yelp and received good reviews there.
Given this prior belief, the restaurant should have less incentive to disclose the
letter grade across the board. In other words, if favorable consumer prior belief
discourages disclosure, it should hold for both A and B restaurants; however, we
do not see this pattern for B restaurants. Thus consumer prior knowledge alone
cannot explain the differential role of the Yelp variables for A and B restaurants.
That being said, the countersignaling interpretation does not rule out the possibility
that Yelp variables may incorporate some consumer prior knowledge. In fact, all
regressions shown in Table 5 control for the Yelp variables before we interact them
with half grades, and all columns in Table 4 include the dummy of being listed on
Yelp, and the results essentially do not change if we include other Yelp variables.
These controls do not explain away the hump shape of disclosure rate.



V.      Conclusion
In contrast to the classical disclosure theory, we observe an empirical setting where
disclosure is neither complete nor monotonic with quality. A closer look at the data
suggests that the most likely explanation is a mixture of signaling and countersig-
naling.
     In the post-GC inspections, disclosure rate drops steadily across letter grades,
from 66 percent for A restaurants to 49 percent for B restaurants, and 30 percent
for C and D restaurants. In other words, disclosure is by and large a positive signal
to consumers over the whole distribution. However, at the high end of the grade
spectrum, A+ restaurants are less likely to disclose than A− restaurants. Focusing

                                          32
on the last post-GC inspection of every restaurant, we find the disclosure rate of A+
restaurants is 7 percentage points lower than that of A− restaurants. This is counter-
intuitive, as A+ restaurants not only have fewer violations in the studied inspection,
but also have fewer violations in previous inspections, have a smaller standard de-
viation in their inspection histories, are more likely to be listed in Yelp, and receive
more and better reviews on Yelp. A likely explanation is countersignaling, where
the very best restaurants have an incentive to use non-disclosure as a countersignal
to distinguish themselves from eager-to-disclose medium-quality restaurants. This
happens because the to-be-disclosed quality information (letter grade) is coarse and
there exists another exogenous signal (the Yelp variables) that is noisy but overlaps
with the distribution of letter grade. As a result, A+ restaurants expect sufficiently
good Yelp reviews and can afford to use non-disclosure to signal their stellar qual-
ity, but A− restaurants are eager to distinguish themselves from Bs because their
future Yelp reviews may turn out to be similar to those of Bs.
   While we are convinced that the non-monotonic pattern of disclosure is best ex-
plained by signaling and countersignaling, we also find significant influence from
other factors. For example, restaurants that were examined sooner after the adop-
tion of the grade card policy (so called first-batch) are more likely to disclose than
other restaurants. This pattern persists over time, suggesting the important and
long-lasting effect of consumer attention. There is also evidence that restaurants
with more competitors in the same ZIP code are less likely to disclose, and restau-
rants with lower-quality neighbors are less likely to disclose, although these results
should be interpreted as correlations rather than causal effects. Finally, there is
some evidence that restaurants with a bigger standard deviation in historical viola-
tions are slightly more likely to disclose (although the difference is not statistically
significant), and restaurants that already received an A in the last disclosed inspec-
tion are more likely to disclose. Both of these patterns are against the arguments of

                                          33
uncertainty or dynamic concerns, which predict that risk-averse restaurants should
be more reluctant to disclose when they face more uncertainty in inspection out-
comes, and a restaurant that has already got an A in the window should play it safe
by choosing nondisclosure this time. It seems that these predictions are dominated
by the fundamental incentive to disclose high quality.
   A remaining question is why, when we focus on the last observed post-GC in-
spection for each restaurant, only 67 percent of A− restaurants (and only 49 percent
of B restaurants) choose to disclose. In theory, disclosure cost could explain any in-
complete disclosure, but it is unclear what constitutes the disclosure cost in this
particular context. Relatedly, one may wonder what information consumers derive
from the market when over 40 percent of restaurants choose to be silent. To the
extent that countersignaling exists, even non-disclosure contains extra information
on top of what is already available to consumers. In this sense, disclosure rate –
measured by the percentage of firms that choose to disclose – may not be the best
measure of transparency, and 100 percent disclosure is not necessarily the most
desirable metric to define the success of a disclosure policy. Non-disclosure, as a
countersignal, may still add value for consumers if they can correctly understand
its information content. That being said, whether consumers can comprehend a
countersignal in reality remains unknown. On the one hand, experimental evidence
presented in FHT (2002) suggests that senders (firms) are able to implement a coun-
tersignaling equilibrium in the lab. On the other hand, Jin, Luca and Martin (2015)
show that, in a simple disclosure game (without countersignaling), senders are typ-
ically more sophisticated than receivers and receivers are not paying too much at-
tention to what it means by non-disclosure. Consumer perception of non-disclosure
warrants further study.




                                         34
References
Board, Oliver. 2009. “Competition and Disclosure.” Journal of Industrial Eco-
  nomics, 57(1): 197–213.
Dranove, David, and Ginger Zhe Jin. 2010. “Quality Disclosure and Certifica-
  tion: Theory and Practice.” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(4): 935–963.
Feltovich, Nick, Richmond Harbaugh, and Ted To. 2002. “Too Cool for School?
  Signalling and Countersignalling.” RAND Journal of Economics, 33(4): 630–
  650.
Fishman, Michael J, and Kathleen M Hagerty. 2003. “Mandatory Versus Volun-
  tary Disclosure in Markets with Informed and Uninformed Customers.” Journal
  of Law, Economics, and organization, 19(1): 45–63.
Fung, Archon, Mary Graham, and David Weil. 2007. Full Disclosure: The Perils
  and Promise of Transparency. Cambridge University Press.
Grossman, Sanford J. 1981. “The Informational Role of Warranties and Pri-
  vate Disclosure about Product Quality.” The Journal of Law & Economics,
  24(3): 461–483.
Grubb, Michael D. 2011. “Developing a Reputation for Reticence.” Journal of
  Economics & Management Strategy, 20(1): 225–268.
Harbaugh, Richmond, and Theodore To. 2016. “False Modesty: When Disclos-
  ing Good News Looks Bad.”
Jin, Ginger Zhe, Michael Luca, and Daniel Martin. 2015. “Is No News (Per-
  ceived As) Bad News? An Experimental Investigation of Information Disclo-
  sure.” National Bureau of Economic Research 21099.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. “Truthful Disclosure of Information.” The Bell Journal of
  Economics, 36–44.
Kang, Jun Seok, Polina Kuznetsova, Michael Luca, and Yejin Choi. 2013.


                                       35
  “Where Not to Eat? Improving Public Policy by Predicting Hygiene Inspections
  Using Online Reviews.” Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing.
Marinovic, Iván, Andrzej Skrzypacz, and Felipe Varas. 2015. “Dynamic Certi-
  fication and Reputation for Quality.”
Mathios, Alan. 2000. “The Impact of Mandatory Disclosure Laws on Product
  Choices: An Analysis of the Salad Dressing Market.” Journal of Law and Eco-
  nomics, 43(2): 651–77.
Matthews, Steven, and Andrew Postlewaite. 1985. “Quality Testing and Disclo-
  sure.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 328–340.
Milgrom, Paul R. 1981. “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems
  and Applications.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 380–391.




                                          36
Figures and Tables

                             Figure 1: Grading System




Source: Maricopa County government website.
https://www.maricopa.gov/EnvSvc/EnvHealth/PermitScoring.aspx. Last visited in August,
2016.




                                         37
Figure 2: Example of the Online Database




                  38
                                        Figure 3: Disclosure by Grade




                             .8
                                              0.67
                                       0.60




                             .6
                     Disclosure rate
                                                     0.47
                                                               0.42

                          .4
                                                                      0.30
                                                                              0.23
                             .2
                             0


                                       A+




                                              A−




                                                     B+




                                                               B−




                                                                          +




                                                                                  −
                                                                      D




                                                                              D
                                                                      C




                                                                              C
Note: The sample includes the last observed inspection in the post-GC period for each
restaurant. The height of the bar indicates the proportion of restaurants that choose to
disclose in each half-mark grade. The x-axis shows grade letters in half-marks. Both the
mean test and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov distribution test show that the disclosure rate for
A+ is significantly lower than that for A−, while the disclosure rates for B+ and CD+ are
significantly higher than those for B− and CD−, respectively.




                                                          39
                                       Figure 4: Correlation with Other Signals
              .5                 Fraction listed on Yelp                               Fraction of Popular Restaurants on Yelp




                                                                            .4
              .4




                                                                            .3
              .3
      ratio




                                                                        ratio
                                                                        .2
              .2




                                                                            .1
              .1
              0




                                                                            0
                    A+




                            A−




                                     B+




                                              B−




                                                           +




                                                                   −




                                                                                  A+




                                                                                           A−




                                                                                                   B+




                                                                                                            B−




                                                                                                                        +




                                                                                                                                    −
                                                           D




                                                               D




                                                                                                                     D




                                                                                                                                 D
                                                       C




                                                               C




                                                                                                                    C




                                                                                                                                C
                   Fraction of Restaurants with Good Reviews on Yelp                   Fraction of Pricey Restaurants on Yelp




                                                                            .08
              .6




                                                                            .06
              .4
      ratio




                                                                         ratio
                                                                        .04
              .2




                                                                            .02
              0




                                                                            0
                    A+




                            A−




                                     B+




                                              B−




                                                           +




                                                                   −




                                                                                  A+




                                                                                           A−




                                                                                                   B+




                                                                                                            B−




                                                                                                                        +




                                                                                                                                    −
                                                           D




                                                               D




                                                                                                                     D




                                                                                                                                 D
                                                       C




                                                               C




                                                                                                                    C




                                                                                                                                C
Note: The sample includes last observed post-GC inspections. Each graph plots the average value
of another signal of restaurant quality, against grades in half marks. Except for the top-left graph,
the sample is conditional on being listed on Yelp.




                                                                       40
                                                       Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                     N       total vios WSUMVIOL            P       PF    Core
                            Before Disclosure 146498           1.763
                            Disclosed              37600       0.917        2.293        0.242 0.217      0.458
                                A                  26465       0.343        0.343        0.000 0.000      0.343
                                B                   9420       1.940        5.828        0.629 0.667      0.644
                                C/D                 1715       4.157        12.981        1.842 1.099     1.216
                            Non-disclosed          27529       1.563        4.474        0.519 0.451      0.592
                                A                  13625       0.312        0.312        0.000 0.000      0.312
                                B                   9938       2.054        6.213        0.618 0.768      0.668
                                C/D                 3966       4.627        14.415        2.057 1.206     1.364
     Note: Each observation is an inspection. Letter grades for non-disclosing restaurants are imputed.
41
                                                         Table 2: Transition Matrix
                                                                                 current inspection
                                                     A                          B                         C/D
           previous inspection   dis    non-dis               dis    non-dis            dis    non-dis             dis   non-dis
                    dis         0.807 0.193
                  non-dis       0.290 0.710
                    A                               0.734                      0.231                     0.035
                          dis                                0.650    0.091            0.164    0.061            0.018    0.015
                        non-dis                              0.244    0.471            0.052    0.193            0.005    0.034
                    B                               0.469                      0.415                     0.116
                          dis                                0.426    0.070            0.284    0.115            0.053    0.052
                        non-dis                              0.185    0.258            0.086    0.344            0.015    0.111
                   C/D                              0.285                     0.442                        0.273
42




                          dis                               0.272    0.049             0.293 0.140                 0.110 0.136
                        non-dis                             0.134    0.135             0.100 0.346                 0.031 0.254
     Note: Letter grades are as disclosed or are   imputed. Each cell indicates the probability of transition between two consecutive
     inspections. Each row sums up to one.
                                Table 3: Characteristics of Disclosing and Non-Disclosing Restaurants
                                                                     (1)         (2)        (3)                (4)         (5)        (6)
                        Panel A                                             A or imputed A                            B or imputed B
                        Average of current inspections               dis      non-dis     (1)-(2)              dis      non-dis     (4)-(5)
                        WSUMVIOL                                   0.319      0.269     0.050***             5.923      6.268    -0.345***
                        priority vios                              0.000      0.000       0.000              0.617      0.589      0.028**
                        priority foundation vios                   0.000      0.000       0.000              0.706      0.786    -0.080***
                        core vios                                  0.319      0.269     0.050***             0.631      0.770    -0.139***
                        consumer observable vios                   0.175       0.157     0.018**             0.617       0.684   -0.067***
                        all vios                                   0.319      0.269     0.050***             1.954      2.145    -0.191***
                        risk factor vios                           0.041      0.036        0.005             1.205       1.249    -0.044**
                        retail practice vios                       0.277      0.233     0.044***             0.749      0.896    -0.147***
                        Panel B                                             A or imputed A                            B or imputed B
                        Average of past inspections                  dis      non-dis    (1)-(2)               dis      non-dis    (4)-(5)
                        WSUMVIOL                                   0.750      0.716       0.034              2.526       3.122   -0.596***
                        priority vios                              0.075      0.069      0.006*              0.264      0.316    -0.052***
                        priority foundation vios                   0.068      0.070      -0.002              0.284      0.361    -0.077***
                        core vios                                  0.177      0.157     0.020***             0.335      0.413    -0.078***
                        consumer observable vios                   0.414       0.367    0.047***             0.682      0.791    -0.109***
                        all vios                                   0.320      0.296     0.024***             0.883      1.091    -0.208***
                        risk factor vios                           0.467      0.424     0.043***             0.992      1.114    -0.122***
                        retail practice vios                       0.572      0.543     0.029***             0.919      1.042    -0.123***
                        Panel C                                             A or imputed A                            B or imputed B
                        stdev of past inspections                    dis      non-dis     (1)-(2)              dis      non-dis    (4)-(5)
                        WSUMVIOL                                   1.418       1.379       0.039             3.169       3.532   -0.363***
                        priority vios                              0.171       0.159     0.012**             0.418       0.454   -0.036***
                        priority foundation vios                   0.159       0.167      -0.008             0.428       0.490   -0.062***
                        core vios                                  0.322       0.286    0.036***             0.523       0.587   -0.064***
                        consumer observable vios                   0.563       0.505    0.058***             0.752       0.798   -0.046***
                        all vios                                   0.548       0.514    0.034***             1.067       1.199   -0.132***
                        risk factor vios                           0.619       0.586    0.033***             0.901       0.936   -0.035***
                        retail practice vios                       0.720       0.707       0.013             0.944       0.982   -0.038***
                        Panel D                                             A or imputed A                            B or imputed B
                        Mean of other signals                        dis      non-dis    (1)-(2)               dis      non-dis     (4)-(5)
                        on Yelp                                    0.384      0.469    -0.085***             0.428      0.409        0.019
                        good reviews on Yelp                       0.491      0.672    -0.181***             0.408      0.419       -0.011
                        pricey on Yelp                             0.213      0.172     0.041***             0.201      0.192        0.009
                        popular on Yelp                            0.225      0.460    -0.235***             0.226      0.257      -0.031*
Note: The sample includes the last observed post-GC inspections. Panel A shows the mean characteristics for restaurants receiving an A or an imputed A (Columns 1 to 3)
or restaurants receiving a B or an imputed B (Columns 4 to 6). Panel B shows the average of the mean of past inspections of these restaurants. Panel C shows the standard
deviation of the past inspections. Panel D shows the mean values of other signals. The last three rows are conditional on the restaurant being listed listed on Yelp. Column
3 shows the mean difference between the value in Column 1 and that in Column 2. Column 6 shows the mean difference between the value in Column 4 and that in
Column 5. Asterisks indicate statistical significance: * p < 0.1 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01 .




                                                                                    43
                                                       Table 4: Disclosure by Imputed Grade
           depvar: disclosure in current inspection                 (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)
           A+ in current inspection (βA+ )                      0.371***        0.295***         0.294***        0.307***       0.347***       0.324***
                                                                 (0.017)         (0.023)          (0.023)         (0.023)        (0.023)        (0.020)
           A− in current inspection (βA− )                      0.421***        0.341***         0.320***        0.356***       0.380***       0.371***
                                                                 (0.019)         (0.023)          (0.024)         (0.023)        (0.024)        (0.021)
           B+ in current inspection (βB+ )                      0.221***        0.150***         0.139***        0.165***       0.214***       0.179***
                                                                 (0.019)         (0.023)          (0.023)         (0.023)        (0.023)        (0.021)
           B− in current inspection (βB− )                      0.176***        0.123***         0.114***        0.135***       0.169***       0.147***
                                                                 (0.019)         (0.022)          (0.022)         (0.022)        (0.023)        (0.021)
           C/D+ in current inspection                           0.053**           0.014            0.010           0.028        0.080***         0.038
                                                                 (0.024)         (0.026)          (0.026)         (0.026)        (0.027)        (0.025)
           first-batch                                          0.056***       0.041***         0.037***        0.042***         -0.005        0.045***
                                                                 (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.007)        (0.008)
           mean WSUMVIOL of own                                                -0.014***        -0.010***       -0.010***         0.002
           past inspections                                                      (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)
           stdev WSUMVIOL of own                                                  0.003            -0.001       0.008***        0.014***
           past inspections                                                      (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)
           mean WSUMVIOL of ZIP                                                                 -0.034***
           restaurants                                                                            (0.004)
           fraction of ZIP restaurants                                                             0.044
           in first batch                                                                         (0.039)
           # of restaurants in ZIP (×1,000)                                                     -0.285***
                                                                                                  (0.012)
           A in previous inspection                                                                             0.101***
                                                                                                                 (0.017)
           B in previous inspection                                                                             0.033**
                                                                                                                 (0.016)
           latest disclosing grade is A                                                                                         0.413***
                                                                                                                                 (0.007)
           A+ in previous inspection (φA+ )                                                                                                    0.122***
                                                                                                                                                (0.021)
           A− in previous inspection (φA− )                                                                                                    0.142***
                                                                                                                                                (0.022)
           B+ in previous inspection (φB+ )                                                                                                    0.064***
                                                                                                                                                (0.022)
           B− in previous inspection (φB− )                                                                                                     0.042*
                                                                                                                                                (0.022)
           C/D+ in previous inspection                                                                                                           0.021
                                                                                                                                                (0.027)
           year-season FE                                           X              X                X               X               X              X
           N                                                      19719          18482            18482           18431           17056          18431
           R2                                                     0.065          0.064            0.093           0.068           0.217          0.067
           βA+ > βA− (p−value)                                    0.000          0.000            0.006           0.000           0.000          0.000
           βB+ > βB− (p−value)                                    0.999          0.972            0.961           0.982           0.999          0.990
           φA+ > φA− (p−value)                                                                                                                   0.027
           φB+ > φB− (p−value)                                                                                                                   0.942
Note: The sample includes last observed inspections in the post-GC period. All columns also include a dummy indicating whether the restaurant is listed on Yelp, and a
dummy indicating whether it belongs to a restaurant chain. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, * p < 0.1 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01 .




                                                                                 44
                         Table 5: Extra Information and Disclosure
        depvar = disclosure              (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)
        extra information             on Yelp       popular      good reviews         pricey
        A+                           0.304***      0.328***        0.371***         0.290***
                                      (0.022)       (0.027)         (0.029)          (0.025)
        A−                           0.304***      0.358***        0.389***         0.394***
                                      (0.023)       (0.029)         (0.032)          (0.026)
        B+                           0.106***      0.193***        0.198***         0.211***
                                      (0.023)       (0.029)         (0.031)          (0.025)
        B−                           0.112***      0.111***        0.156***         0.131***
                                      (0.023)       (0.029)         (0.032)          (0.025)
        extra info                     -0.040       -0.070*          0.021            -0.073
                                      (0.025)       (0.037)         (0.037)          (0.088)
        A+ × extra info (γA+ )       -0.047*       -0.148***      -0.161***           0.021
                                      (0.027)       (0.041)         (0.040)          (0.094)
        A− × extra info (γA− )       0.068**        0.123**         -0.004             0.001
                                      (0.031)       (0.051)         (0.047)          (0.105)
        B+ × extra info (γB+ )       0.082***        0.026           0.009           -0.051
                                      (0.031)       (0.049)         (0.046)          (0.103)
        B− × extra info (γB− )         0.006         0.042          -0.076           -0.062
                                      (0.033)       (0.052)         (0.049)          (0.117)
        other covariates                  X             X               X                X
        year-season FE                    X             X               X                X
        N                              18482          7718           7718              7718
        R2                             0.067         0.081           0.071            0.064
        p−values of testing
        γA+ > γA−                      0.000           0.000         0.000            0.619
        γB+ > γB−                      0.997           0.370         0.976            0.549
  Note: Other covariates include whether the restaurants is in the first batch, whether it belongs to a
restaurant chain, and the mean and standard deviation of past grading. “on Yelp” is a dummy
indicating whether the restaurant is listed on Yelp.com. Columns 2 to 4 include only restaurants
that are listed on Yelp. A restaurant is “popular” if it has more than 60 reviews (the number of
reviews for the median restaurant in the sample). A restaurant has “good reviews” on Yelp if it has
4 or more Yelp stars (ranging from 1 to 5 with 0.5 increments). A restaurant is “pricey” if it has 3
or 4 dollar signs on Yelp (ranging from 1 dollar sign to 4 dollar signs). Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. * p < 0.1 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01 .




                                                  45
