NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CHILDHOOD HOUSING AND ADULT EARNINGS:
A BETWEEN-SIBLINGS ANALYSIS OF HOUSING VOUCHERS AND PUBLIC HOUSING
Fredrik Andersson
John C. Haltiwanger
Mark J. Kutzbach
Giordano E. Palloni
Henry O. Pollakowski
Daniel H. Weinberg
Working Paper 22721
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22721
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016, Revised September 2018
Any analysis, opinions, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, the National Bureau of Economic Research or any of the institutions to which the
authors are or have been affiliated. Much of the work on this study was done while Mark
Kutzbach, Giordano Palloni, and Daniel Weinberg were employees of the U.S. Census Bureau,
and Fredrik Anderson (also previously at the Census Bureau) was at the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency.All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed. This research was supported by the U.S. Census Bureau, by grant number 98082 from
the “How Housing Matters” research program of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation, by a Research Partnership grant from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, and by the CGIAR Research Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets led by
the International Food Policy Research Institute. This research uses data from the Census
Bureau’s Longitudinal Employer- Household Dynamics Program, which was partially supported
by the following National Science Foundation Grants: SES-9978093, SES-0339191, and
ITR-0427889; a National Institute on Aging Grant AG018854; and grants from the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation and the Russell Sage Foundation. The authors want to thank Emily Mytkowicz
and Mark Heller for their valuable research assistance and David Hardiman, Daniel Hartley,
Kristin McCue, Erika McEntarfer, Todd Richardson, and Geoffrey Wodtke for their comments on
earlier drafts, and participants at numerous seminars and conferences.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Fredrik Andersson, John C. Haltiwanger, Mark J. Kutzbach, Giordano E. Palloni,
Henry O. Pollakowski, and Daniel H. Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Childhood Housing and Adult Earnings: A Between-Siblings Analysis of Housing Vouchers
and Public Housing
Fredrik Andersson, John C. Haltiwanger, Mark J. Kutzbach, Giordano E. Palloni, Henry O.
Pollakowski, and Daniel H. Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 22721
October 2016, Revised September 2018
JEL No. I38,J15,J31,J62,R23
ABSTRACT
We create a national-level longitudinal data set to analyze how children’s participation in public
and voucher-assisted housing affects age 26 earnings and adult incarceration. Naïve OLS
estimates suggest that returns to subsidized housing participation are negative, but that
relationship is driven by household selection into assisted housing. Household fixed-effects
estimates indicate that additional years of public housing and voucher-assisted housing increase
adult earnings by 4.9% and 4.7% for females and 5.1% and 2.6% for males, respectively.
Childhood participation in assisted housing also reduces the likelihood of adult incarceration for
males and females from all household race/ethnicity groups.
Fredrik Andersson
Economics Department
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
250 E Street, SW
Washington, DC 20219
frdrkndrssn@gmail.com
John C. Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
Mark J. Kutzbach
Center for Financial Research
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
550 17th Street NW, MB-2127
Washington, DC 20429
mkutzbach@fdic.gov

Giordano E. Palloni
International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K St NW
Washington, DC 20006
giordano.palloni@gmail.com
Henry O. Pollakowski
Graduate School of Design
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
hpollakowski@gsd.harvard.edu
Daniel H. Weinberg
Asst Director for Decennial Census
U.S. Census Bureau
Washington, DC 20233
dhweinberg@gmail.com

1.

Introduction
Over the last several decades, millions of children lived in Housing Choice Voucher

(HCV)-supported or public housing, two of the largest subsidized housing programs run by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).1 For these children, residential
location, neighborhood amenities, peer composition, and the availability of household resources
were shaped by their households’ participation in subsidized housing. Given the mounting body
of evidence that early characteristics and experiences can have lasting consequences for a range
of adult outcomes (Aaronson 1998; Almond and Mazumder 2005; Black et al. 2007; Almond et
al. 2009; Akee et al. 2010; Chetty and Hendren 2017), exposure to HCV-supported or public
housing early in life could potentially have important implications for adult well-being. Yet,
research on the long-term economic effects of assisted housing for resident children has been
hampered by data and methodological limitations.
Though assisted housing programs in the United States have existed since the 1930s,
researchers have only recently found convincing strategies to deal with the non-random selection
of households into subsidized housing. A series of evaluations of HUD’s Moving to Opportunity
(MTO) program and research using administrative records from Chicago together with
experimental and quasi-experimental variation in participation provide the most convincing
evidence on the impacts of subsidized housing (Jacob 2004; Kling et al. 2005; Jacob and Ludwig
2012; Ludwig et al. 2012, 2013; Jacob et al. 2013, 2015; Chetty et al. 2016; Chyn 2016).2 With
the exception of Chetty et al. and Chyn, these papers identify, at most, modest differences in
short- and long-term such as physical and mental health, criminal behavior, and adult labor
market outcomes.3
However, much of this research estimates differences between the outcomes of children
from households in project-based subsidized housing and the outcomes of children from
households that received tenant-based housing vouchers, and thus does not permit inference
We focus on the cohort of children who were 13-18 in 2000 with participation in either public housing or
HCV housing in the 1997-2005 period. In 2000, there were approximately 3 million children under 18 in
public housing or HCV-assisted housing.
2
Earlier work estimates the effect of either public housing or HCV-assisted housing on short- and longterm outcomes by employing instrumental variables strategies (Currie and Yelowitz 2000; Newman and
Harkness 2000) or propensity score matching (Carlson et al. 2012a, 2012b).
3
Chetty et al. (2016) link MTO data to administrative tax records on college attendance, earnings, and adult
residential locations. They find that voucher recipients who had agreed to move to considerably lower poverty
neighborhoods, on average, live in better neighborhoods, are more likely to have attended some college, and have
higher earnings as adults, but only if the MTO-driven moves occurred prior to age 13.
1

2

about the effects of assisted housing programs relative to unsubsidized housing. Notable
exceptions are the papers examining the Chicago HCV lottery, which use data from one city and
compare HCV-assisted housing with unsubsidized housing.4
While the MTO and Chicago HCV lottery papers arguably identify internally valid
estimates, their limited geographic coverage along with MTO’s experiment-specific features
(households in the experimental group were required to move to low poverty census tracts and
they received counseling support to help them find an apartment and adapt to their new
circumstances) threaten the external validity of the results.5 Public and HCV-assisted housing
opportunities are not uniform across housing authorities (HAs), they vary considerably with
respect to structure type, physical proximity to amenities, ease of availability (i.e., waitlist times
and area median income thresholds), tightness of the rental housing market, access to lower
poverty neighborhoods, and characteristics of participating households. Furthermore, while the
five metropolitan areas included in the MTO experiment6 account for an important share of
assisted housing participants, the households residing in public or HCV-assisted housing in these
cities are observably different from public and HCV-assisted housing participants in the United
States as a whole.7
In this paper, we estimate the long-term effects of teenage participation in HCVsupported and public housing on adult earnings and incarceration. To do so, we develop a
national dataset that combines 2000 and 2010 Census information with comprehensive
longitudinal administrative data on housing assistance, residential location, and earnings. The
integrated data permit us to identify nearly the universe of youths aged 13-18 in 2000, and to
observe demographic information, household structure, housing assistance, neighborhood
See Jacob and Ludwig (2012), Jacob et al. (2015), and Chyn (2016). These papers use administrative data
from the city of Chicago along with a HCV lottery to compare tenant-based housing vouchers to
unsubsidized housing. The first paper tests for effects on adult labor supply, the second explores how longterm health, schooling, and criminal behavior are affected, and the third examines long-term labor market
outcomes.
5
Chyn (2016) raises another generalizability related concern with MTO and the Chicago HCV lottery: because all
participating households had to apply for the program, the returns they experience may not be representative of the
expected return to HCV housing for eligible households. He presents results that indicate that households who
elected to participate in the lottery may be negatively selected on the expected return to HCV housing.
6
The five PHAs included in the MTO experiment are Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New
York City.
7
See columns 1 and 3 of Appendix Tables A2 and A3 which displays summary statistics for households
participating in public and HCV-assisted housing in all housing authorities, in housing authorities that participated
in the MTO experiment, and in housing authorities that did not participate in the MTO experiment. Relative to the
full set of public and HCV-assisted housing participants in the United States, households participating in MTO
housing authorities are more likely to be Black non-Hispanic, face substantially longer waitlist times, and reside in
neighborhoods with higher poverty rates (for public housing).
4

3

characteristics, and parents’ earnings over their teenage years. The longitudinal nature of the data
enables us to follow these teenagers into adulthood, where we observe their quarterly labor
market earnings and whether they are incarcerated in April 2010. To our knowledge, this is the
first paper to estimate the long-term economic effects of both public and HCV-supported
housing for a large nationally representative sample. We contrast the impacts of both programs
with each other as well as with unsubsidized housing.
We employ a household fixed-effects (HFE) specification that exploits variation in
children’s exposure to HCV-supported and public housing participation within households.
Exposure differences are largely a product of household moves into and out of housing combined
with sibling age differences and the teenagers aging out of the household at different times. This
between-siblings approach allows us to isolate the effect of each type of subsidized housing on
adult outcomes from observed and unobserved household-level heterogeneity that may affect
both program participation and adult outcomes. We observe cross-sibling differences in
participation for about 282,000 teenagers, or 24% of the full sample of 1.172 million. These
differences in participation are generated by roughly equal numbers of household entries and
exits from each program and we therefore observe roughly equal numbers of older siblings and
younger siblings with more subsidized housing participation.
Our results confirm that selection into subsidized housing matters. Whereas Ordinary
Least Squares (OLS) estimates indicate a substantial negative effect of housing subsidies when
young on later adult earnings, the HFE estimates are generally positive and statistically
significant. For females we find that each additional year spent in public housing as a teenager
generates a 4.9% premium for young adult earnings. The corresponding estimate for HCVassisted housing is 4.7% per year of participation. For males, the estimates are 5.1% and 2.6%
for public and HCV-assisted housing, respectively. We find the largest impacts on earnings for
females from non-Hispanic Black households in HCV-assisted housing and for females from
Hispanic households in public housing, who earn an additional 7.0% and 7.1% from additional
years of teenage assisted housing participation. Translating the primary effects on age 26
earnings into expected changes in lifetime earnings suggests that each additional year of teenage
public housing participation increases total discounted lifetime pre-tax earnings by $45,400 for
females and $47,300 for males, while each additional year of teenage HCV-assisted housing

4

increases total discounted lifetime pre-tax earnings by $43,600 for females and $24,100 for
males.8
The results for 2010 incarceration closely follow our earnings estimates, both overall and
for the sex by race/ethnicity subgroups. For teenagers from non-Hispanic Black households, each
additional year of HCV-assisted housing reduces the likelihood of being incarcerated in April
2010 by 9.7% for males and 22.6% for females—evaluated at the mean incarceration rate for the
overall sample—and they contrast sharply with the OLS estimates which suggest a positive
association between subsidized housing participation and incarceration, especially for Black nonHispanic males.9 The estimates for public housing suggest similarly sized reductions in the
likelihood of 2010 incarceration for children from Black non-Hispanic households: 9.7% for
males and 19.4% for females.
Our HFE approach, while addressing several sources of bias that are problematic for OLS
estimates, is still vulnerable to two types of potentially confounding variation: unobserved timevarying household-level heterogeneity and unobserved child-level characteristics that vary
between siblings. If either of these are correlated with both teenage subsidized housing
participation and subsequent adult outcomes, they could bias treatment effects estimated through
HFE specifications. We confirm that our main results are robust to a series of checks testing the
relevance of these two potential sources of bias.
The comprehensive and longitudinal earnings data permit us to control for the most likely
source of unobserved time-varying household heterogeneity—changes in the economic
circumstances of the household that may vary across siblings, thereby affecting household
eligibility for public and HCV-assisted housing and directly impacting potential adult outcomes
for the children in the household. The main results are unaffected by the inclusion of controls for
parents’ earnings while children are teenagers, suggesting there is little relationship between
within-household differences in teenage subsidized housing participation and parents’ earnings.
To explore in more detail whether total parents’ earnings differ from their typical level
around the time of a move in or a move out of subsidized housing, we conduct an event study
analysis. The results indicate that moves out of either program are not associated with
meaningful changes in parents’ earnings in the calendar year of a move or in the year prior;
similarly, there is no significant change in parents’ earnings in the year prior to a move into
All dollar figures are in 2000 US$. The increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) from 2000 to 2017 was 42.1%.
Previous research using a HCV lottery in Chicago found no significant effect of childhood HCV receipt on adult
criminal outcomes (Jacob et al. 2015).

8
9

5

either public or HCV-assisted housing. We estimate declines in parents’ earnings in the calendar
year that sample households move into either program suggesting that, if anything, our preferred
estimates may understate the true causal benefits of subsidized housing participation.10 The event
study results therefore also fail to uncover evidence that our main estimates are driven by timevarying economic shocks.
To continue assessing the likelihood that time-varying unobserved heterogeneity is
driving our main results we split the analysis sample and estimate separate treatment effects in
areas with long expected wait times for public and HCV-assisted housing (greater than 9 months
on average) and areas with shorter expected wait times. If parents adjust subsidized housing
participation in response to economic shocks, so that children with more exposure to the better
economic circumstances also experience more teenage subsidized housing (and the converse),
we would expect this source of bias to be more pronounced in areas where households are able to
quickly move into public or HCV-assisted housing. We find no differences in the treatment
effects between areas with long and short wait times.
Similarly, one might be concerned that the HFE estimates are confounded by unobserved
non-economic shocks; for example, adults could exert more parenting effort or otherwise change
behavior in ways that positively influence potential outcomes for children. If these changes are
also associated with an increased likelihood of entering assisted housing—perhaps because
parents are more willing to exert effort applying for government programs—this could generate
positive bias in our treatment effects. Household removal from assisted housing for disciplinary
reasons would similarly lead to positive bias in our estimates if the behaviors leading to the
disciplinary problems are more harmful for younger children. Critically, the positive bias in the
treatment effects would be driven by households moving into a program in the former scenario
and by households moving out of a program in the latter scenario. We find no differences in the
estimated impact of either public or HCV-assisted housing between households that moved in
and those that moved out of the programs.
Though it remains theoretically possible that these potential sources of bias could both
exist, it would need to be the case that they generate exactly the same amount of positive bias in
the treatment effects for households that move into assisted housing as they do for households
that move out of assisted housing. Moreover, in addition to exerting exactly the same amount of
positive bias, both confounders would also need to be orthogonal to the time-varying measures
10

Which will be true if lower parents’ earnings while a teenager depress potential child outcomes.

6

of parents’ earnings we include as a control in the HFE specifications, and be unaffected by
whether parents are able to quickly move their family into assisted housing (as measured by
whether households live in an area with long or short assisted housing wait times). It is unlikely
that there exist biases that satisfy all of these conditions simultaneously, and therefore
unobserved time-varying non-economic shocks are not likely to be driving the estimates.
We view unobserved child-level characteristics as a less likely source of bias. In contrast
to decisions over how to allocate health- or education-related resource across children, the
decision to participate in subsidized housing is made at the household level. Parents have limited
scope to adjust subsidized housing participation to benefit some children but not others. In
addition, to generate upward bias, parents would have to form accurate expectations about the
difference in future adult outcomes for their children and systematically move into subsidized
housing programs so that the children they expect to have better adult outcomes are exposed to
more subsidized housing as teenagers; the required parental accuracy in forecasting long-term
outcomes for children and the necessary responsiveness of subsidized housing participation to
changes in parental expectations seem unreasonable. Regardless, our baseline empirical
specifications control flexibly for the child-level characteristics most likely to be correlated with
teenage subsidized housing participation and adult outcomes that are available in the data—we
include a full set of age by male and household race/ethnicity by male indicators, and our
findings are robust to flexibly controlling for child birth order.
Finally, we test whether the results are affected by the early departures of teenagers for
events expected to improve (e.g., post-secondary education) or harm (e.g., juvenile incarceration)
potential adult outcomes. We do so by implementing a household fixed-effects instrumental
variables (HFEIV) strategy that uses the age differences between siblings and the observed
subsidized housing participation of the head of household in 2000 to predict public housing and
HCV-assisted housing participation for each child. The HFEIV strategy discards any variation in
subsidized housing not driven by the timing of moves made by the head of household, so
departures from the household before age 18 are ignored unless the head of household also
moves. The HFEIV results follow the same qualitative pattern as the primary estimates: the point
estimates remain economically large and positive for male and female children in both public
and voucher-assisted housing and they are never significantly different from their HFE
counterparts.

7

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the subsidized
housing programs we study and discusses how they might affect labor market earnings and
incarceration. Section 3 presents our research design. Section 4 discusses the data infrastructure
and describes the study sample. Section 5 presents the primary empirical results, Section 6
explores extensions and robustness checks, and Section 7 concludes.

2.

Background on Subsidized Housing and Adult Outcomes

2.1

Subsidized and Unsubsidized Housing in the United States11
The federal Public Housing program began with the New Deal era enactment of the

United States Housing Act of 1937. Initially the program consisted of federal subsidies for
construction and ongoing management and operations performed by local public housing
agencies. Because construction subsidies were not sufficient to cover maintenance, the federal
government instituted operating subsidized (in 1974) and imposed a rent ceiling—the maximum
rent that each family could be charged—currently set at 30 percent of family income. In 1970
there were approximately 1 million units of public housing and construction continued slowly
thereafter with the program reaching a peak of 1.4 million units in operation in 1994. Since 1994
participation in public housing has declined to just under 1.3 million in 2000 and about 1.1
million in 2013, reflecting, in part, the demolition of severely distressed projects under the
HOPE VI program.
Enacted in 1974, the Housing Choice Voucher program provides rental assistance for
low-income households through vouchers that prospective tenants take to private sector
landlords of approved rental units. The vouchers allow the landlords to receive the full rental
price, up to a “Fair Market Rent”, while still capping household contributions to 30% of income
in most cases. The HCV program has grown rapidly over the past two decades, with participation
rising from 1.1 million households in 1990 to 1.8 million in 2000 and to nearly 2.4 million in
2013.12
HUD rental assistance is not an entitlement and serves only a fraction of the households
that meet the basic income requirements. HUD estimates that in 2013, at least 7.72 million
unassisted very-low-income (and eligible) households paid more than 50 percent of their income
in rent (Steffin et al. 2015).
2.2
11
12

Potential pathways from child housing subsidies to adult outcomes

We thank David Hardiman and Todd Richardson of HUD for providing substantive clarifications for the section.
In this paper, we do not consider other HUD rental assistance programs (see Appendix A for details).

8

There are a number of channels through which childhood participation in subsidized
housing might affect later adult outcomes. Both HCV and public housing provide a positive
income effect for households. By relaxing the budget constraint faced by participating
households, these programs may enable parents to devote more time and financial resources to
develop the human capital of children residing in the household (Dahl and Lochner 2012; Aizer
et al. 2014; Jacob et al. 2015). This increase in human capital would suggest that childhood
residence in assisted housing should improve adult labor market outcomes and decrease adult
incarceration.
Beyond the direct income effects, assisted housing may help households to avoid some of
the most acute consequences of high housing expenditure, including eviction and homelessness.
Desmond et al. (2015), examining renters in Milwaukee, find higher rates of forced moves for
low-income households, including formal and informal eviction, landlord foreclosure, and
building condemnations. They find that these relocations account for roughly a quarter of all
moves and can result in moves to substandard housing or cause further relocations.
However, other pathways could generate a negative relationship between subsidized
housing participation in childhood and adult well-being. Newman (1972) argues that the design
of some public housing projects is not conducive to community watchfulness and leads to
isolation and crime. Schill (1993) documents the distressed state of public housing with a
backlog of unmet maintenance and modernization needs that could create a harmful living
environment for children. Both building structure-related mechanisms predict a negative
relationship between childhood participation in public housing and adult outcomes.
Oreopoulos (2003) proposes that public housing participation might affect outcomes
through peer or neighborhood effects. If, as argued by Oreopoulos (2003), assisted housing units
are located in worse neighborhoods (i.e., neighborhoods with higher crime rates and lower
quality schools) than participants’ counterfactual housing options, then public and HCV-assisted
housing could have negative neighborhood and peer effects and therefore decrease adult wellbeing.
The impact of HCV-assisted and public housing participation during childhood need not
be the same. Indeed, the perception that public housing might have especially deleterious effects
partly motivated the shift in subsidized housing policy in the U.S. to providing housing choice
through vouchers. In the absence of discrimination on the part of potential landlords, housing
choice voucher housing should offer households increased neighborhood choice. As such, the

9

potential adverse consequences of public housing projects (e.g. negative peer effects) might be
avoided while the positive income effects would be preserved.
Alternatively, public housing projects may offer increased stability for residents. Whereas
voucher recipients and private market households are forced to search for open rental units,
public housing residents receive housing at pre-determined prices (subject to adjustment for
household income) in known locations. Further increasing the search costs faced by HCVassisted households is the possibility that some landlords prefer not to rent units to households
using HCVs. As a result, a significant fraction of families that are offered a voucher are unable to
successfully locate housing on which to use it (Finkel and Buron 2001). Public housing
participants, with Public Housing Authorities as their landlords, do not face this type of
discrimination or search cost.
There may also be heterogeneous impacts of assisted housing for different demographic
groups. For instance, some MTO research uncovers larger benefits of the program for girls than
boys (Kling et al. 2005; Ludwig et al. 2013). To account for the possibility that treatment effects
differ across demographic groups, in our empirical analysis we allow the effects of assisted
housing to vary by sex and race/ethnicity.
In sum, there is no clear prediction as to how subsidized housing participation while
young will affect long-term outcomes. Nor is there a strong prediction about which type of
subsidized housing will have more advantageous or deleterious effects.

3.

Research Design

3.1

Household fixed effects model
Our goal is to identify the causal effect of living in subsidized rental housing as a

teenager on adult earnings and incarceration. To do so, we specify a linear, constant HFE
regression model for each outcome, y, of child i as:
𝑦𝑖𝑓 = 𝛾𝑓 + 𝑯′𝒊𝒇 𝜷𝑯𝑭𝑬 + 𝑿′𝒊𝒇 𝝓 + 𝜖𝑖𝑓

(1)

where f indexes the household including child i in the year 2000. The outcome 𝑦𝑖𝑓 is
either the inverse hyperbolic sine of total age 26 earnings or an indicator for whether child i is
incarcerated in 2010.13 The explanatory variables of interest, 𝑯𝒊𝒇 , are separate measures of the

We use the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of earnings rather than the more traditional log of earnings because
estimated coefficients can be interpreted in the same way as with a log-transformed dependent variable but, unlike
with the log of earnings, IHS is defined for zero earnings. The IHS is defined as log[𝑦𝑖 + (1 + 𝑦𝑖2 )0.5 )] where 𝑦𝑖 is
13

10

number of years spent in public housing and HCV-assisted housing while a teenager, and the
HFE estimates of their impact on the outcomes are represented by 𝜷𝑯𝑭𝑬 . Throughout the text we
focus our analysis on this “dose” version of subsidized housing treatment.14
The vector 𝑿𝒊𝒇 includes child-specific control variables, including an indicator for
whether the child is male, a full set of age dummies, an interaction between whether the child is
male and the age dummies, and when pooling across household races an interaction between the
household race/ethnicity and whether the child is male. We also interact each of the subsidized
housing measures with the male indicator to allow for heterogeneous effects by child sex, and we
estimate separate regressions for each race/ethnicity to allow all coefficients to vary along this
dimension. In some specifications, 𝑿𝒊𝒇 also includes controls for the average block group percent
poverty that each child experienced while a teenager, the inverse hyperbolic sine of average
annual parents’ earnings while the child was a teenager, and a full set of child birth order
indicators. All time-invariant household-level characteristics are subsumed in the household
fixed effects, 𝛾𝑓 . Lastly, 𝜖𝑖𝑓 is a zero-mean error term which we cluster by household.
We recognize that the error term includes all unobserved time-varying household-level
characteristics and all unobserved child-level characteristics that affect the outcomes. If, after
conditioning on household fixed effects, these factors are correlated with subsidized housing
participation and adult outcomes, then our estimates of the impact of subsidized housing may be
biased. As described in the introduction, we explore a variety of robustness checks in our
analysis to alleviate such concerns.
The HFE regression estimates the effect of subsidized housing participation on labor
market outcomes and adult incarceration using only variation in housing participation and
outcomes across teenagers within the same household. In practice, each dependent and
independent variable is demeaned at the household level and ordinary least squares (OLS) is run
using the demeaned values for everyone in the sample. While we retain individuals from
households with no between-sibling difference in assisted housing participation, only
observations from households with some within-household difference in teenage subsidized

total earnings for individual 𝑖 (see Burbidge et al. 1988). Annual earnings are deflated to their year 2000 purchasing
power equivalent using the U.S. city average annual purchasing power for all urban consumers (CPI-U).
14
In unreported results, we also estimate a dummy version of our models, where the treatments are indicators for
whether the individual ever resided in each program while a teenager. The results from these dummy specifications
closely mirror the dose versions.

11

housing participation help to identify 𝜷𝑯𝑭𝑬 . Consider a household in the year 2000 with both a
17 year-old and a 14 year-old which does not enter HUD-subsidized housing until 2003. The
older sibling, who we assume ages out of the household in 2002, would have 𝐻𝑖 = 0 and the
younger sibling would have 𝐻𝑗 = 315 and therefore this household would contribute to the
identification of 𝛽𝐻𝐹𝐸 . As we document in the next section, there is ample within-household
variation in assisted-housing exposure to help identify the effect of interest.
Griliches (1979) provides a summary of the early literature that makes use of sibling
fixed effects and points out potential issues. More recent studies include Royer (2009), which
uses over 3,000 twin pairs and twin fixed effects to estimate the effect of birth weight on longterm outcomes; Currie and Walker (2011), which uses mother fixed effects to estimate the
impact of the introduction of EZ-Pass in New Jersey and Pennsylvania on infant health
outcomes; and Currie et al. (2010), which employs sibling fixed effects to identify the
relationship between early childhood health problems and outcomes in early adulthood. An
especially relevant siblings study is Aaronson (1998), which estimates the effect of
neighborhood characteristics on children’s educational outcomes using sibling fixed effects
specifications.
Previous research has also used a between-siblings methodology to study
intergenerational economic mobility (e.g., Page and Solon 2003; Vartanian and Buck 2005;
Levine and Mazumder 2007; Chetty and Hendren 2015). These studies have the same motivation
for employing a household fixed-effects strategy as we do: to abstract from unobserved time
invariant family attributes. As emphasized in many of these papers, we recognize that withinhousehold variation in unobserved characteristics may bias the household fixed effects results.
We address these concerns with through a series of different robustness checks.

4.

Data

4.1

Sample Construction
We use confidential microdata from the Census Bureau, including administrative files

and censuses, as well as linked public use data to construct a dataset of children eligible for
assisted housing, their housing exposure, and their long-run outcomes (see Appendix A for a
detailed exposition of the data sources). We characterize households using responses to the 2000
Census short form, including geographic location, housing tenure (rent or own), and, for each
This is a slight abuse of notation. Here we use 𝐻𝑗 to denote the generic entry in the vector 𝑯𝒋 , corresponding to the
program that the household enters.
15

12

person, household relationship types and demographics (age, sex, race, and ethnicity). Assisted
housing participation from 1997 to 2005 is taken from HUD’s Public and Indian Housing
Information Center (PIC) file, an annual administrative record submitted by housing authorities
for the housing occupancy verification process that lists households by authority, subsidy type,
and project, and includes application and move in dates as well as identifying information and
demographics for each participant. Earnings from wage and salary jobs come from the Census
Bureau’s Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) Infrastructure Files, an
employer-employee matched dataset assembled from quarterly earnings records from states and
for federal workers. The jobs data, which begin for most states in the 1990s, cover approximately
96 percent of private non-farm wage and salary employment (Stevens 2007). Jobs data for
federal workers are included beginning in 2011. Adult incarceration is defined using the group
Quarters reporting in the 2010 Census. Finally, we identify location from an annual place of
residence file assembled by the LEHD program, which – when administrative records are
available – gives a census block of residence from 1999 onwards.
Starting with the 2000 Census households as a frame, we integrate the files to create a
sample of children from households which are likely eligible for housing assistance. We identify
households with two or more children aged 13 to 18 on April 1, 2000, the reference date for the
2000 Census, who will turn 26 years old in 2008 to 2013, a period spanned by the LEHD
earnings data and including the 2010 Census.16 The Census Bureau uses personal identifying
information to link respondents to unique identifiers, with about 89 percent successfully linked.
We use these identifiers to link the children, as well as Person 1 (on the Census) and any spouse,
to LEHD earnings records, housing assistance records, the annual place of residence data, and
the 2010 Census. To limit the sample to likely eligible households, we require that, while a child
is 13-18, the sum of LEHD reported earnings for the adults (Person 1 and spouse) be no greater
than 50 percent of the Area Median Income (AMI); below 50% AMI households are classified
by HUD as being “very low income” and are typically considered eligible for both public
housing and HCV-assisted housing.17 Although we have no wealth information, we further
restrict the sample to require that households be renters in 2000. We also drop households
residing in 119 counties that were served by housing authorities that participated in HUD’s
Moving to Work (MTW) demonstration program. This sample restriction is made because MTW
Age 26 earnings are used as an outcome in some previous studies of intergenerational economic mobility (e.g.,
Chetty and Hendren 2015). It is likely that most individuals will have completed their education by that age.
17
We base the AMI calculation on the household size and response location in 2000.
16

13

relaxed reporting requirements for housing authorities, so retaining these households would
compromise our ability to link persons with housing assistance.
Having started with 2.8 million children aged 13-18 in 2000, our data integration
requirements and restrictions give us a sample of 1.172 million children in sibling households
(and 673,000 for our sample linked to the 2010 Census). See Appendix A for a full description of
the sample construction as well as our methodology for re-weighting the restricted sample to
better match the broader population. All subsequent estimates are population-weighted, although
our main results are not sensitive to the application of weights.
For this sample, we use the linked files to define our dependent and explanatory variables
as well as to allocate households to subsamples. We construct household level race/ethnicity
indicators for whether the household is White non-Hispanic (White), Black non-Hispanic
(Black), other race non-Hispanic (Other), or Hispanic. We measure the “dose” of treatment for
both public housing and HCV-assisted housing as the count of years a child resided in each type
while aged 13-18. For children aged 17 or 18 in 2000, whom we do not observe in HUD-PIC
data when they are 13 or 14 (in 1995 and 1996), we impute participation in those years based on
a household’s move-in date in 1997 (if they participated then) and add those years to the
treatment count.18 As noted above, we use LEHD to calculate household income as the inverse
hyperbolic sine of average parents’ annual earnings while a child is 13-18, with the goal of
controlling for possible unobserved, time-varying characteristics. We link individuals to the
annual place of residence file (where available), and by census block, to the 2000 Census
summary file, to calculate average observed neighborhood poverty rate (measured at the block
group level) while a child is 13-18. Lastly, we calculate the inverse hyperbolic sine of each
child’s LEHD earnings in the year they turn age 26 (as well as other earnings outcomes) and
create an indicator for whether they are observed in a correctional facility on April 1, 2010.
4.2

Summary Statistics
Our analysis sample closely resembles the characteristics of housing-subsidy eligible

households in the United States. The geographic exclusions of residents (based on the 2000
Census residential location) in counties containing HAs that entered MTW during the study
period do not appear to distort the representativeness of the sample. Appendix Tables A2 and A3
indicate that the housing authorities located in the 3,025 non-MTW counties have similar
characteristics as the public and HCV programs overall. For the year 2000, our non-MTW areas
18

Our results are robust to omitting this imputation and removing 17-18 year-olds entirely.

14

cover 91% of public housing residents and 93% of HCV residents. As mentioned in the
introduction, this coverage is substantially higher than is available for existing experimental
studies, such as MTO, which covers HAs where 20% and 12% of public housing and HCV
households reside, respectively.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for housing subsidy-eligible teenagers from the
counties included in our sample.19 The first column presents summary statistics for the sample
used in estimation – youth aged 13-18 in 2000 living with another sibling aged 13-18 in 2000
whose parents earned less than 50% of AMI. This sample is subdivided further, into those that
lived in households not in subsidized housing anytime during the 1997-2005 study period
(column 2), and those that lived in households receiving a subsidy at some point during this
period (column 3); the latter are then subdivided further into those that themselves never lived in
subsidized housing while aged 13-18 (column 4) and those that did (column 5).
A comparison of columns 2 and 3 shows that there are substantial differences in age 26
earnings, with those in subsidized households earning 24% less at age 26. In addition, Black nonHispanics make up a larger portion of the subsidized sample (47% versus 22%), parents’
earnings are lower in the subsidized sample, and a higher portion of the subsidized sample lived
in single-parent households (77% versus 60%). In contrast, the comparison between columns 4
and 5 uncovers only small differences.20 This similarity suggests, unsurprisingly, that children
who never participated in subsidized housing themselves but that come from households where
at least one child did participate, more closely resemble subsidized housing participants.
To help introduce the within-household variation in subsidized housing participation,
Figure 1 displays the distribution of within-household differences; that is, each youth’s own
subsidized housing participation net of the household mean among all 13 to 18 year-olds (in
2000), that we use to identify our regression model. The figure is based on the full sample
described in Table 1, Column 1, but they are also required to be from households with at least
some within-household difference in subsidized housing participation among the household

Confidentiality restrictions preclude us from releasing summary statistics for the entire sample of 13-18 year-old
children from the 2000 census.
20
Only 15% of children in the ever-subsidized household sample received no subsidy between the ages 13-18. We
focus on estimates of a dose treatment variable, allowing for variation in the number of years of subsidy receipt
among those children from households that were ever subsidized.
19

15

members aged 13-18.21 The distribution is unimodal and symmetric around zero, with an
overwhelming majority of teenagers within 2 years of the household mean participation.
Table 1 also presents the fraction of our sample observed in the 2010 Census as well as
the incarceration rate among those found in 2010. Those not receiving a housing subsidy had the
lowest incarceration rate, just as they had higher adult earnings. In households ever receiving a
housing subsidy, 73% of children were linked to a 2010 Census response. Of these, 5.4% of the
children who did not reside in subsidized housing while a teenager were observed in an adult
correctional facility in 2010, while only 4.5% of those who did reside in some form of subsidized
housing while a teenager were found in an adult correctional facility in 2010. These rates rise to
7.9% and 6.6% for children in Black non-Hispanic households, underscoring the high prevalence
of adult incarceration for our study sample as well as the potential for housing to explain these
differences.
Appendix Table A4 shows more details on the within-household variation in assisted
housing we use for identification. Entries and exits from assisted housing contribute
approximately equally to the within-household variation in housing participation. This balance in
moving patterns helps to decrease the likelihood that any particular source of unobserved timevarying heterogeneity could explain our findings as well as ensuring that there is no relationship
between child age or birth order and the within-household differences in assisted housing.22
Table A4 also shows that the within-household differences in assisted housing are meaningful in
size. For households that move into or out of assisted housing during our study period, we find
that children, on average, have about three quarters of a year more (or less) exposure than the
mean participation for their household. This implies that for a two-child household that moves
during the study period, on average, there is a difference of a year and half between the teenage
participation of the sibling with more exposure and the sibling with less exposure.

5.

Empirical Results

5.1

All households

The restriction that teenagers have some within-household variation is made for expositional purposes. The
subsample displayed in Figure 1 therefore excludes the 41.7% of HCV participants and 69.3% of public housing
participants with no between-sibling variation that are included in our main empirical sample.
22
When households move out of an assisted housing program while at least one child is still a teenager, older
children and lower birth order children will typically have higher levels of teenage program participation; when
households move into an assisted housing program while at least one child is still a teenager, younger children and
higher birth order children will typically have higher levels of teenage program participation.
21

16

The OLS results in column 1 of Table 2 are highly susceptible to bias from selection
based on both time-varying and time-invariant unobservable factors. The point estimates suggest
that there is a statistically significant negative relationship between both public and HCVassisted housing participation and age 26 earnings.
The HFE (between-siblings) results in column 2, which control for all household level
time-invariant heterogeneity, paint a dramatically different picture. The negative relationships in
the OLS specification completely disappear. Both living in public housing and living in a HCVsubsidized unit lead to positive and significant effects on age 26 earnings for males and females.
The “All Households” panel of Table 3 displays the implied treatment effects along with the
results of tests of whether there is no difference in the treatment effects between males and
females or for either sex between public housing and HCV-assisted housing. The estimates imply
that each additional year of voucher housing increases female and male earnings by 4.7% and
2.6%, respectively, while an additional year of public housing increases female and male
earnings by 4.9% and 5.1%, respectively. We are able to reject the null hypothesis of no
difference between the effects of voucher housing for males and females, with females receiving
significantly larger benefits than males. 23
Since we include individuals with zero earnings (through our use of the inverse
hyperbolic sine transformation), assigning a dollar amount to the estimated coefficients depends
on where in the distribution the estimated effects are evaluated. In what follows, we use the mean
of the total earnings at age 26 for those young adults who lived in households that received some
housing subsidy while they were a teenager ($9,716 in 2000 dollars).24
The results indicate that each additional year of HCV participation increases age 26
earnings for females by about $457 and increases age 26 earnings for males by $253. For public
housing, the point estimates suggest that each additional year of public housing participation
increases age 26 earnings for females by $476; for males, the corresponding increase is $496.
We note that an overwhelming majority of teenagers fall within 2 years of the household mean

We check for heteroscedasticity in our main HFE specifications by regressing the squared predicted error term on
the treatment indicators and the same set of controls included in the main regressions. The relationship between the
assisted housing indicators and the squared error terms is always small in magnitude, below 0.03 in absolute value,
and only statistically significant for one of the four assisted housing by male groups: years in voucher housing
interacted with the male indicator. We conclude that heteroscedasticity is unlikely to produce bias in the treatment
effects. Results are available upon request.
24
We use the same figure for all groups when we make these calculations. See Appendix Table A6 for details.
23

17

participation and therefore appropriate caution must be taken in extrapolating these estimates
beyond the within-sample range of variation.
The third, fourth, and fifth columns in Table 2 present results from HFE specifications
that, in addition to the controls in column 2, also include a control for the average total annual
parents’ earnings that each individual experienced between 13 and 18 and its interaction with a
male dummy variable (in column 3), a control for average block group percent poverty that each
child experienced between 13 and 18 years of age and its interaction with a male dummy (in
column 4), and controls for both parents’ earnings and block group poverty and their interactions
with a male dummy (column 5).
We interpret the estimates in column 3 as a first test of whether our household fixed
effects are effectively ridding the treatment effects of bias from unobserved, time-varying
heterogeneity. Specifically, if our treatment effects do not change with the inclusion of average
parents’ earnings, then either the within-household differences in subsidized housing
participation or the within-household differences in adult earnings (or both) are unrelated to
within-household differences in parents’ earnings. We find that the sibling who experiences
higher average parental income has significantly higher earnings at age 26. However, controlling
for changes in the household’s economic circumstances yields essentially no change on the
impact of either subsidized housing program—the subsidized housing coefficients in Columns 2
and 3 are nearly identical. This suggests that the HFE estimates are unlikely to be biased by timevarying household level shocks, which themselves are likely to be strongly correlated with total
parents’ earnings.
Column 4 adds controls for differences in block group poverty across siblings. For
females, block group poverty has a negative relationship with age 26 earnings, while for males
the effect is not statistically different from zero. However, as with parents’ earnings, adding
block group poverty has no impact on the estimated effect of subsidized housing. Consider what
this implies for the potential mechanism linking subsidized housing residence to changes in adult
earnings. For HCV-assisted housing, where households are in principle able to move to lower
poverty neighborhoods by using their HCV, the Column 4 results suggest that either HCV
households do not typically move to substantially lower poverty neighborhoods, or that these
moves to lower poverty neighborhoods do not generate earnings benefits for the children who
reside in them for longer durations. Given the dense literature on the long-term effects of
growing up in better neighborhoods (Aaronson 1998; Kling et al. 2005; Ludwig et al. 2012,

18

2013; Chetty et al. 2014; Chetty and Hendren 2015; Chetty et al. 2015, 2016) and related work
by Collinson and Ganong (2016) which shows that inducing voucher recipients to move into
better neighborhoods is difficult, the former explanation is more plausible: without additional
incentives or assistance to help them move to lower poverty neighborhoods, many HCV
recipients may remain in neighborhoods similar to where they lived prior to receiving their
housing voucher.
Column 5 of Table 2 adds both time-varying within-household controls. Again, the main
effects of these longitudinal controls indicate that block group poverty and parents’ earnings are
predictive of adult earnings, but their inclusion causes no change in the estimated effects of
subsidized housing.25
We also estimate HFE specifications with an indicator for whether individuals worked at
all during their age 26 year. Appendix Table B1 presents these results. The results closely match
those presented in Table 2 for Age 26 earnings. The HFE treatment effects indicate that
additional time spent in the HCV program while a teenager increases the likelihood of being
employed at age 26 by 0.5 percentage points for females and 0.3 percentage points for males.
The corresponding estimates for public housing are a 0.5 percentage point increase for both
females and males.
5.2

Race/ethnicity subsamples
To further explore the results in Table 2, we investigate how the estimates differ by

household race/ethnicity. That is, we estimate equation (1) separately for non-Hispanic White
households, non-Hispanic Black households, and Hispanic households. The control variables are
unchanged from Table 2, but the indicators for household race/ethnicity by sex are now
subsumed by the male dummy variable. The estimated treatment effects are summarized in Table
3 with complete results reported in Appendix Tables B5, B6, and B7, respectively.26
Comparing results across the three subgroups in Table 3, we find either a positive effect
or no effect of public and voucher assisted housing on age 26 earnings for all household
race/ethnicities. We do, however, observe some important differences. The positive effects for
females in Table 2 are driven by females in Black non-Hispanic and Hispanic households,
In results available upon request, we also follow the recommendations in Pei et al. (2017) and include the parents’
earnings measure and the block group poverty measure as dependent variables in our main HFE specifications. We
estimate coefficients below 0.005 (in absolute value)—less than one-tenth the size of the main results—for all
household race/ethnicities and sexes, for both public housing and HCVs. This provides further evidence that the
changes in teenage assisted housing participation are, at most, weakly related to these longitudinal measures.
26
The sample size did not permit robust results for Other race non-Hispanics.
25

19

whereas males appear to benefit in all three race/ethnicity samples. The point estimates for nonHispanic Black females suggest they receive an earnings premium of about 7.0% per year in
HCV housing and 5.5% per year in public housing. Non-Hispanic Black males also see their
adult earnings increase, by about 3.0% and 5.1% per year of residence in HCV-assisted and
public housing; Non-Hispanic White males earn 3.4% and 6.5% for additional years of HCVassisted and public housing. The estimates for White non-Hispanic females are small and not
significantly different from zero for either program. Finally, age 26 earnings increase for
Hispanic males by 3.0% and 5.1%, and by 4.5% and 7.1% for Hispanic females, for HCV and
public housing, respectively. To facilitate the interpretation of these treatment effects, Appendix
Table A6 presents the implied differences in age 26 earnings in 2000 U.S. dollars, evaluated at
the mean age 26 earnings for teenagers who spent some time in subsidized housing as a teenager
($9,716).
For no household race/ethnicity/sex cell are the effects of HCVs and public housing
significantly different statistically from one another. Given the prevailing view of public housing
in the United States, this lack of significant differences is perhaps somewhat surprising. It must
be noted, however, that public housing programs differ greatly across geographic areas and
frequently are quite unlike the oft-cited worst-case scenarios. We find that public housing
residence in childhood has substantial positive benefits for age 26 earnings for all but one
race/ethnicity/sex group, with white non-Hispanic females being the lone exception.
There is, however, some heterogeneity in the effects by sex: females benefit more than
males from HCVs in the pooled and Black non-Hispanic samples, and males benefit more than
females from HCVs and public housing in the White non-Hispanic sample.
5.3

Adult incarceration

Table 4 presents estimates of the effect of subsidized housing on adult incarceration,
using the same controls as our main HFE results in Table 2. For the full sample, we find that an
additional year of HCV housing reduces the likelihood of 2010 incarceration for females and
males by 0.4 and 0.1 percentage points, respectively. Based on the overall mean adult
incarceration rate for the sample, these correspond to a 12.9 percent and 3.2 percent reduction in
adult incarceration. Similarly, a year of public housing reduces incarceration for females and
males by 0.5 and 0.3 percentage points (16.1 and 9.7 percent), respectively. In columns 2, 3, and
4, we find similar patterns for each of the household race/ethnicity subsamples. The largest
reductions in adult incarceration are found for females in Black non-Hispanic households: 0.7

20

and 0.6 percentage points for an additional year of HCV-assisted and public housing. The effects
for males from Black non-Hispanic households are 0.3 percentage point decreases in adult
incarceration for both public and HCV-supported housing.27
Although the effects of youth subsidized housing participation on adult incarceration
presented in Table 4 are independently important, they are also likely to be closely related to the
earnings effects shown in Tables 3 and 4.28 Adult incarceration could lead to decreases in
expected adult earnings because of incapacitation effects, recidivism, reduced self-sufficiency, or
because formerly incarcerated individuals receive a negative earnings premium from
disinvestment in human capital or from having a criminal record (Mueller-Smith 2014).
However, the direction of causality is not so obvious. A reduction in potential earnings could
also increase the likelihood of incarceration through various behavioral and environmental
pathways. Kling et al. (2005) present evidence on how neighborhood poverty affects youth
criminal behavior.
While a comprehensive analysis of the relationship between adult incarceration and adult
earnings is outside the scope of this paper, we do attempt to gauge how important the observed
association between youth subsidized housing and incarceration may be for explaining our
earnings results. In Table 5, for each sex by race/ethnicity group, we calculate the share of the
observed effect of youth subsidized housing participation on age 26 earnings that can be
potentially explained by the incarceration effects presented in Table 4. To obtain these figures,
we multiply the effect of a year of additional subsidized housing participation on the likelihood
of 2010 incarceration by the average association between 2010 incarceration and age 26
earnings.29 We then divide this expected earnings difference by the direct effect of housing on
earnings (the estimates shown in Table 3), and multiply the resulting fraction by 100 to get an
estimate of the percent of the earnings estimates that could be explained by the observed

We also estimate (in unreported results) OLS versions with the same controls as in Table 2 but without household
fixed effects. The OLS specifications with controls for observable factors suggest a positive and statistically significant
relationship between time spent in subsidized housing as a teenager and incarceration for both public and HCVassisted housing. The effects are especially large for Black non-Hispanic males.
28
Note that for this sample, the indicator for 2010 incarceration may be measured at ages 23 to 28, spanning the age
26 earnings outcome. Since we do not have information on the duration or frequency of incarceration, we do not
attempt to disentangle the sequence of earnings changes and incarceration episodes.
29
This latter association is based on household fixed effects specifications with the inverse hyperbolic sine of age 26
earnings as the dependent variable and an indicator for 2010 incarceration as the explanatory variable of interest.
These specifications also include a full set of age by male and household race/ethnicity by male fixed effects.
27

21

differences in incarceration.30 Table 5 does not report results for sex by race/ethnicity groups
where the earnings effect was not statistically significant, instead displaying “(0)”.
Table 5 suggests that reductions in incarceration can account for approximately a quarter
of the positive effect of subsidized housing on earnings. This pathway has the greatest
explanatory potential for females from Black non-Hispanic households: explaining roughly 60%
for HCV-supported housing and 29% for public housing. We remain agnostic about whether the
associations between subsidized housing participation and incarceration are a potential cause or a
consequence of the main earnings effects, but the alignment and strength of the associations
suggests that subsidized housing may have multi-dimensional long-term benefits for children,
especially those in Black non-Hispanic households.
5.4

Implications for Lifetime Earnings and Cost-Benefit Analysis
While our main estimates suggest there is a statistically significant and economically

meaningful increase in age 26 earnings from additional years spent in public and HCV-assisted
housing as a teenager, this captures only a small fraction of the expected increase in lifetime
earnings. We therefore follow Chetty et al. (2015) and Chyn (2016) and use the main treatment
effects for age 26 earnings to estimate the expected benefit for lifetime earnings from an
additional year of public or voucher-assisted housing. To do so, we make four key assumptions:
(1) the household fixed-effects treatment effects shown in Table 3 are constant over the lifecycle
for males and females; (2) the trajectory of lifetime earnings for the children in our sample
follows the pattern suggested by the U.S. population average; (3) real earnings growth is 0.5%
per year; and (4) the discount rate is 3%, slightly higher than the current 30-year Treasury bond
rate.
To estimate the trajectory of lifetime earnings at the U.S. population average, we tabulate
earnings31 by age using the 2000 Census 5% sample microdata from the University of
Minnesota’s Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (Ruggles et al., 2017). Adding together
annual earnings from 19 to 65—after applying a real wage growth rate of 0.5%—gives an
undiscounted sum of lifetime earnings of $1.51 million in 2000 U.S. dollars for the average
worker, and a present discounted value at age 12 of $618,000. Under the above assumptions and

As with the incarceration outcomes, we restrict this sample to children in households with no attrition from 2000
to 2010. We note that these earnings effects are similar to the main sample estimates in Table 3, but are somewhat
attenuated for several subgroups, particularly for boys in voucher housing.
31
To parallel the LEHD earnings measure we use for the main analysis, we consider just wages, salary,
commissions, bonuses, and tips from all jobs.
30

22

using the main treatment effects for age 26 earnings shown in Table 3, each additional year of
teenage public housing participation increases undiscounted total pre-tax lifetime earnings by
$45,400 for females and $47,300 for males; an additional year of teenage voucher-assisted
housing increases undiscounted total pre-tax lifetime earnings by $43,600 for females and
$24,100 for males.32 The analogous estimates for discounted total pre-tax lifetime earnings are
$24,700 (females) and $25,700 (males) for public housing and $23,700 (females) and $13,100
(males) for HCV-assisted housing.
For a household with two children, in expectation, this suggests that each additional year
of public housing participation while both children are teenagers increases total discounted pretax lifetime income for the children by between $49,400 and $51,400 and each additional year of
voucher-assisted participation increases total discounted pre-tax lifetime income for the children
by between $26,200 and $47,400, depending on the sex of the two children. Clearly, childhood
participation in assisted housing produces meaningful long-term economic returns by increasing
expected adult earnings for children in beneficiary households.
With these estimates, we conduct a cost-benefit calculation from the perspective of the
U.S. federal government. In doing so, we recognize that we only consider one of potentially
many benefits of subsidized housing, and therefore the estimated benefits should be interpreted
as a lower bound on the true lifetime benefits from teenage assisted housing participation.33 We
assume that the children in our sample fall into the bottom federal income tax bracket, file their
taxes as singles or as married individuals filing separately, that they elect to take the standard
deduction for their filing status, and that they earn above the standard deduction even in the
absence of any teenage subsidized housing participation. As a result, the federal government
receives 10% of the expected increase in lifetime earnings. For a household with two children,
this implies an expected discounted benefit to the federal government of between $4,940 and
$5,140 for each additional year of public housing and between $2,620 and $4,740 for each
additional year of HCV participation while both children are teenagers.

The mean age 26 total earnings for the individuals in our sample who never participate in subsidized housing
while a teenager is 61.1% of the U.S. population average. We therefore calculate the estimated impacts on
undiscounted lifetime earnings of an additional year of teenage participation in subsidized housing as being equal to
TE x 0.611 x $1.51m, where TE is the relevant treatment effect from Table 3 (e.g., the estimated impact of an
additional year of public housing for females: 0.047). The corresponding estimates for discounted lifetime earnings
are calculated as TE x 0.611 x $618,000.
33
Important omitted benefits include the immediate utility from the income transfer received by the participating
household and any increased housing stability or positive long-term health effects generated by the subsidy. See
Desmond et al. (2015) for a detailed discussion of the value placed on stability for poor households.
32

23

To calculate the cost to the federal government using publicly available “Picture of
Subsidized Households” data from HUDUSER for the year 2000 (HUD, 2000). We compute the
national average federal spending per unit per month for both public housing and the HCV
program. For public housing, this is the sum of the operating subsidy and the capital
improvement cost scaled by the number of occupied units; for the HCV program, it represents
the total housing assistance payment plus an administrative cost (payment to landlords) divided
by the total number of reported participating households. The results suggest that the average
cost per year for a unit of public housing is $5,112 and the average cost per year for one year of
HCV-assistance is $5,124. Therefore, even when we only consider the intergenerational financial
benefit to the federal government from providing housing assistance to poor households, the
public housing and HCV programs are expected to be almost cost-neutral in the long run through
their impact on expected future tax revenue.

6.

Robustness and Heterogeneity
While the HFE specifications eliminate unobserved time-invariant household-specific

heterogeneity, they are still susceptible to bias from time-varying shocks or unobserved
individual-level characteristics. For example, differences in adolescent incarceration or postsecondary attendance that may directly impact potential adult outcomes and also result in early
household departures (and therefore within-household differences in teenage assisted housing
participation) could be problematic for the estimates. And while we believe the parents’ earnings
controls are a good proxy for most of the time-varying economic shocks that could generate bias,
we recognize that they are an imperfect proxy; thus, the lack of movement in the treatment
effects when we control for parents’ earnings is not sufficient to rule out either possible source of
bias. We therefore undertake several additional robustness checks to further assess the likelihood
that our results are biased by either source of potentially unobserved variation.34
Before turning to the robustness checks, it is worth briefly discussing the likely sign of
any bias from time-varying household-level heterogeneity. To be eligible for public or HCV
Another potentially confounding unobserved characteristic we do not discuss is between-sibling differences in
pre-teen exposure to subsidized housing. While data limitations prevent us from controlling for precise measures of
the amount of pre-teenage exposure, we confirm that our main results are robust to controlling for whether the
household was in subsidized housing as of the beginning of the sample period (discussed more later in this section).
Concerns of such omitted variable bias is also mitigated in that it is not immediately obvious that we should expect
differences in teenage exposure to subsidized housing across siblings to be systematically correlated with differences
in pre-teenage exposure to subsidized housing, since the expected sign of the correlation largely depends on whether
older or younger siblings have more teenage exposures. If so, there is no reason to expect bias in the parameter
estimates for teenage exposure even if pre-teenage exposure is omitted from the exposure.
34

24

housing, housing authorities typically require that a household be “very low income” (below
50% of AMI). As a result, we should expect there to be a negative relationship between
household income and eligibility for assisted housing. If longer exposure to depressed economic
conditions also negatively impacts potential adult outcomes for children, there may also be a
negative relationship between within-household differences in assisted housing participation and
within-household differences in adult outcomes. This should bias treatment effects estimated
through HFE specifications downwards as we would incorrectly attribute the negative effect of
poor household economic conditions to an increased likelihood of being eligible for assisted
housing. Many household-level shocks that would increase the likelihood a household
participates in subsidized housing would be expected to worsen potential adult outcomes for
children. Homelessness, divorce or separation, the death or incarceration of an adult household
member, or the change in disability status of a household member could all increase eligibility
(or decrease the required wait time) for assisted housing, but would also be expected to
negatively impact adult outcomes for children with more exposure. We discuss some potential
scenarios below.
6.1

Time-varying household-level heterogeneity
If households’ entries into or exits from assisted housing are correlated with other

changes—for example, economic shocks to the household or differences in parenting effort or
effectiveness—then HFE specifications may incorrectly attribute the impacts of these factors to
the within-household differences in teenage assisted housing. While it seems unlikely that there
are time-varying factors correlated with both potential outcomes and assisted housing
participation, but not with the longitudinal measure of parents’ earnings included as a control in
Table 2, simply adding the measure as a control is not sufficient to completely rule out this
possible source of bias. Below we therefore conduct several additional tests designed to judge
whether time-varying household-level heterogeneity could be contaminating our estimates.
We begin by estimating an event study specification of the relationship between parents’
earnings and changes in assisted housing participation; the event study analysis allows us to test
how parents’ earnings differ from their typical level around the calendar year of a move into or
out of assisted housing. To do so, we collapse the data to the household-year level, generating a
variable for the inverse hyperbolic sine of total parents’ earnings and four indicators for whether
the household was observed making any of the possible types of moves in every year of our data:
a move out of public housing, a move into public housing, a move into HCV-assisted housing, or

25

a move out of HCV-assisted housing. In each year, we also generate leads and lags of the move
variables to produce indicators for whether the household makes each type of move in that
calendar year, in the next calendar year, or in any previous calendar year. Appendix Table A5
displays some key summary statistics for the household-level sample used in the event study
analysis. The event study estimates then are generated by estimating the following by OLS:
𝑡−1

𝑦ℎ𝑡 = 𝛼ℎ + 𝛼𝑡 +

′
∑ 𝛽𝑀𝑠 𝑀ℎ𝑠 + 𝑋ℎ𝑡
𝜙 + 𝜖ℎ𝑡

∑

(2)

𝑀∈{𝑃𝐸,𝑃𝐷,𝑉𝐸,𝑉𝐷} 𝑠=𝑡+1

where 𝑦ℎ𝑡 is the inverse hyperbolic sine of total parents earnings for household ℎ in year
𝑡, 𝛼ℎ is a household fixed effect, 𝛼𝑡 is a year fixed effect, 𝑀ℎ𝑠 is an indicator for whether
household ℎ made a move of type 𝑀 in year 𝑡,35 where 𝑀 can be each of the four possible moves
types—an entrance to public housing (𝑃𝐸), a departure from public housing (𝑃𝐷), an entrance to
the HCV program (𝑉𝐸), or a departure from the HCV program (𝑉𝐷). 𝑋ℎ𝑡 includes a full set of
state by year fixed effects and indicators for the count of children in household ℎ of each age
between 13 and 23 in year 𝑡, and 𝜖ℎ𝑡 is an error term which we cluster at the household level. As
shown by the interior summation, for each of the move indicators we include a set of indicators
for whether the household makes that type of move in the next calendar year (𝑠 = 𝑡 + 1), in that
calendar year (𝑠 = 𝑡), or whether they made that type of move in any previous calendar
year (𝑠 = 𝑡 − 1). The omitted category is therefore moves of each type that occurred at least two
years after the year (𝑠 > 𝑡 + 1) when parents’ earnings are observed. Because we include a full
set of year fixed effects and household fixed-effects, identification of the coefficients of interest,
the 𝛽𝑀𝑡+1, come from changes in parents’ earnings that occur in the year prior to a move, relative
to their level at least two years prior to a move. We include the move indicators for past moves
and moves that occur in that calendar year to ensure that identification of the 𝛽𝑀𝑡+1 coefficients
does not use any variation in parents’ earnings that could be caused by the moves.
Figure 3 displays the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the estimates on
each of the four possible move indicators for the year prior to a move, 𝛽𝑀𝑡+1, and the year of the
move, 𝛽𝑀𝑡 . The coefficients should be interpreted as the percent change in total parents’
earnings, relative to their level at least two years prior to the move. None of the 95% confidence

We define a move for a given year if, when examining the subsidized housing participation of the teenagers who
resided in the household in the year 2000, the household has at least one teenager participating in a program in the
prior year but none participating in the year being considered (a move out), or if the household has no teenagers
participating in the program in the prior year but at least one participating in the year being considered (a move in).
35

26

intervals for the year prior to a move exclude zero, suggesting that there is no change in parents’
earnings in the year prior to a move into or out of public or HCV-assisted housing. The event
study results thus help to dispel what we view as the most likely source of potential bias for the
HFE estimates: unobserved time-varying changes in household economic conditions.36
Non-economic time-varying household factors could also generate bias in the HFE
estimates. For example, changes in parental effort at home—for example, exerting additional
effort towards housing search or applying to government programs—could improve potential
outcomes for children; this type of unobserved change, whereby parents “get their act together”
in multiple ways simultaneously, would lead to positively biased estimates for households that
move into assisted housing during the study period. Conversely, if households are removed from
assisted housing for disciplinary reasons37 and the behaviors that lead to the punishment
independently affect child well-being, we would incorrectly attribute this to the changes in
assisted housing participation. This would lead to positively biased estimates for households that
move out of assisted housing during the study period. In both cases, we should expect to find a
difference in the treatment effects between households that move into and households that move
out of assisted housing. If both biases are important, we would still estimate a difference in the
treatment effects for entries and exits as long as these biases are not exactly equal in magnitude.
To assess whether these potential confounders are important, we therefore estimate HFE
specifications that include an interaction between the assisted housing measures (and the male
interaction) and an indicator for whether each household was in assisted housing in 1997, the
first year of data. Households with a between-sibling difference in assisted housing that
participated in 1997 are likely to have moved out while those that did not participate in 1997 are
Interpreting estimates for the year of the move (𝑠 = 𝑡) is more nuanced. While there is no statistically significant
change in parents’ earnings in the year of household departure from public housing, we can reject the null of no
change in parents’ earnings in the calendar year of a move out of HCV-assisted housing, though the point estimate is
small in magnitude—less than 0.025 in absolute value. There are also declines of roughly 10% in parents’ earnings
in the calendar year of a move into public and HCV-assisted housing. However, because the assisted housing data
are chronologically coarse, we only observe a binary participation measure for each individual annually; we
therefore can’t accurately sequence the change in parents’ earnings and the change in assisted housing participation
within year 𝑡. Together with the lack of any changes in parents’ earnings in the year prior to the moves, this suggests
a plausible explanation for the observed differences in parents’ earnings in the same calendar year of the moves—
particularly for moves into subsidized housing—is that there is a short-term negative causal effect on parents’
earnings. This would be consistent, in both sign and magnitude, with the findings in Jacob et al. (2013), which
suggests that adult earnings decline by approximately 10% for households randomly allocated to receive a housing
voucher through the Chicago Housing Voucher Lottery. For this reason, we do not view the changes in parents’
earnings in year 𝑡 as a threat to our household fixed-effects estimates; rather, we believe they capture part of the
causal effect of the move.
37
Among other reasons, HUD regulations enable tenancy to be terminated for criminal activity, illegal drug use,
alcohol abuse, fleeing prosecution, custody or confinement, or violating a condition of probation or parole.
36

27

likely to have moved in during the study period. Appendix Table B2 presents the results. For
neither public nor HCV-assisted housing are any of the interactions significantly different from
zero. Additionally, the main (non-interacted) coefficients are unchanged in magnitude, despite
the inclusion of the interaction terms.
Though it remains theoretically possible that these potential sources of bias could both
exist even with the results shown in Table B2, it would need to be the case that they generate
exactly the same amount of positive bias in the treatment effects for households that move into
assisted housing as they do for households that move out of assisted housing. Moreover, both
confounders would also need to be orthogonal to the time-varying measures of parents’ earnings
we include as a control in the HFE specifications since the main results are robust to the
inclusion or exclusion of this control. Given results presented below on the robustness of the
results to areas with different waiting times, they would also need to be unaffected by whether
parents are able to quickly move their family into assisted housing. It is unlikely that there exist
biases that satisfy all of these conditions simultaneously, suggesting that changes in parental
effort or behavior-related evictions from assisted housing are not driving the results.
As pointed out by Jacob and Ludwig (2012) and others, subsidized housing programs are
frequently oversubscribed, leading to lengthy lags between when households apply for a program
and when they are allotted a voucher or public housing unit. Households that apply to an
oversubscribed subsidized housing program may end up with children exposed to different
amounts of the program purely because of their mandated wait time. Figure 2 indicates that about
12% of public housing residents and 29% of housing voucher recipients faced wait times of 1
year or more. In areas where households are quickly able to adjust their assisted housing
participation—those with shorter wait times—it is more likely that unobserved and time varying
characteristics will be correlated with within-household differences in assisted housing
participation. On the other hand, in areas with long average wait times, this association should be
weaker because of the larger expected gap between when households apply to the programs (and
therefore the change that induced them to apply) and when they enter the program. Testing for
differences in treatment effects between areas with longer wait times and those with shorter wait
times offers another way to assess whether unobserved time-varying household characteristics
are likely to bias the HFE results.
In Table 6 we present estimates for two subsamples that differ by whether the household
resided in a county in 2000 with average subsidized housing wait times of less than or greater

28

than 9 months (approximately the median county-level wait time). The HFE estimates are similar
to the main results in Table 2 for households in both low and high wait time areas. In no case can
we reject the hypotheses that the estimated treatment effects are the same in the two samples,
further supporting the idea that the main results are not driven by unobserved time-varying
factors.
6.2

Unobserved individual-level heterogeneity
The second potential threat to our HFE empirical strategy is unobserved individual-level

characteristics that are correlated with both within-household differences in teenage assisted
housing participation and within-household differences in potential adult outcomes. Though we
view this as a less likely source of bias, we still conduct several exercises intended to rule it out
as a possible confounder.
First, the main HFE specifications include flexible controls for almost all the individuallevel characteristics available in the data. Specifically, a full set of age fixed effects, a full set of
age by male fixed effects, a full set of male by household race fixed effects, and a male indicator
are included as controls in each specification. We also estimate specifications that include birth
order fixed effects; not surprisingly given the observed balance in household entrances and exits
from public housing and the HCV program shown in Table A4, the point estimates when
including birth order fixed effects are nearly identical to those from our preferred HFE
specification.38
A second exercise explores the possibility that individual-level characteristics related to
early departures from households may bias HFE estimates. If children from households that
participate in assisted housing are systematically departing home before the age of eighteen for
college, incarceration or another institution that might directly affect potential adult outcomes,
HFE specifications would incorrectly attribute the observed differences in adult outcomes to the
shorter duration of assisted housing residence for these children. The direction of the bias
depending on the sign of the relationship between the omitted factor and the outcome of interest.
In the event of education, this bias is likely to be negative (i.e., we would underestimate the
impact of public or voucher-supported housing) while in the case of juvenile incarceration the
bias is likely to be positive. To address these concerns, we implement a HFE instrumental
variables specification (HFEIV) that uses the observed participation in public and HCV-assisted
housing of the head of household from the 2000 Census, along with the birth dates of the
38

Results available upon request.

29

teenagers in our sample, to define a predicted measure of teenage participation in both public and
HCV-assisted housing. We then use these predicted participation measures as instruments for the
observed participation of the teenager.
Table 7 reports household fixed-effects results using the actual treatment (also found in
column 2 of Table 2), using the predicted treatment instead of the actual treatment, and
household fixed effects instrumental variables estimates which instrument for the actual
treatment with the predicted treatment. In all columns we transform the earnings variable into a
distributional measure, giving the earnings percentile of each child in their age 26 year among all
children in the sample. We do so to ensure that the outcome is more robust to outliers and less
sensitive to small within-household differences in earnings which may be particularly
troublesome as the HFEIV estimates use only a fraction of the total within-household variation in
subsidized housing. The HFE estimates follow the same pattern as those displayed in Table 2:
the effect of public housing and HCV-assisted housing on age 26 earnings is positive, with larger
effects of HCV-assisted housing for females than males and slightly larger effects of public
housing for males than females.
Turning to the estimates that use the predicted treatment measures (HFE PRED), there is
little movement in the HCV estimates relative to the HFE estimates. As expected given the
strong first stage (shown at the bottom of Table 7), the HFEIV estimates closely track both the
HFE and HFE PRED results. The effect of HCVs for females remains large, positive, and
statistically significant, while the male interaction is negative but small enough that males are
still expected to receive an earnings premium from time spent in voucher housing. While the
HFEIV female public housing estimate remains positively signed, it is imprecisely estimated and
not significantly different from zero. That said, we are unable to reject that the effect of public
housing for females is equal when using HFE (the observed participation measure) and the
HFEIV strategy. In fact, The HFEIV estimates are never significantly different from either the
HFE estimates which use observed participation or the HFE PRED estimates. The HFEIV
estimates therefore confirm that the early departure of children from subsidized households is not
driving our main results.
6.3

Heterogeneity by public housing characteristics
Given that housing subsidy programs are implemented by local housing

authorities, the programs can vary considerably across geographic areas. As discussed in
the introduction, previous research has identified potential concerns with large and low-

30

income public housing projects, some of which is classified as severely distressed
housing. Although we do not have information on the overall quality, upkeep, or crime
rates in housing projects, we can examine these hypotheses indirectly by identifying
especially large or especially low-income housing projects. In Appendix Tables B3 and
B4, we examine whether public housing projects in the upper quartile of size or the lower
quartile of resident income have differential effects on children (we do not consider
characteristics of voucher housing, where subsidies are tied to the recipient and may be
transferred across locations).
The results provide little evidence that large or low-income projects are worse for
individuals who reside in them as teenagers. In the pooled sample, these public housing
projects do not have any differential effect on age 26 earnings relative to projects in the
bottom three quartiles of size or the top three quartiles of household income for either
males or females. In the race/ethnicity sub-samples, there is some weak evidence that
especially large public housing projects are less beneficial for Hispanic males and lowincome public housing projects are less beneficial for Hispanic females. If anything,
White non-Hispanic and Hispanic males seem to benefit more from particularly lowincome public housing projects. Together, we find little evidence to support the theory
that especially large or low-income public housing projects have differential effects on
the age 26 earnings of individuals who reside in them as teenagers. We note, however,
that these measures are only general and indirect characterizations of project quality and
that using improved measures of public housing project quality could yield different
results.

7.

Conclusion
Despite the exposure of millions of children in low-earning households to subsidized

rental housing and the potential for these programs to have effects on long-term outcomes, the
existing literature lacks a well-identified comparison of public housing, HCV-assisted housing,
and private market housing. This study estimates the long-term effects of living in public
housing and HCV-assisted housing as a teenager on age 26 earnings and incarceration, enabling
the direct comparison of both programs to each other and to private market housing.
We estimate household fixed effects models that identify the impact of assisted housing
by exploiting only variation within households. This between-siblings approach allows us to
isolate the effect of each type of subsidized housing on adult outcomes from observed and

31

unobserved household-level differences that may affect both program participation decisions and
adult outcomes. We find that the substantial negative effects of subsidized housing in OLS
specifications are attributable to the selection of households into assisted housing. After
accounting for this household-level selection, subsidized housing participation as a teenager
yields substantial positive effects on age 26 earnings for both females and males.
We use the age 26 earnings effects to estimate expected lifetime earnings benefits and
find that each additional year of teenage public housing participation increases total discounted
pre-tax lifetime earnings in 2000 US$ by $45,400 for females and $47,300 for males while
additional years of teenage HCV participation increase total discounted pre-tax lifetime earnings
by $43,600 for females and $24,100 for males. The increase in lifetime earnings is sufficiently
large that a cost-benefit analysis implies that subsidized housing is approximately cost neutral in
the long run, even when only considering the implied increase in tax revenue from the
intergenerational increase in earnings. We also find substantial reductions in the likelihood of
adult incarceration, particularly for non-Hispanic Black males and females.
There remain limitations to our analysis. First, our results apply to just two of the largest
HUD-subsidized housing programs—public and housing choice voucher-assisted housing. The
project-based housing voucher program, which serves a somewhat higher proportion of elderly
households and a lower proportion of families with children, is not considered, nor is the Low
Income Housing Tax Credit program. Second, our results may not be representative of all
subsidized households. We exclude from our estimates households with only younger children,
and those with just one teenager. However, the sub-population for which we estimate treatment
effects—households with two or more teenagers born within a 6-year range—represent a large
and important fraction of subsidy-eligible households. While this is a formative period, other
research has suggested that early childhood circumstances may be even more important
predictors of long-term outcomes. Future work should investigate whether exposure to
subsidized housing during earlier periods of life has long-term implications as well.
Public and HCV-assisted housing participation while a teenager has meaningful and
beneficial effects on both age 26 earnings and incarceration. Though the increased neighborhood
choice afforded to participating households suggests there could be higher returns to HCVassisted housing than public housing, we find no evidence that children who grow up in HCVassisted housing do better than children who group in public housing as adults. One possibility is
that, without financial incentives or intensive counseling, households that enter the HCV

32

program are unlikely to move to better neighborhoods. Future research should explore how the
local rental housing market as well as the physical and social characteristics of public housing
projects affect the long-term effects of both HCV-assisted and public housing.

References
Aaronson, Daniel. 1998. “Using Sibling Data to Estimate the Impact of Neighborhoods on
Children's Educational Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources 33(4): 915-946.
Abravanel, Martin, Robin Smith, Margery Turner, Elizabeth Cove, Laura Harris, and Carlos
Manjarrez. 2004. Testing Public Housing Deregulation: A Summary Assessment of
HUD’s “Moving To Work” Demonstration. Washington DC: The Urban Institute.
Abowd, John, John Haltiwanger, and Julia Lane. 2004. “Integrated Longitudinal EmployeeEmployer Data for the United States.” American Economic Review 94(2): 224-229.
Aizer, Anna, Shari Eli, Joseph P. Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2014. “The Long Term
Impact of Cash Transfers to Poor Families.” NBER Working Paper No. 20103.
Akee, Randall K.Q., William E. Copeland, Gordon Keeler, Adrian Angold, and E. Jane Costello.
2010. “Parents’ Incomes and Children’s Outcomes: A Quasi-Experiment Using Transfer
Payments from Casino Profits.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(1):
86-115.
Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Marten Palme. 2009. “Chernobyl’s Subclinical Legacy:
Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 124(4): 1729-1772.
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2005. “The 1918 Influenza Pandemic and
Subsequent Health Outcomes: An Analysis of SIPP Data.” American Economic Review
95(2): 258-262.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Alan Krueger. 1994. “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling
from a New Sample of Twins.” American Economic Review 84(5): 1157-1173.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2007. “From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122(1): 409-439.
Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee, and A. Leslie Robb, 1988. "Alternative Transformations to
Handle Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable" Journal of the American Statistical
Association 83(401): 123-127.
Burt, Martha. 2001. “Homeless Families, Singles, and Others: Findings from the 1996 National
Survey of Homeless Assistance Providers and Clients.” Housing Policy Debate 12(4):
737-780.
Carlson, Deven, Robert Haveman, Thomas Kaplan, and Barbara Wolfe. 2012a. “Long Term
Earnings and Employment Effects of Housing Voucher Receipt.” Journal of Urban
Economics 71(1): 128-150.

33

Carlson, Deven, Robert Haveman, Thomas Kaplan, and Barbara Wolfe. 2012b. “Long-term
Effect of Public Low-Income Housing Vouchers on Neighborhood Quality and
Household Composition.” Journal of Housing Economics 21: 101-120.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where is the land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4): 1553-1623.
Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren. 2015. “The Effects of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
Mobility: Childhood Exposure Effects and County Level Estimates.” Working Paper.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence Katz. 2015. “The Effects of Exposure to Better
Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity
Experiment.” American Economic Review 106(4): 855-902.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Frina Lin, Jeremy Majerovitz, and Benjamin Scuderi. 2016.
“Childhood Environment and Gender Gaps in Adulthood.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper # 21936.
Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren. 2017. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper # 23001.
Chyn, Eric. 2016. “Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effect of Public Housing Demolition
on Labor Market Outcomes of Children.” University of Michigan Working Paper, at
https://economics.nd.edu/assets/186186/chyn_moved_to_opportunity_jmp_12_12_2015.
pdf.
Collinson, Robert and Peter Ganong. 2016. “The Incidence of Housing Voucher Generosity.”
Working Paper, at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2255799.
Currie, Janet, Mark Stabile, Phongsack Manivong, and Leslie L. Roos. 2010. “Child Health and
Young Adult Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources 45: 517-548.
Currie, Janet, and Reed Walker. 2011. “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
EZ-Pass.” American Economic Journals-Applied Economics 3: 65-90.
Currie, Janet and Aaron Yelowitz. 2000. “Are Public Housing Projects Good For Kids?” Journal
of Public Economics 75: 99–124.
Dahl, Gordon B. and Lance Lochner. 2012. “The Impact of Family Income on Child
Achievement: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” American Economic
Review 102(5): 1927-1956.
Desmond, Matthew, Carl Gershenson, and Barbara Kiviat. 2015. “Forced Relocation and
Residential Instability among Urban Renters.” Social Service Review 89(2): 227-262.
Finkel, Meryl and Larry Buron. 2001. “Study on Section 8 Voucher Success Rates.” Volume I:
Quantitative Study of Success Rates in Metropolitan Areas. U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research.
Griliches, Z. 1979. “Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginnings of a Survey.” Journal of
Political Economy 87: S37-S64.
HUD. 2000. “Picture of Subsidized Households.” [dataset]. Retrieved from
https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/assthsg.html.

34

Jacob, Brian A. 2004. “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement: Evidence
from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago.” American Economic Review 94(1): 233258.
Jacob, Brian A. and Jens Ludwig. 2012. “The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply:
Evidence from a Voucher Lottery.” American Economic Review 102(1): 272-304.
Jacob, Brian A., Jens Ludwig, and Douglas L. Miller. 2013. “The Effects of Housing and
Neighborhood Conditions on Child Mortality.” Journal of Health Economics 32(1): 195206.
Jacob, Brian A., Max Kapustin, and Jens Ludwig. 2015. “The Impact of Housing Assistance on
Child Outcomes: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Lottery.” Quarterly Journal of
Economic 130(1): 465-506.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz (2005) “Neighborhood Effects on Crime
for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher
Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(1): 87-130.
Levine, David and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2007. “The Growing Importance of Family: Evidence
from Brothers’ Earnings.” Industrial Relations 46(1): 7-21.
Lubell, Jeffrey M., Mark Shroder and Barry Steffen. 2003. “Work Participation and Length of
Stay in HUD-Assisted Housing.” Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and
Research 6(2): 207-223.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg Duncan, Lisa Gennetian, Lawrence Katz, Ronald Kessler, Jeffrey Kling, and
Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2012. “Neighborhood Effects on the Long-Term Well-Being of LowIncome Adults.” Science 337(6101): 1505-1510.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg Duncan, Lisa Gennetian, Lawrence Katz, Ronald Kessler, Jeffrey Kling, and
Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2013. “Long-term Neighborhood Effects on Low-Income Families:
Evidence from Moving to Opportunity.” American Economic Review 103(3): 226-231.
Mills, Gregory, Daniel Gubits, Larry Orr, David Long, Judie Feins, Bulbul Kaul, Michelle
Wood, Amy Jones and Associates, Cloudburst Consulting, and the QED Group. 2006.
The Effects of Housing Vouchers on Welfare Families. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and
Research.
Mueller-Smith, Michael. 2015. “The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration.”
Working Paper, University of Michigan Department of Economics, at
http://www.antoniocasella.eu/nume/Mueller-Smith_2014.pdf.
Newman, Sandra and Joseph Harkness. 2000. “Assisted Housing and the Educational Attainment
of Children.” Journal of Housing Economics 9: 40-63.
Newman, Sandra and Joseph Harkness. 2002. “The Long-Term Effects of Public Housing on
Self-Sufficiency.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21: 21-43.
Newman, Oscar. Defensible Space: Crime Prevention Through Urban Design. New York:
Macmillan. 1972.
Olsen, Edgar O., Catherine A. Tyler, Jonathan W. King, and Paul E. Carrillo. 2005. “The Effects
of Different Types of Housing Assistance on Earnings and Employment.” Cityscape: A
Journal of Policy Development and Research 8(2): 163-187.
35

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2003. “The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1533-1575.
Page, Marianne and Gary Solon. 2003. “Correlations between Brothers and Neighboring Boys in
Their Adult Earnings: The Importance of Being Urban.” Journal of Labor Economics
21(4): 831-855.
Pei, Zhuan, Jorn-Steffen Pischke, and Hannes Schwandt. 2017. “Poorly Measured Confounders
are More Useful on the Left than on the Right.” NBER Working Paper No. 23232.
Popkin, Susan J., Diane K. Levy, Laura E. Harris, Jennifer Comey, Mary K. Cunningham, and
Larry F. Buron. 2004. “The HOPE VI Program: What about the Residents?” Housing
Policy Debate 15(2): 385-414.
Quigley, John, and Steven Raphael. 2004. “Is Housing Unaffordable? Why Isn’t It More
Affordable.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(1): 191-214.
Raphael, Steven. 2005. “The Socioeconomic Status of Black Males: The Increasing Importance
of Incarceration,” in Alan Auerbach, David Card, and John Quigley (eds.), Poverty, the
Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, Russell Sage Foundation: New York.
Royer, Heather. 2009. “Separated at Girth: Estimating the Long-Run and Intergenerational
Effects of Birthweight Using Twins.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
1: 49-85.
Ruggles, S., K. Genadek, R. Goeken, J. Grover, and M. Sobek. 2017. “Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series: Version 7.0.” [dataset]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V7.0.
Schill, Michael H. 1993. “Distressed Public Housing: Where Do We Go from Here?” The
University of Chicago Law Review 60(2): 497-554.
Shroder, Mark. 2002. “Does Housing Assistance Perversely Affect Self-Sufficiency? A Review
Essay.” Journal of Housing Economics 11: 381-417.
Steffen, Barry L., George R. Carter, Marge Martin, Danilo Pelletiere, David A. Vandenbroucke,
and Yung-Gann David Yao. 2015. “Worst Case Housing Needs.” U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research.
Stevens, David. 2007. “Employment that is Not Covered by State Unemployment Insurance
Laws.” U.S. Census Bureau LEHD Technical Paper No. TP-2007-04.
Tatian, Peter A. and Christopher Snow. 2005. “The Effects of Housing Assistance on Income,
Earnings, and Employment.” Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research
8(2): 135-161.
Thomas Vartanian and Page Walker Buck. 2005. “Childhood and Adolescent Neighborhood
Effects on Adult Income: Using Siblings to Examine Differences in OLS and Fixed
Effect Models.” Social Service Review 79(1): 60-94.

36

.4
.3
Density
.2
.1
0

0

.1

Density
.2

.3

.4

Figure 1: Within-Household Differences in Subsidized Housing Participation

-4

-2

0
2
HCV-assisted Housing

4

-4

-2

0
Public Housing

2

4

Notes:
Figure displays the distribution of within-household differences in public housing and HCV-assisted housing participation for teenagers in the
main sample. Within-household differences are topcoded to have an absolute value no greater than four and individuals from households with
no differences in program participation are omitted. Of individuals in households with some HCV-assisted housing participation, 0.428 have no
within-household variation. Of individuals in households with some public housing participation, 0.699 have no within-household variation. Each
bin represents a one year difference in program participation.

Figure 2: Days on a Waitlist Prior to Program Admission in 2000
HCV-assisted Housing
.01
.008
.006
0

.002

.004

Fraction of Households

.006
.004
0

.002

Fraction of Households

.008

.01

Public Housing

0

200
400
600
800
Days on Waitlist Before Admission

1000

0

200
400
600
800
Days on Waitlist Before Admission

1000

Notes:
Figure displays the distribution of days spent on the waiting list before admission for households found in both public and HCV-assisted housing in
the year 2000. The sample is limited to households with non-missing admission and waitlist information who gained admission to their program no
earlier than 1995. 0.116 of public housing households spent >1 year and 0.033 spent >2 years on a waitlist prior to admission. 0.287 of HCV-assisted
housing households spent >1 year and 0.108 spent >2 years on a waitlist prior to admission.

37

Average Difference in IHS Parents’ Earnings by Year
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

Figure 3: Event Study Estimates of Changes in Parents’ Earnings in Years Before a Move

t+1

t

Moves into PH

t+1

t

t+1

t

Moves into HCV

Moves out of PH

Point Estimate

95% CI

t+1

t

Moves out of HCV

Notes:
Figure displays coefficients from household fixed effects regressions of the inverse hyperbolic sine of total parents’ earnings on indicators for
whether the household changed public housing (PH) or housing choice voucher (HCV) assisted housing participation in the calendar year t, in the
next calendar year, or whether the household changed their participation in either program at any previous year in the study period. In addition to
the move indicators, the models include household fixed effects, year fixed effects, state by year fixed effects, and counts of the number of children
in the household of each age between 13 and 23. A household is designated as having moved out of public housing or the HCV program in a year
if in the year prior at least one child was observed in the program but in the current year no child was observed in that program. A household is
designated as having moved into public housing or the HCV program if in the year prior no child was observed in the program but in the current
year at least one child is observed in the program. The t+1 coefficients correspond to the indicator for whether there was a move in the subsequent
year while the t coefficients correspond to there being a move in the current year. The mean annual inverse hyperbolic sine of parents’ earnings
for the full sample is 5.874. For each coefficient, the point estimate and 95% confidence interval are shown with confidence intervals based on
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the household level.

38

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Analysis Sample
13-18 in 2000 with at least one other sibling 13-18
In household that received a subsidy

Total
(1)

In households
not receiving
any housing
subsidy
(2)

Household size in 2000
Age in 2000
Male
White non-Hispanic household
Black non-Hispanic household
Hispanic household
Other non-Hispanic household
Block group % poverty while 13-18
Inverse hyperbolic sine parents’ earnings
Total parents’ earnings while 16-18
Single-parent household
Public housing resident while 13-18
HCV recipient while 13-18
Years in public housing ages 13-18
Years in HCV housing ages 13-18

5.355
15.415
0.499
0.345
0.289
0.285
0.082
0.113
7.889
$36,056
0.647
0.085
0.168
0.295
0.593

Total labor market earnings 2008-2013
Total labor market earnings age 26
Total number of years worked 2008-2013
Observed in 2010 Census
Incarcerated in 2010
Observations

Total
(3)

Never lived in
subsidized
housing while
13-18
(4)

Lived in
subsidized
housing while
13-18
(5)

5.331
15.456
0.504
0.402
0.216
0.295
0.087
0.109
8.069
$39,625
0.599
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

5.415
15.313
0.487
0.203
0.470
0.258
0.069
0.121
7.441
$27,189
0.767
0.296
0.585
1.026
2.067

5.669
15.525
0.507
0.230
0.448
0.256
0.065
0.120
7.589
$29,106
0.743
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

5.369
15.275
0.483
0.198
0.474
0.258
0.070
0.122
7.415
$26,848
0.771
0.348
0.689
1.209
2.434

$69,571
$11,818
4.240
0.764
0.031

$74,695
$12,681
4.310
0.778
0.025

$56,840
$9,673
4.068
0.730
0.046

$55,801
$9,428
3.998
0.721
0.054

$57,024
$9,716
4.080
0.731
0.045

1,172,000

840,000

333,000

50,000

282,000

Notes:
Excludes teenagers in owner-occupied housing, those from households earning above 50% of area median income in the year and teenagers who
lived in counties that participated in HUD’s Moving to Work program prior to 2005. Based on authors’ tabulations of matched 2000 and 2010
Census, HUD-PIC, and LEHD files. See text for more details. Number of observations rounded to the nearest thousand.

39

Table 2: The Effect of Teenage Residence in HUD-Subsidized Housing on Age 26 Earnings
All Household Race/Ethnicities

OLS
(1)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public Housing*Male

Dose Treatment (Years Spent in Program)
HFE
HFE EC
HFE BGC
(2)
(3)
(4)

-0.062***
(0.004)
-0.015**
(0.006)
-0.081***
(0.006)
0.015*
(0.008)

0.047***
(0.010)
-0.021***
(0.008)
0.049***
(0.013)
0.002
(0.011)

IHS Average Parents’ Earnings
IHS Average Parents’ Earnings*Male

0.047***
(0.010)
-0.020**
(0.008)
0.049***
(0.013)
0.003
(0.011)
0.025*
(0.013)
0.006**
(0.003)

Average Block Group % Poverty
Average Block Group % Poverty*Male
Demographic Controls
Household Fixed Effects

yes
no

yes
yes

yes
yes

0.047***
(0.010)
-0.020**
(0.008)
0.054***
(0.013)
-0.008
(0.011)

-1.729***
(0.323)
1.588***
(0.187)
yes
yes

HFE LC
(5)
0.046***
(0.010)
-0.018**
(0.008)
0.054***
(0.013)
-0.006
(0.011)
0.023*
(0.013)
0.009***
(0.003)
-1.751***
(0.324)
1.639***
(0.188)
yes
yes

Notes:
Number of observations 1,172,000 rounded to the nearest thousand. See text for a detailed sample description. The dependent variable in each
column is the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of total earnings at age 26. Column 1 presents ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates. All remaining
columns present household fixed effects (HFE) estimates. All columns include controls for male by age and male by household race. Column 3
(HFE EC) also includes a control for the IHS sine of parents’ average annual earnings while a teenager and its interaction with whether the child
was male. Column 4 (HFE BGC) includes a control for the average block group percent poverty in the block group of residence between the ages
of 13 and 18 and its interaction with a male indicator. Column 5 (HFE LC) includes both the parents’ earnings and block group percent poverty
controls, along with interactions with the male indicator. In cases where the teenager’s block group of residence is unknown, the average block
group percent poverty in their county of residence is used. Race and ethnicity is assigned at the household level using information from the 2000
Census. Subsidized housing participation is defined using a count of the number of years each individual ever lived in each type of subsidized
housing while a teenager. Robust standard errors clustered at the household are displayed below each point estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. Based on the authors’ tabulations from matched Census 2000-LEHD-PIC file.

40

Table 3: Household Fixed Effects Estimates
By Gender, Subsidy Type, and Race/Ethnicity
Dose Treatment (Years Spent in Program)
Housing Voucher (HCV) Public Housing (PH)
Are Subsidy Effects
Treatment Effect
Treatment Effect
Different? (HCV vs. PH)
(1)
(2)
(3)
All Households
Females (F)
Males (M)
Are Subsidy Effects Different? (F vs. M)
Non-Hispanic White Households
Females (F)
Males (M)
Are Subsidy Effects Different? (F vs. M)
Non-Hispanic Black Households
Females (F)
Males (M)
Are Subsidy Effects Different? (F vs. M)
Hispanic Households
Females (F)
Males (M)
Are Subsidy Effects Different? (F vs. M)

0.047***
(0.010)
0.026***
(0.010)
Yes***

0.049***
(0.013)
0.051***
(0.014)
No

No

0.006
(0.020)
0.034*
(0.020)
Yes*

-0.000
(0.035)
0.065*
(0.035)
Yes**

No

0.070***
(0.014)
0.030**
(0.014)
Yes***

0.055***
(0.017)
0.051***
(0.018)
No

No

0.045**
(0.021)
0.030
(0.021)
No

0.071***
(0.027)
0.051*
(0.028)
No

No

No

No

No
No

Notes:
All columns present household fixed effects estimates of the impact of subsidized housing participation as a teenager on the inverse hyperbolic
sine (IHS) of total age 26 earnings. Teenage participation in each subsidized housing program is defined as the count of the number of years as a
teenager spent in the program. Estimates do not control for parents’ earnings as a teenager or average block group percent poverty as a teenager but
include a male indicator, a full set of age in years by male fixed effects, and, in the All Household Rows, male by household race interactions with
non-Hispanic White by Male as the omitted category. See Tables 3 and C1-C3 for observations rounded to the nearest thousand. Robust standard
errors clustered at the household are displayed below each point estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Based on the authors’ tabulations from
matched Census 2000-LEHD-PIC file.

41

Table 4: Subsidized Housing and Adult Incarceration

All Households
(1)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public*Male
Observations
Demographic Controls
Household fixed effects

2010 Incarceration
White Households
Black Households
(2)
(3)

Hispanic Households
(4)

-0.004***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.000)
-0.005***
(0.001)
0.002***
(0.001)
673,000

-0.002**
(0.001)
0.002***
(0.001)
-0.005***
(0.002)
0.002*
(0.001)
291,000

-0.007***
(0.001)
0.004***
(0.001)
-0.006***
(0.001)
0.003**
(0.001)
160,000

-0.003***’
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.003**
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
168,000

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

Notes:
Table displays household fixed effects estimates of the effect of teenage subsidized housing participation on 2010 incarceration in an adult correctional facility as observed in the 2010 census. Participation in subsidized housing is captured by a count of the number of years each individual
ever resided in public housing or HCV-supported housing while between the ages of 13 and 18. Treatment is observed between 1997 and 2005
and imputed for 1995 and 1996 when possible. To be included in the sample individuals must be in households that did not have any attrition
between the 2000 and 2010 census. To adjust for this, we re-weight the observations by the inverse probability that a household would not lose
any observations between 2000 and 2010, using household race indicators, the number of people in the household the number of teenagers in the
household, whether the household rented in 2000, whether the household lived rent free (but did not own) their household in 2000, and state fixed
effects as predictors. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the household level are shown in parentheses below each point estimate.
* p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01

42

Table 5: Subsidized Housing, Incarceration, and Adult Earnings

All Households
(1)

Subsidized Housing, Incarceration, and Earnings
White Households
Black Households
Hispanic Households
(2)
(3)
(4)

(A) Effect of Subsidized Housing on Age 26 Earnings
HCV Housing:
Females
0.041
0.027
0.042
Males
0.016
0.063
-0.003
Public Housing:
Females
0.061
-0.007
0.072
Males
0.051
0.021
0.064
(B) Effect of Subsidized Housing on 2010 Incarceration
HCV Housing:
Females
-0.004
-0.002
-0.007
Males
-0.001
0.000
-0.003
Public Housing:
Females
-0.005
-0.005
-0.006
Males
-0.003
-0.003
-0.003
(C) Association Between Age 26 Earnings and 2010 Incarceration
Females
-3.012
-2.499
-3.575
Males
-3.757
-3.487
-3.819
(D) % Of Earnings Effect Explainable by 2010 Incarceration [(B)*(C)]/(A)
HCV Housing:
Females
29
(0)
60
Males
(0)
0
(0)
Public Housing:
Females
25
(0)
29
Males
22
(0)
17
Observations
673,000
291,000
160,000
Demographic Controls
Household fixed effects

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

0.047
0.030
0.083
0.047

-0.003
0.000
-0.003
-0.002
-2.547
-3.827

17
(0)
10
(0)
168,000
yes
yes

Notes:
Table displays the percent of the earnings effects that can potentially be explained by different 2010 incarceration rates. (A) displays the household
fixed effects estimates of subsidized housing participation while a teenager on the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of age 26 earnings, using the sample
of individuals, households, and weights from Table 4. (B) replicates the household fixed effects estimates of subsidized housing participation while
a teenager on 2010 incarceration from Table 4. (C) shows the difference in the IHS of age 26 earnings between individuals who were incarcerated
in 2010 and those not incarcerated in 2010, based on household fixed effects specifications that control for age and household race and which are
estimated separately by sex. Finally (D) shows the percent of the observed earnings difference that can potentially be attributed to the observed
difference in incarceration, calculated as [(B)*(C)]/(A). A (0) indicates that the estimated effect of public or HCV housing on age 26 earnings is
insignificantly different from zero. A (-) indicates that the predicted effect of the subsidized housing program on age 26 earnings and the predicted
effect of the subsidized housing program on 2010 incarceration are of the same sign, which given the negative relationship between incarceration
and age 26 earnings suggests that the incarceration association can not explain any of the observed effect on age 26 earnings.

43

Table 6: Subsidized Housing Residence and Adult Earnings
By Average Time Spent on a Waitlist
All households
Dose Treatment (Years Spent in Program)
<=9 Months Wait
>9 Months Wait
(1)
(2)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public Housing*Male
Male
Observations

0.040***
0.053***
(0.014)
(0.014)
-0.012
-0.027**
(0.011)
(0.011)
0.051***
0.050**
(0.017)
(0.022)
-0.003
0.005
(0.014)
(0.017)
0.515***
0.352***
(0.041)
(0.046)
611,000
562,000
P-value: Treatment effects are equal below and above 9 months wait

Females in HCV Housing
Females in Public Housing
Males in HCV Housing
Males in Public Housing

0.494
0.961
0.917
0.803

Notes:
Each column presents a household fixed effects estimate of HUD-subsidized housing participation while a teenager on the inverse hyperbolic sine
(IHS) of total age 26 earnings. Average wait time for public housing and HCV-assisted housing in a county is calculated as the weighted housing
authority average of the mean days spent on a waitlist prior to admission each program. The weights used for each average are the number of
teenagers observed in each housing authority-program type-county cell in the year 2000. The overall average county-level wait time is then the
arithmetic mean of the public housing and HCV-housing county-level average wait time. Counties are classified as having a wait of above nine
months if this average is greater than 273 days and below nine months if it is less than or equal to 273 days. The bottom panel displays p-values
from tests of whether the effect is the same in counties with long (>9 months) and short (<=9 months) wait times. Robust standard errors, clustered
at the household level, are displayed under each estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

44

Table 7: Subsidized Housing Residence and Adult Earnings
Predicting Observed Subsidized Housing Participation using the Head of Household in 2000

OLS
(1)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public Housing*Male

Dose Treatment (Years in Program)
HFE
HFE PRED
(2)
(3)

HFE IV
(4)

-0.667***
(0.028)
-0.045
(0.040)
-0.878***
(0.038)
0.228***
(0.055)

0.271***
(0.062)
-0.173***
(0.051)
0.237***
(0.085)
0.062
(0.069)

0.258***
(0.088)
-0.195***
(0.050)
0.047
(0.131)
0.087
(0.072)

0.325***
(0.115)
-0.224***
(0.058)
0.081
(0.179)
0.094
(0.080)

Public
Housing

Male*Public
Housing

HCV
Housing

Male*HCV
Housing

-0.011***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
0.729***
(0.006)
-0.016***
(0.003)
4568.090

-0.002***
(0.001)
-0.008***
(0.000)
-0.085***
(0.004)
0.897***
(0.003)

0.762***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.012***
(0.002)
0.002***
(0.001)

-0.051***
(0.002)
0.869***
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.014***
(0.001)

First Stage Estimates

Predicted HCV Housing
Predicted HCV Housing*Male
Predicted Public Housing
Predicted Public Housing*Male
Kleinbergen-Paap rk Wald

Notes:
Number of observations = 1,172,000 rounded to the nearest thousand. Table presents only the coefficients on the housing subsidy measures and
their interactions with a male indicator. In each column the percentile in the earnings distribution when age 26 is the dependent variable. Treatment
is defined using a count of the number of years the individual participated in each program between the ages of 13 and 18. See the main text for a
more detailed description of the sample. Columns 1 and 2 of the top panel present OLS and HFE estimates. Column 3 defines participation using the
observed subsidized housing participation of the head of household and the ages of household members rather than using the observed participation
of each individual. Column 4 presents household fixed effects instrumental variables estimates using the predicted treatment based on the head of
household participation and the individual’s age in 2000 as instruments for observed participation. A full set of male by age fixed effects and male
by household race fixed effects are included as controls. The bottom panel presents the first stage estimates corresponding to the four endogenous
variables. Kleinbergen-Paap Wald statistic is also shown at the bottom of the table. Robust standard errors clustered at the household are displayed
below each point estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

45

For Online Publication
APPENDIX A. PROGRAM BACKGROUND, DATA, AND SUMMARY STATISTICS
A.1

Subsidized and Unsubsidized Housing in the United States1
The federal Public Housing program began with the New Deal era enactment of the

United States Housing Act of 1937. Initially the program consisted of subsidies for construction
provided by the federal government and ongoing management and operations performed by local
government public housing agencies. By 1970, there were approximately 1 million units in the
public housing program and construction continued slowly thereafter with the program reaching
a peak of 1.4 million units in operation in 1994. Because construction subsidies were not
sufficient for the maintenance of public housing, the federal government instituted operating
subsidies (in 1974) and imposed a rent ceiling—the maximum amount of rent that each family
could be charged—which was initially set at 25% of family income but later raised to 30% of
family income (in 1981). Since 1994, participation in public housing has steadily declined, to
just under 1.3 million in 2000, and to about 1.1 million in 2013. The reduction in the number of
available public housing units reflects, in part, the demolition of severely distressed projects
starting in the 1990s, largely under the HOPE VI program. In these cases, some tenants were
given housing vouchers to find housing elsewhere, while other tenants received units in different
public housing projects (Popkin et al. 2004).
Enacted in 1974 as the Section 8 tenant-based rental assistance program, the Housing
Choice Voucher (HCV) program provides rental assistance for low-income households through
vouchers that prospective tenants take to private sector landlords of approved rental units; the
vouchers allow the landlords to receive the full rental price, up to a “Fair Market Rent” (FMR).
The HCV subsidy covers the difference between the rental cost of the unit (up to the FMR) and
the household’s rent contribution (typically 30% of its income). Households also have the option
of paying a higher portion of their income for rent for units that charge rents above the FMR.
The HCV program has grown rapidly over the past two decades. In 1990 there were about 1.1
million voucher households. This figure rose to 1.8 million in 2000, and to nearly 2.4 million in
2013 (over 45% of U.S. subsidized housing).
In this paper, we do not consider other HUD rental assistance programs, the most
prominent of which, the Section 8 project-based rental assistance program, also began in 1974

1

We thank David Hardiman and Todd Richardson of HUD for providing substantive clarifications for the section.

46

and provides an additional 1.2 million units of affordable housing. That program serves a
somewhat higher proportion of older households and a lower proportion of households with
children.2 Table A1 presents the major subsidized housing programs and the number of
households and units subsidized through each program over time. In 2000, there were nearly 5
million subsidized households, with 1.3 million in public housing and 1.8 million using HCVs.
We briefly describe conditions in private rental housing, the alternative for lower earning
households eligible for housing subsidies. This is highly relevant because HUD rental assistance
is not an entitlement and serves only a fraction of the households that meet the basic income
requirements. As a point of comparison, both the public housing and HCV programs use a
general rule that households pay 30% of their incomes for rent. HUD estimates that in 2013, at
least 7.72 million unassisted very-low-income households paid more than 50% of their income in
rent (Steffin et al. 2015). Quigley and Raphael (2004) note that among all renters, the overall
share of income paid for rent rose from 19% in 1960 to 26% in 2000. Over the same time period,
the rental share for households in the first income quintile rose from 47% to 55%, with 79% of
those households spending more than 30% on rent in 2000.
One consequence of high housing expenditure and constrained liquidity is a high
incidence of eviction and homelessness. Desmond et al. (2015), examining renters in Milwaukee,
find higher rates of forced moves for low income households, including formal and informal
eviction, landlord foreclosure, and building condemnations. These relocations account for
roughly a quarter of all moves and can result in moves to substandard housing and cause further
relocations. Burt (2001), examining a nationally representative sample of homeless people who
use homeless assistance programs, finds that the most cited reason for homelessness is
difficulties with paying rent. Due to the uneven geographical wealth distribution, residential
segregation, and limited affordable housing in higher cost neighborhoods, low earning
households are also likely to live in high poverty neighborhoods.
A.2

Data Sources

The Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) program began with the 1986 Tax Reform Act, and was expanded
by 40% in 2001. Unlike the “deep subsidies” provided by the other three programs discussed here, LIHTC provides
“shallow subsidies” in that no ongoing operating costs are covered by the government. In this program, the U.S.
government (through the Internal Revenue Service), provides tax credits to for-profit and non-profit developers to
build income-restricted housing. In 1990, there were about 140,000 units with this number growing to almost 2
million units in 2010. While LIHTC housing has significant income limits for eligibility, this program typically does
not provide housing for the very poor.

2

47

This project draws from several sources of confidential microdata at the Census Bureau
as well as a number of public use files. From households responding to the 2000 Census of
Population and Housing, we select the set of teenagers aged 13 to 18 on April 1, 2000.3 The
frame for the Census is the set of all addresses. A household, which we use in our fixed effects
analysis, is the set of persons responding at an address.4 Each household lists the relationship of
all respondents to Person 1,5 and we use these relationships to characterize family structure. The
2000 Census data also provide a geographic location, reported housing tenure (rent or own) and
reported demographics (age, sex, race, and ethnicity) for each member of the household.6
The HUD-PIC files provide detailed information on public housing and housing voucher
recipients during our study period from 1997 to 2005.7 As part of their housing occupancy
verification process, local housing authorities provide HUD with the identities of residents,
which HUD then compiles into an annual relational database. HUD-PIC identifies the members
within each household and includes fields for when a household applied for housing and when
they moved in. The most significant reporting shortfalls are for pre-1997 data, and for housing
authorities participating in HUD’s Moving to Work (MTW) demonstration (see Abravanel et al.
2004). MTW relaxed reporting requirements for participating housing authorities, resulting in
inconsistent data quality for some authorities during our study. We elect to exclude households
in areas that participate in the MTW demonstration during our study period to avoid
mismeasuring teenage assisted housing participation as a result of the inconsistent reporting.
Table A1 presents summary statistics for public housing and HCV-assisted households in
2000. The summary statistics are generated using publicly available data derived from the HUDPIC records. Households in public housing have substantially longer housing tenures, are more

Responses to the Census “short-form” are assembled in the Hundred-Percent Census Edited File (HCEF).
We use the Master Address File ID (MAFID) to define a household as the set of responses collected from one
address. MAFIDs, or addresses, constitute the residence frame for Census Bureau surveys.
5
Throughout the paper and tables, we refer to this Person 1 as the Head of Household and the spouse of Person 1 as
the spouse of the head of household.
6
We chose to use all households in the U.S. rather than the 1-in-6 sample (who received the “long form”) for the
principal analysis in order to have a larger sample size. While the long form would allow us to include variables
such as parent’s education, such time-invariant explanatory factors are eliminated by a household fixed effects
approach.
7
PIC refers to Public and Indian Housing Information Center. The data file contains an annual extract of recipients
of voucher-supported housing and public housing, submitted by housing authorities and providers. For other
research using the HUD-PIC extract file, see Shroder (2002); Lubell et al. (2003); Olsen et al. (2005); Tatian and
Snow (2005); and Mills et al. (2006). We do not use the HUD-TRACS (Tenant Rental Assistance Certification
System) since those data apply to tenants in projects receiving project-based Section 8 subsidies. HUD-PIC was
formerly known as Multifamily Tenant Characteristics System (MTCS).
3
4

48

likely to have members who are age 62 or older, and are less likely to have children than
households in HCV-assisted housing.
The Census Bureau produces the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD)
Infrastructure Files, an employer-employee matched dataset, which it develops in partnership
with state data providers.8 At its core are two administrative records files provided by states on a
quarterly basis: (1) unemployment insurance (UI) wage records, giving the earnings of each
worker at each employer, and (2) employer reports giving establishment-level data, also known
as the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. The coverage is roughly 96 percent of
private non-farm wage and salary employment (Stevens 2007). The data series of most states
begin in the 1990s and there are approximately 130 million workers for all states and D.C. in
2010. We also include earnings records for federal workers, based on information from the U.S.
Office of Personnel Management.9 While the longitudinal data support the measurement of job
histories, turnover measures, and employment status, this analysis focuses on annual earnings for
parents and adult earnings for children.
To complement our analysis of adult earnings, we use information from the 2010 Census
to measure adult incarceration. Specifically, we make use of Group Quarters reporting
information to observe whether children in our sample were found in an adult correctional
facility in April 2010. Raphael (2005) finds a strong relationship between the institutionalization
totals from the 2000 Census group quarters data and separate calculations conducted by the U.S.
Bureau of Justice Statistics.
We introduce additional geographic data to address time-varying but spatially constant
household factors. The LEHD program makes use of an annual place of residence file composed
of federal administrative data known as the Composite Person Record (CPR). LEHD uses CPR
residences, which begin in 1999, for imputation models and for the residence component of
public use data. We use CPR geocodes to characterize a household’s time varying residence
location. For this analysis, the most precise neighborhood definition we use is a census block
group, which has a target population of 600 to 3,000 people (most census tracts have three or

For a description of the LEHD Infrastructure Files and public statistics, see Abowd et al. (2004).
LEHD is in the process of integrating data on self-employed individuals and independent contractors who are not
covered in the UI files but are available from the Census Bureau’s Business Register which contains the universe of
all businesses including all sole proprietorships on an annual basis (whether the sole proprietor has employees or is a
non-employer). This study does not make use of these new data. LEHD also excludes earnings from those in the
military and those in the U.S. Postal Service (these exclusions might downwardly bias estimates of the effects of
subsidized housing on earnings). Federal earnings data begin in 2011.

8
9

49

four block groups). These geocodes may be linked with spatially constant neighborhood
information, such as the poverty rate in 2000 (available from Census 2000’s Summary File 3).
A.3

Data Integration
We first use the responses from the 2000 Census to construct a frame of children aged 13

to 18 and their households. Because our focus is on employment outcomes at age 26 and
incarceration in 2010, we require that children be at least age 13 in 2000, meaning they will be at
least 26 by 2013. The 18 year-olds in 2000 will be 26 in 2008. By age 26, young adults are likely
to have entered the labor force even if they attained some higher education.10 We cap the sample
at age 18 and require that in 2000 the child be in a household with at least one adult. The
included adult(s) may be parents, grandparents, or other caregivers (we refer to these adults as
parents).11 Based on the 2000 Census county of residence, we also exclude residents of 119
counties participating in MTW, where a link with the HUD-PIC file would be expected to fail
due to possible non-reporting.12
Person-level record matching is done by way of a Protected Identification Key (PIK),
which is assigned to survey and administrative records based on personally identifying
information. The 2000 Census and HUD-PIC files have a PIK for approximately 89 percent and
98 percent of person-records, respectively. All LEHD records have a PIK value, though a small
share of them are not valid. We only retain Census 2000 households with a parent who has a PIK
and at least two children aged 13 to 18 who have a PIK, are renters (see below), and have nonmissing basic characteristics.13 To restore the selected sample to representativeness, we reweight
the sample.14 We use PIKs to link both parents and children to HUD-PIC, LEHD earnings
records, the CPR residence information, and the 2010 Census.

Age 26 earnings are used in some studies of intergenerational economic mobility (e.g., Chetty and Hendren 2015).
Specifically, we limit the adults to Person 1 and the spouse of Person 1, should there be a spouse.
12
Columns 1 and 2 of Tables A2 and A3 show summary statistics for the households participating in public housing
and the HCV program across all housing authorities and in all housing authorities that did not participate in MTW
during our study period (i.e., those included in our empirical sample). Clearly, our sample closely resembles the
national population in assisted housing across all of the characteristics available in the data.
13
We exclude households including more than 15 residents or more than 10 teenagers. For cases where a PIK has
been assigned to multiple individuals (less than 1 percent) we drop all cases, unless all observable characteristics (date
of birth, race, ethnicity, gender, geographic location) are identical, in which case one record is retained.
14
From the full sample of households with at least two children aged 13 to 18 in 2000, including records with no
PIK, we estimate a logistic regression for whether or not that household also has at least two children with a nonmissing PIK, with explanatory variables including the number of persons in a household, the number of children,
housing tenure as well as person age, gender, race, ethnicity and state fixed effects based on the year 2000 location.
We then reweight the records using the inverse of the probability of having a PIK, based on the model estimates.
Our results are robust to excluding these weights.
10
11

50

In addition to using LEHD earnings to construct outcome measures for the youth in our
study, we use parents’ LEHD earnings to determine sample eligibility and to construct an annual
measure of household income for 1997 to 2005 to use as a control variable.15 For each child, we
calculate the inverse hyperbolic sine of average parents’ earnings (the sum of earnings for the
head of household and the spouse of the head of household in each year while the child was aged
13-18).
We take several steps to select a sample of teenagers from households likely to be
eligible for housing assistance. HUD defines eligibility for its assistance programs based on
family income as a percentage of Area Median Income (AMI), which adjusts for area income
and for family size.16 We therefore use each household’s county of residence in 2000 and
household size in 2000 matched to their average parents’ LEHD earnings to create a ratio of
parents’ earnings to AMI; this ratio accounts for the differences in average earnings across
metropolitan areas within the U.S. 17 Since local housing authorities typically require that a
household earn less than 50% of AMI to be eligible for assistance, we retain only children in
households with a parents’ earnings-to-AMI measure below 0.5. This provides us with an
analysis sample that includes only those widely eligible for the subsidized housing treatment. In
addition, based on the housing tenure question from Census 2000, we require that the household
be renters at that time. Given that we have no household wealth information, renter status helps
to characterize a household as having limited assets and is also consistent with the housing
assistance programs we consider, which are rental arrangements.
Of the 2.8 million children in our sample aged 13-18 in the U.S. in 2000, we end up with
a final sample size of 1.17 million children in sibling households with parents who earned less
than 50% of HUD’s AMI, 28% of whom were in households that resided in subsidized housing

We require that for the time period in which each child is between 13-18 that we observe at least one year of
earnings in the LEHD data infrastructure. This restriction eliminates teenagers in states that are not part of the
LEHD program (e.g., Massachusetts) in our national sample. Not all states supplied data to LEHD back to 1997 so
there are some limitations for using this measure as a control.
16
Under most HUD programs, households pay 30% of their income for rent with HUD subsidizing the remainder to
cover operating costs or up to a fixed local FMR. Actual program requirements vary by subsidy type, but generally
require residents to earn at or below 80% of AMI (low income), with additional requirement dictating the percentage
of residents that must be “very low income” (at or below 50% of AMI) or “extremely low income” (at or below 30%
of AMI).
17
We use average annual total labor income from years where the child is between 13 and 18 years of age. To avoid
dropping observations that do not match to the Composite Person Record (CPR) we use the 2000 census residence
county to define AMI. After 2005, HUD defines AMI using American Community Survey data; specified
proportions of AMI are used as eligibility and priority criteria.
15

51

at some point between 1997 and 2005. This is the main sample for our analysis of the impact on
earnings. Because not all of the children in our main sample are found in the 2010 Census (for
example, they were not assigned a PIK in 2010 and therefore cannot be linked), we limit the
estimation of effects on incarceration to the sibling groups (as defined by our 2000 households)
where we can find all siblings in both 2000 and 2010. This longitudinal restriction reduces the
sample size for the incarceration outcomes substantially, from 1,172,000 to 673,000.18
The predicted participation measures used in the HFE PRED and HFE IV specifications
are calculated in the following way. In any given year, if the head of household is in subsidized
housing and the child is in the 13-18 year-old age range, then the predicted participation measure
indicates that the child is in subsidized housing in that year. If either the child is not between the
ages of 13 and 18 or the head of household is not observed in subsidized housing, then the
predicted participation measure will take on a value of zero for that year. As with our main
treatment measures, we sum up the predicted years spent in voucher housing and the predicted
years spent in public housing while each individual was between 13 and 18 years of age.19
A.4

Variables
Because our aim is to estimate the effect of childhood environmental factors on later life

outcomes, we derive most of our demographic characteristics from the base year 2000 Census
short form responses, when subjects are still children. We describe children using age on April 1,
2000, gender, race, ethnicity, and household size. We also construct a household-level
race/ethnicity variable to allocate households to race/ethnicity subsamples as follows. We
decompose the sample into mutually exclusive groups, as follows: we define a household as
Hispanic if any member reports being Hispanic, Black non-Hispanic (Black) if no member
reports being Hispanic and at least one member reports being Black or African American, White
The fraction of the sample remaining, 0.574, roughly corresponds with what one might expect given the 0.764
share of the 2000 sample being observed in the 2010 Census (Table 1). Considering a two-child household, the
expected retention rate if retention of each child was independent would be 0.584. We re-weight observations by the
inverse probability that a household would be fully accounted for in 2010, where this probability is predicted using
household race/ethnicity indicators, the number of people in the household in 2000, the number of teenagers in the
household in 2000, an indicator for whether the household rented their home in 2000, an indicator for whether the
household lived rent free but did not own their home in 2000, and a set of state fixed effects. We note that we don’t
have this attrition problem for the main sample since LEHD has virtual universal coverage of employment and
earnings outcomes with all workers having a PIK.
19
The household-predicted housing subsidy measure could also be thought of as another, noisy measure of child
housing subsidy. For an example of how a one noisy measure can be used to instrument for another, see Ashenfelter
and Krueger (1994). In that study, IV first-differences estimates turn out to be substantially higher than firstdifferences estimates with no IV, suggesting that noise was attenuating the baseline result. In any event, the results
in Table B2 suggest that measurement error is not importantly affecting our results.
18

52

non-Hispanic (White) if no member reports being Hispanic or Black and at least one member
reports being White, and Other non-Hispanic (Other) if no member reports being Hispanic,
Black, or White.
We generate a treatment “dose” variable that counts the years a child resides in public
housing or HCV-assisted housing (based on the PIK match to the HUD-PIC annual files from
1997 to 2005).20 We consider a child to be a HUD-subsidized resident in a particular year if their
PIK appears in the HUD administrative data and if that individual is no older than 18.21 The
maximum would be 6 years in HUD housing, which would be for a 13-year-old first residing in
subsidized housing in or before 2000. Our goal is to estimate the effect of these treatment
measures on labor market and incarceration outcomes.
One possible spurious source of between-sibling variation is simple censoring of the
subsidized housing treatment. We define treatment only for individuals between the ages of 13
and 18. However, for sample members who are 17 or 18 years of age in 2000, we are unable to
observe their subsidized housing participation at age 13 (or age 14 for individuals aged 18 in
2000) because we use HUD administrative records beginning in 1997 (earlier records are less
complete). As a result, it is possible that some of the within-household variation results from this
left-censoring of treatment. Therefore, for those children who were 17 or 18 in 2000 and whose
household resided in public housing in 1997, we impute housing treatment in the censored years
based on the move-in date reported by that household in the HUD-PIC data. All reported results
are for the treatment measures including the imputations for 17 and 18 year-olds, but we obtain
similar estimates without the imputed treatment and when we completely remove 17 and 18
year-olds from the sample.
We use the average annual parents’ earnings between the ages of 13-18 to control for
differences in household economic circumstances across siblings. As we discussed above,
changes in household income may be directly associated with moves into and out of subsidized
housing. We therefore interpret the specifications with controls for parents’ earnings as
addressing possible unobserved, time-varying characteristics.

The PIKs for the head of household and the spouse of the head of household for each child in our sample are also
matched to the HUD-PIC file. We use this match, in tandem with the age of each child, to define an alternative
subsidized housing participation measure which is discussed in more detail in Section 6.2.
21
We do not count individuals who are under 18 in 2000 but over 18 when we observe them in the HUD
administrative data as being HUD residents.
20

53

We also consider additional within-household variation in some specifications. We use
the mean of neighborhood poverty (measured at the census block group level) between the ages
of 13-18 as a control variable in some specifications. Controlling for the average poverty rate
when each sibling is between 13-18 is designed to capture one of the possible mechanisms for
subsidized housing to impact adult outcomes. We identify a residence census block for each
child from 1999-2005 where available (approximately 10% of children are missing a CPR
residence in each year). When possible, we match the child residence to block group-level
tabulations from Census 2000, giving neighborhood characteristics such as the poverty rate.22
For most households, the HUD-PIC data contain information on the date they entered a
waitlist as well as the date they were granted admission to the program. In some cases the two
dates are the same, indicating there was no wait for the program, but most households face nontrivial waiting periods. As noted in the main text, Figure 2 displays the distribution of wait times
for individuals in voucher and public housing who entered subsidized housing no earlier than
1995 and who were found in subsidized housing in 2000. We restrict the entrance date to be after
1995 because data quality is lower in the early 1990s and because these waits are likely to be a
better approximation to the waits experienced by the households in our sample. We identify the
housing authority population average wait time and match these housing authority level waits to
the geographic location of the households in our sample. This match is used to identify whether
households lived in an area with a long average wait (nine months or more) or a short average
wait (less than nine months).
A.5

Summary Statistics
To help better understand the within-household variation in public and voucher-assisted

housing Table A4 displays summary statistics for teenage subsidized housing exposure,
disaggregated by household assisted housing participation in the first year of our data (1997).
The full sample includes 1,172,000 children aged 13-18 in 2000. 994,000 (84.7%) come from
households that did not participate in assisted housing in 1997, 62,000 (5.3%) come from
households that resided in public housing in 1997, and 118,000 (10.1%) come from households
that resided in HCV-assisted housing in 1997. While 313,000 children were in a household that
received some housing assistance during the 1997-2005 period, not all of these households have
between-sibling differences in teenage subsidized housing participation and therefore contribute
to identifying the treatment effects in our household fixed-effects model. For example, a
22

We use the county-level average as a fallback for a small share of records.

54

household with two children, aged 13 and 15 in 2000, that enters public housing in 2000 and
stays until 2001 would be observed as having two children with two years of teenage public
housing participation each, and no within-household difference in subsidized housing
participation. In total, 98,000 children have some within-household difference in teenage public
housing and 187,000 have a within-household difference in teenage HCV-assisted housing. The
mean within-household difference (in absolute value) in public and HCV housing exposure for
these two groups are 0.993 and 0.972 years, respectively.23 A two-child household at the mean
within-household difference in public housing participation (0.993 years) would thus have one
child with nearly 2 additional years of public housing participation relative to the other.
This within-household variation is due, roughly in equal parts, to household entries and
exits from subsidized housing. From the households not participating in subsidized housing in
1997, 43,000 children entered public housing and another 90,000 entered the HCV program as
teenagers. Likewise, among subsidized households in 1997, 53,000 children exited public
housing and 94,000 children exited the HCV program during our study period. This suggests that
roughly the same number of households exited and entered both programs during our study
period.
The mean within-household difference in assisted housing participation is near threequarters of a year—ranging from a minimum of 0.674 years to a maximum of 0.822 years—for
children exposed to any of the four possible changes in assisted housing: moves into public or
HCV-assisted housing and moves out of public or HCV-assisted housing. In addition to implying
that the variation used to identify the treatment effects is not overwhelmingly driven by either
households exiting or households entering the two programs, this also decreases the likelihood
that there is a systematic relationship between child age or birth order and teenage subsidized
housing participation.24

Calculated as the mean within-household variation scaled by the fraction of individuals in the sample with some
variation. For example, for public housing: 0.993 = 0.083/(98,000/1,173,000).
24
When households move out of an assisted housing program while at least one child is still a teenager older
children and lower birth order children will typically have higher levels of teenage program participation; when
households move into an assisted housing program while at least one child is still a teenager younger children and
higher birth order children will typically have higher levels of teenage program participation.
23

55

For Online Publication
Table A1: Characteristics of Households in Public and HCV Housing in 2000

Number of people per unit
Monthly tenant payment (rent+utilities)
Household income per year (USD)
Months on waiting list
Months since moved in
% of households with most income from welfare
% area median income
% households with children
% minority
% 62 or older
% with 0 or 1 bedrooms
% with 2 bedrooms
% with 3 bedrooms
Total households

Public Housing
(1)

HCV Housing
(2)

2.260
(0.459)
210.118
(54.390)
10,333.221
(2,555.877)
14.844
(12.801)
105.777
(57.661)
11.017
(6.593)
25.046
(6.041)
43.971
(15.513)
68.299
(32.858)
32.277
(14.819)
52.263
(26.771)
22.925
(13.845)
24.779
(15.813)
1,080,359

2.653
(0.371)
227.348
(59.291)
10,666.891
(2,021.567)
28.067
(16.534)
52.223
(23.882)
12.172
(7.406)
23.020
(3.571)
60.962
(11.439)
60.235
(30.963)
17.183
(8.594)
25.990
(12.443)
39.516
(7.348)
34.516
(11.380)
1,447,688

Notes:
Statistics computed from HUDUSER public use Picture of Subsidized Housing data in the year 2000. Figures reflect only households and housing
authorities with reported data. Standard deviations appear in ().

56

Table A2: Public Housing Participant Characteristics
For All HAs, non MTW HAs, and MTO HAs

Household size
Tenant monthly contribution
Income mostly wages
Income mostly welfare
Household income (thousands)
% of area median income
% single-parent household with children
% Black non-Hispanic
Mean time on waitlist (months)
% minority in census tract
% poverty in census tract
Number of households

All
(1)

Non-MTW HAs
(2)

MTO HAs
(3)

2.260
(0.459)
210.118
(54.390)
26.911
(9.869)
11.017
(6.593)
10.333
(2.556)
25.046
(6.041)
31.503
(13.269)
49.752
(33.296)
15.374
(32.560)
56.072
(30.163)
28.544
(11.308)
1,080,359

2.257
(0.470)
209.799
(55.151)
27.230
(10.096)
10.472
(6.565)
10.404
(2.617)
25.487
(5.564)
31.584
(13.684)
47.456
(32.844)
14.189
(33.708)
54.446
(30.693)
27.966
(11.323)
977,790

2.383
(0.233)
270.499
(25.196)
30.345
(6.246)
16.264
(4.056)
13.262
(2.477)
27.614
(6.253)
25.190
(4.346)
55.408
(17.026)
17.587
(15.939)
84.877
(9.401)
37.622
(4.193)
215,789

Notes:
Table displays summary statistics for Public Housing participants in all housing authorities (HAs), in non Moving to Work HAs which are retained
in the main sample of this paper (non MTW), and Moving to Opportunity (MTO) HAs. For each characteristic, the mean and standard deviation in
all HAs are shown in Column 1, the mean and standard deviation for non MTW HAs are shown in Column 2, and the mean and standard deviation
for MTO HAs are shown in column 3. “Income mostly wages” is the percent of participating households who receive the majority of their household
income from wages and “Income mostly welfare” is the percent of participating households who receive the majority of their income from welfare.
Minority includes Black non-Hispanics, Native American non-Hispanics, Asian non-Hispanics, and Hispanics. Summary statistics are computed
using HA-level means weighted by the number of households participating in Public housing through that HA. Standard deviations appear in ().
Numbers based on Authors’ calculations using HUDUSER Picture of Subsidized Households data from the year 2000.

57

Table A3: HCV-Supported Housing Participant Characteristics
For All HAs, non MTW HAs, and MTO HAs

Household size
Tenant monthly contribution
Income mostly wages
Income mostly welfare
Household income (thousands)
% of area median income
% single-parent household with children
% Black non-Hispanic
Mean time on waitlist (months)
% minority in census tract
% poverty in census tract
Number of households

All
(1)

Non-MTW HAs
(2)

MTO HAs
(3)

2.653
(0.371)
227.348
(59.291)
34.511
(8.094)
12.172
(7.406)
10.667
(2.022)
23.020
(3.571)
44.864
(12.000)
41.771
(31.599)
28.630
(19.380)
32.140
(27.415)
13.379
(9.420)
1,447,688

2.636
(0.379)
226.804
(59.025)
34.509
(8.246)
11.779
(7.383)
10.595
(2.016)
23.196
(3.524)
44.858
(12.166)
40.440
(31.282)
27.996
(19.223)
29.777
(26.018)
12.806
(9.236)
1,341,182

2.738
(0.086)
225.122
(37.787)
31.164
(4.402)
21.229
(6.740)
11.239
(0.970)
22.426
(3.724)
39.421
(6.006)
52.465
(21.370)
35.430
(13.574)
37.014
(34.509)
11.798
(11.150)
170,922

Notes:
Table displays summary statistics for HCV housing participants in all housing authorities (HAs), in non Moving to Work HAs which are retained in
the main sample of this paper (non MTW), and Moving to Opportunity (MTO) HAs. For each characteristic, the mean and standard deviation in all
HAs are shown in Column 1, the mean and standard deviation for non MTW HAs are shown in Column 2, and the mean and standard deviation for
MTO HAs are shown in column 3. “Income mostly wages” is the percent of participating households who receive the majority of their household
income from wages and “Income mostly welfare” is the percent of participating households who receive the majority of their income from welfare.
Minority includes Black non-Hispanics, Native American non-Hispanics, Asian non-Hispanics, and Hispanics. Summary statistics are computed
using HA-level means weighted by the number of households participating in the HCV housing through that HA. Standard deviations appear in ().
Numbers based on Authors’ calculations using HUDUSER Picture of Subsidized Households data from the year 2000.

58

Table A4: Within-Household Variation in Public Housing and HCV in the Estimation Sample

Household Status
No subsidy in 1997
Never Entered
Entered PH
Entered HCV
In PH in 1997
Never Left PH
Left PH
In HCV in 1997
Never Left HCV
Left HCV
Full Sample

Count
(1)

Share
(2)

Mean
Years
PH
(3)

994,000
865,000
43,000
90,000
62,000
9,000
53,000
118,000
24,000
94,000
1,172,000

0.847
0.870
0.043
0.091
0.053
0.145
0.855
0.101
0.203
0.797
1.000

0.132
0.000
2.914
0.089
3.259
6.000
2.799
0.068
0.000
0.085
0.295

Mean
Years
HCV
(4)

# with
Variation
in PH
(5)

# with
Variation
in HCV
(6)

Mean
WHH
Diff. in
PH
(7)

Mean
WHH
Diff. in
HCV
(8)

0.273
0.000
0.198
3.005
0.320
0.006
0.372
3.449
6.000
2.800
0.593

45,000
11,000
33,000
4,000
48,000
6,000
42,000
5,000
0
5,000
98,000

93,000
21,000
5,000
70,000
8,000
0
8,000
86,000
13,000
73,000
187,000

0.043
0.012
0.674
0.038
0.804
0.699
0.822
0.036
0.008
0.043
0.083

0.091
0.026
0.096
0.733
0.132
0.028
0.149
0.719
0.609
0.748
0.155

Notes:
Table presents population counts (rounded to the nearest 1000), shares, mean subsidized housing participation between the ages of 13 and 18, and
the mean absolute value of between sibling variation in teenage subsidized housing participation for different sub-groups of the overall estimation
sample. The Full Sample row of the table also displays values for the full estimation sample. The No subsidy in 1997 group includes all teenagers
who were in a household where no teenagers were participating in public or housing choice voucher (HCV) assisted housing in the year 1997. This
group is subdivided in to three sub-groups: those that never entered subsidized housing, those that entered public housing, and those that entered
HCV housing. The sub-group classification is done using the observed participation of each teenager while they were between the ages of 13 and
18. The PH in 1997 group includes all teenagers who were in a household where at least one teenager participated in public housing in 1997. This
group is subdivided into two sub-groups: teenagers who remained in public housing for each year between the ages of 13 and 18 and teenagers who
left public housing at some point. The HCV in 1997 group includes all teenagers who were in a household where at least one teenager participated
in HCV-assisted housing in 1997. This group is subdivided into teenagers who remained in HCV housing for each year between the ages of 13 and
18 and those that left the HCV program at some point. Column 1 shows the number of teenagers in each row and Column 2 displays the share of
teenagers represented by the count in Column 1, either the share of all teenagers (for the rows corresponding to the primary classifications) or the
share of teenagers in the relevant primary classification (for the rows corresponding to the sub-groups). Columns 3 and 4 show the mean years spent
in public and HCV-supported housing between the ages of 13 and 18 for the teenagers in the row. Columns 5 and 6 show the count of teenagers
in the row with some within-household variation in teenage public or HCV-supported housing participation and Columns 7 and 8 show the mean
within-household (WHH) difference (in absolute value) in public and HCV-assisted housing for the teenagers in the row.

59

Table A5: Summary Statistics for Parents’ Earnings and Changes in Assisted Housing

All Sample Households
(1)

Households with a Between
Sibling Difference in Participation
(2)

6.254
(3.543)
10822.270
(10332.609)
0.296
(0.455)
0.092
(0.286)
0.161
(0.366)
0.090
(0.282)
0.159
(0.365)
0.589
(1.074)
0.111
(0.365)
0.194
(0.475)
0.108
(0.361)
0.193
(0.477)
537000

5.776
(3.603)
8063.074
(7992.257)
0.950
(0.218)
0.288
(0.450)
0.522
(0.499)
0.310
(0.460)
0.534
(0.498)
1.947
(1.161)
0.352
(0.598)
0.637
(0.690)
0.374
(0.604)
0.649
(0.688)
121000

Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Parents’ Annual Earnings
Parents’ Annual Earnings
Any Move in or Move out of Subsidized Housing
Any Move into Public Housing
Any Move into HCV Housing
Any Move out of Public Housing
Any Move out of HCV Housing
Number of Moves into or out of Subsidized Housing
Number of Moves into Public Housing
Number of Moves into HCV Housing
Number of Moves out of Public Housing
Number of Moves out of HCV Housing
Number of Households

Notes:
Table presents means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for parents’ earnings and moves into and out of subsidized housing during the 19972005 period. The sample in column 1 is limited to households used to estimate our main empirical results. Column 2 further restricts the sample
to only those households in our estimation sample with some across sibling difference in teenage subsidized housing participation. The means
are calculated using one observation per household and weighted using the hosuehold weights described in the main text. The parents’ earnings
averages are based on the total annual earnings for both the head of household and the spouse of the head of household in each year. We identify
a household has having moved into or out of a program in a given year if in the prior year at least one teenager participated in the program and in
the current year no teenager is participating in the program (a move out) or if in the prior year no teenagers participated in the program and in the
current year at least one teenager is participating in the program (a move in).

60

Table A6: Converting Treatment Effects to Dollar Amounts (2000 USD)

All
Female Public Housing
Male Public Housing
Female HCV
Male HCV
White non-Hispanic
Female Public Housing
Male Public Housing
Female HCV
Male HCV
Black non-Hispanic
Female Public Housing
Male Public Housing
Female HCV
Male HCV
Hispanic
Female Public Housing
Male Public Housing
Female HCV
Male HCV

Treatment Effect
(1)

Marginal Effect (2000 USD)
(2)

0.049
0.051
0.047
0.026

476.084
495.516
456.652
252.616

0
0.065
0.006
0.034

0
631.540
58.296
330.344

0.055
0.051
0.07
0.03

534.380
495.516
680.120
291.480

0.071
0.051
0.045
0.03

689.836
495.516
437.220
291.480

Notes:
Note: Table presents marginal effets of participation in public and HCV-assisted housing using the main results from Table 4. In all cases, we
calculate the marginal effects in 2000 USD at the mean age 26 earnings for teenagers who spent some time in subsidized housing as a teenager
($9,716). For a given treatment effect β , marginal effects at the mean for teenagers who spent some time in subsidized housing as a teenager (y)
are calculated as ME (β ) = 0.5 × β × (ey + e-y ).

61

For Online Publication
Table B1: The Effect of Teenage Residence in HUD-Subsidized Housing on Age 26 Employment
All Household Race/Ethnicities

OLS
(1)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public Housing*Male
Male

Dose Treatment (Years Spent in Program)
HFE
HFE EC
HFE BGC
(2)
(3)
(4)

-0.004***
(0.000)
-0.001**
(0.001)
-0.006***
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
0.017***
(0.002)

0.005***
(0.001)
-0.002**
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.026***
(0.003)

IHS Average Parents’ Earnings
IHS Average Parents’ Earnings*Male

0.005***
(0.001)
-0.001*
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.022***
(0.004)
0.002
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)

Average Block Group % Poverty
Average Block Group % Poverty*Male
Age by Male Fixed Effects
Male by HH Race Effects
Household Fixed Effects

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

0.005***
(0.001)
-0.001*
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.013***
(0.004)

-0.138***
(0.032)
0.137***
(0.019)
yes
yes
yes

HFE LC
(5)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.001*
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.007
(0.004)
0.002
(0.001)
0.001**
(0.000)
-0.140***
(0.032)
0.141***
(0.019)
yes
yes
yes

Notes:
Number of observations 1,172,000 rounded to the nearest thousand. See text for a detailed sample description. The dependent variable in each
column is an indicator for whether the individual worked in the calendar year they were age 26. Column 1 presents ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimates. All remaining columns present household fixed effects (HFE) estimates. All columns include controls for male by age and male by
household race. Column 3 (HFE EC) also includes a control for the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of parents’ average annual earnings while a
teenager and its interaction with whether the child was male. Column 4 (HFE BGC) includes a control for the average block group percent poverty
in the block group of residence between the ages of 13 and 18 and its interaction with a male indicator. Column 5 (HFE LC) includes both the
parents’ earnings and block group percent poverty controls, along with interactions with the male indicator. In cases where the teenager’s block
group of residence is unknown, the average block group percent poverty in their county of residence is used. Race and ethnicity is assigned at the
household level using information from the 2000 Census. Subsidized housing participation is defined using a count of the number of years each
individual ever lived in each type of subsidized housing while a teenager. Robust standard errors clustered at the household are displayed below
each point estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Based on the authors’ tabulations from matched Census 2000-LEHD-PIC file.

62

Table B2: Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Subsidized Housing Participation in 1997

No
Interactions
(1)
HCV Housing

0.047***
(0.010)
-0.021***
(0.008)
0.049***
(0.013)
0.002
(0.011)

HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public*Male
HCV Housing*HH in Subsidized Housing in 1997
HCV Housing*HH in Subsidized Housing in 1997*Male
Public Housing*HH in Subsidized Housing in 1997
Public Housing*HH in Subsidized Housing in 1997*Male

All households
HH in Subsidized
Housing in 1997
(2)
0.045***
(0.015)
-0.017
(0.013)
0.053**
(0.021)
0.015
(0.018)
-0.001
(0.020)
0.003
(0.019)
-0.011
(0.028)
-0.011
(0.025)

Notes:
Table presents household fixed effects estimates of years of teenage participation in subsidized housing on the inverse hyperbolic sine of total age
26 earnings. Column 1 replicates the dose specification from the main results. See main text for a more detailed description of the sample. Column
2 additionally includes interactions between the number of teenage years spent in each housing program type and whether the teenager’s household
participated in subsidized housing in the first available year of administrative data (1997). Robust standard errors, clustered at the household level,
are displayed under each estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

63

Table B3: Subsidized Housing Residence and Adult Earnings
Differentiating Large Public Housing Projects
Dose Treatment (Years spent in program)
All
White
Black
Hispanic
Households
Households
Households
Households
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public Housing*Male
Public Housing*Large Public Housing
Public Housing*Large Public Housing*Male
Observations
Mean of dependent variable

0.047***
(0.010)
-0.021***
(0.008)
0.041***
(0.015)
0.016
(0.013)
0.030
(0.030)
-0.049*
(0.025)
1,172,000
6.981

0.006
(0.020)
0.029*
(0.015)
0.003
(0.036)
0.069**
(0.029)
-0.033
(0.129)
-0.059
(0.121)
464,000
7.101

0.070***
(0.014)
-0.039***
(0.012)
0.050**
(0.020)
-0.006
(0.017)
0.020
(0.040)
0.004
(0.034)
336,000
6.444

0.045**
(0.021)
-0.015
(0.016)
0.042
(0.034)
0.030
(0.027)
0.071
(0.056)
-0.125***
(0.046)
279,000
7.352

Notes:
Each column displays a household fixed effects estimate of the impact of teenage participation in subsidized housing on the inverse hyperbolic sine
of total age 26 earnings. Each type of subsidized housing participation is defined using a count of the number of years the individual participated in
that program while between the ages of 13 and 18. See the main text for a more detailed description of the sample. Large public housing projects
are defined as projects in the top quartile of total population over the 1997 to 2005 period. A full set of male by age fixed effects and male by
household race fixed effects are included as controls. Robust standard errors clustered at the household are displayed below each point estimate.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

64

Table B4: Subsidized Housing Residence and Adult Earnings
Differentiating Low-Income Public Housing Projects
Dose Treatment (Years spent in program)
All
White
Black
Hispanic
Households Households Households Households
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public Housing*Male
Public Housing*Low Income Public Housing
Public Housing*Low Income Public Housing*Male
Observations
Mean of dependent variable

0.047***
(0.010)
-0.021***
(0.008)
0.051***
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.012)
-0.010
(0.034)
0.038
(0.031)
1,172,000
6.981

0.006
(0.020)
0.029*
(0.015)
-0.007
(0.038)
0.042
(0.031)
0.031
(0.102)
0.180*
(0.103)
464,000
7.101

0.070***
(0.014)
-0.039***
(0.012)
0.045**
(0.020)
0.012
(0.017)
0.041
(0.041)
-0.066*
(0.037)
336,000
6.444

0.045**
(0.021)
-0.015
(0.016)
0.085***
(0.029)
-0.055**
(0.022)
-0.180**
(0.087)
0.391***
(0.079)
279,000
7.352

Notes:
Each column displays a household fixed effects estimate of the impact of teenage participation in subsidized housing on the inverse hyperbolic sine
of total age 26 earnings. Each type of subsidized housing participation is defined using a count of the number of years the individual participated
in that program while between the ages of 13 and 18. See the main text for a more detailed description of the sample. Low income public housing
projects are defined as projects in the bottom quartile of person-weighted median household income over the 1997 to 2005 period. A full set of
male by age fixed effects and male by household race fixed effects are included as controls. Robust standard errors clustered at the household are
displayed below each point estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

65

Table B5: The Effect of Teenage Residence in HUD-Subsidized Housing on Age 26 Earnings
White non-Hispanic Households Only

OLS
(1)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public Housing*Male

Dose Treatment (Years Spent in Program)
HFE
HFE EC
HFE BGC
(2)
(3)
(4)

-0.149***
(0.008)
0.034***
(0.012)
-0.161***
(0.016)
0.063***
(0.022)

0.006
(0.020)
0.029*
(0.015)
-0.000
(0.035)
0.065**
(0.028)

IHS Average Parents’ Earnings
IHS Average Parents’ Earnings*Male

0.004
(0.020)
0.032**
(0.015)
-0.001
(0.035)
0.068**
(0.028)
0.027
(0.020)
0.016***
(0.005)

Average Block Group % Poverty
Average Block Group % Poverty*Male
Demographic Controls
Household Fixed Effects

yes
no

yes
yes

yes
yes

0.008
(0.020)
0.024
(0.015)
0.006
(0.035)
0.054*
(0.028)

-3.135***
(0.621)
3.235***
(0.386)
yes
yes

HFE LC
(5)
0.006
(0.020)
0.028*
(0.015)
0.005
(0.035)
0.057**
(0.028)
0.026
(0.020)
0.018***
(0.005)
-3.160***
(0.622)
3.302***
(0.387)
yes
yes

Notes:
Number of observations 464,000 rounded to the nearest thousand. See text for a detailed sample description. The dependent variable in each column
is the inverse hyperbolic sine of total age 26 earnings. Column 1 presents ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates. All remaining columns present
household fixed effects (HFE) estimates. All columns include controls for male by age and male by household race. Column 3 (HFE EC) also
includes a control for the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of parents’ average annual earnings while a teenager and its interaction with whether the
child was male. Column 4 (HFE BGC) includes a control for the average block group percent poverty in the block group of residence between
the ages of 13 and 18 and its interaction with a male indicator. Column 5 (HFE LC) includes both the parents’ earnings and block group percent
poverty controls, along with interactions with the male indicator. In cases where the teenager’s block group of residence is unknown, the average
block group percent poverty in their county of residence is used. Race and ethnicity is assigned at the household level using information from the
2000 Census. Subsidized housing participation is defined using a count of the number of years each individual ever lived in each type of subsidized
housing while a teenager. Robust standard errors clustered at the household are displayed below each point estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. Based on the authors’ tabulations from matched Census 2000-LEHD-PIC file.

66

Table B6: The Effect of Teenage Residence in HUD-Subsidized Housing on Age 26 Earnings
Black non-Hispanic Households Only

OLS
(1)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public Housing*Male

-0.041***
(0.006)
-0.032***
(0.009)
-0.067***
(0.007)
0.005
(0.011)

Dose Treatment (Years Spent in Program)
HFE
HFE EC
HFE BGC
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.070***
(0.014)
-0.039***
(0.012)
0.055***
(0.017)
-0.005
(0.014)

IHS Average Parents’ Earnings
IHS Average Parents’ Earnings*Male

0.070***
(0.014)
-0.041***
(0.012)
0.057***
(0.017)
-0.007
(0.014)
0.064**
(0.026)
-0.021***
(0.006)

Average Block Group % Poverty
Average Block Group % Poverty*Male
Demographic Controls
Household Fixed Effects

yes
no

yes
yes

yes
yes

0.068***
(0.014)
-0.036***
(0.012)
0.059***
(0.017)
-0.011
(0.015)

-1.627***
(0.542)
1.496***
(0.320)
yes
yes

HFE LC
(5)
0.068***
(0.014)
-0.037***
(0.012)
0.059***
(0.017)
-0.012
(0.015)
0.062**
(0.026)
-0.017***
(0.006)
-1.550***
(0.543)
1.340***
(0.325)
yes
yes

Notes:
Number of observations 336,000 rounded to the nearest thousand. See text for a detailed sample description. The dependent variable in each column
is the inverse hyperbolic sine of total age 26 earnings. Column 1 presents ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates. All remaining columns present
household fixed effects (HFE) estimates. All columns include controls for male by age and male by household race. Column 3 (HFE EC) also
includes a control for the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of parents’ average annual earnings while a teenager and its interaction with whether the
child was male. Column 4 (HFE BGC) includes a control for the average block group percent poverty in the block group of residence between
the ages of 13 and 18 and its interaction with a male indicator. Column 5 (HFE LC) includes both the parents’ earnings and block group percent
poverty controls, along with interactions with the male indicator. In cases where the teenager’s block group of residence is unknown, the average
block group percent poverty in their county of residence is used. Race and ethnicity is assigned at the household level using information from the
2000 Census. Subsidized housing participation is defined using a count of the number of years each individual ever lived in each type of subsidized
housing while a teenager. Robust standard errors clustered at the household are displayed below each point estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. Based on the authors’ tabulations from matched Census 2000-LEHD-PIC file.

67

Table B7: The Effect of Teenage Residence in HUD-Subsidized Housing on Age 26 Earnings
Hispanic Households Only

OLS
(1)
HCV Housing
HCV Housing*Male
Public Housing
Public Housing*Male

Dose Treatment (Years Spent in Program)
HFE
HFE EC
HFE BGC
(2)
(3)
(4)

-0.068***
(0.009)
-0.014
(0.012)
-0.085***
(0.011)
0.003
(0.016)

0.045**
(0.021)
-0.015
(0.016)
0.071***
(0.027)
-0.020
(0.021)

IHS Average Parents’ Earnings
IHS Average Parents’ Earnings*Male

0.042**
(0.021)
-0.011
(0.016)
0.068**
(0.027)
-0.015
(0.021)
0.010
(0.025)
0.020***
(0.006)

Average Block Group % Poverty
Average Block Group % Poverty*Male
Demographic Controls
Household Fixed Effects

yes
no

yes
yes

yes
yes

0.045**
(0.021)
-0.017
(0.016)
0.076***
(0.028)
-0.030
(0.021)

-0.854
(0.575)
0.924***
(0.315)
yes
yes

HFE LC
(5)
0.043**
(0.021)
-0.012
(0.016)
0.074***
(0.028)
-0.025
(0.021)
0.010
(0.025)
0.021***
(0.006)
-0.884
(0.575)
0.995***
(0.315)
yes
yes

Notes:
Number of observations 279,000 rounded to the nearest thousand. See text for a detailed sample description. The dependent variable in each column
is the inverse hyperbolic sine of total age 26 earnings. Column 1 presents ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates. All remaining columns present
household fixed effects (HFE) estimates. All columns include controls for male by age and male by household race. Column 3 (HFE EC) also
includes a control for the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of parents’ average annual earnings while a teenager and its interaction with whether the
child was male. Column 4 (HFE BGC) includes a control for the average block group percent poverty in the block group of residence between
the ages of 13 and 18 and its interaction with a male indicator. Column 5 (HFE LC) includes both the parents’ earnings and block group percent
poverty controls, along with interactions with the male indicator. In cases where the teenager’s block group of residence is unknown, the average
block group percent poverty in their county of residence is used. Race and ethnicity is assigned at the household level using information from the
2000 Census. Subsidized housing participation is defined using a count of the number of years each individual ever lived in each type of subsidized
housing while a teenager. Robust standard errors clustered at the household are displayed below each point estimate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1. Based on the authors’ tabulations from matched Census 2000-LEHD-PIC file.

68

