                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DO RARE EVENTS EXPLAIN CDX TRANCHE SPREADS?

                                        Sang Byung Seo
                                       Jessica A. Wachter

                                      Working Paper 22723
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22723


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2016




We thank Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Hitesh Doshi, Kris Jacobs, Mete Kilic, Nick Roussanov, Ivan
Shaliastovich, Pietro Veronesi, Amir Yaron and seminar participants at AFA annual meetings,
University of Houston, and the Wharton School for helpful comments. We thank the Rodney L.
White Center for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Sang Byung Seo and Jessica A. Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Rare Events Explain CDX Tranche Spreads?
Sang Byung Seo and Jessica A. Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 22723
October 2016
JEL No. G12,G13

                                          ABSTRACT

We investigate whether a model with a time-varying probability of economic disaster can explain
the pricing of collateralized debt obligations, both prior to and during the 2008-2009 financial
crisis. Namely, we examine the pricing of tranches on the CDX, an index of credit default swaps
on large investment-grade firms. CDX senior tranches are essentially deep out-of-the money put
options because they do not incur losses until a large fraction of previously stable firms default.
As such, these products clearly reflect the market’s assessment of rare-event risk. We find that the
model can simultaneously explain prices on CDX senior tranches and on equity index options at
parameter values that are consistent with the equity premium and with aggregate stock market
volatility. Our results demonstrate the importance of beliefs about rare disasters for asset prices,
even during periods of relative economic stability.


Sang Byung Seo
Department of Finance
University of Houston
220D Melcher Hall
4750 Calhoun Road
Houston, TX 77204-6021
sseo@bauer.uh.edu

Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu
1         Introduction

The period from 2005 to September of 2008 witnessed a more than 100-fold increase in the
cost of insuring against economic catastrophe. This cost can be seen from the pricing of
derivative contracts written on the CDX, an index of credit default swaps on investment-
grade firms. During the 2005–2009 period, tranches on the CDX were actively traded:
investors could purchase and sell insurance that would pay off only if a certain fraction of
firms represented by the CDX went into default. The most senior tranches were structured
to pay off only if corporate defaults became extremely widespread, more so than during the
Great Depression.
        While the costs to insure the senior tranches on the CDX were close to zero through most
of 2006 and 2007, fluctuations began to appear in late 2007, culminating in sharply rising
prices in the summer and fall of 2008. Ex post, of course, such insurance did not pay off. In
fact only a very small number of firms represented by the CDX index have gone into default.
Yet, the pricing of these securities strongly suggests a substantial, and time-varying, fear of
economic catastrophe.
        The CDX and its tranches are an example of the structured finance products that pro-
liferated in the period prior to the financial crisis of 2008–2009.1 In the years following,
both the academic literature and the popular press have deeply implicated structured fi-
nance in the series of events beginning with the near-default of Bear Stearns in March 2008
and culminating in collapse of Lehman brothers later that year.2 Yet, despite the central-
ity of structured products to the crisis and its aftermath, there have been few attempts to
quantitatively model these securities in a way that connects them to the underlying economy.
        In this paper, we investigating whether an equilibrium model with rare economic disas-
    1
        See Longstaff and Rajan (2008) for a description of structured finance products.
    2
        See, for example, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Gorton and Metrick (2012), and Salmon (2009).



                                                      1
ters, in the spirit of Barro (2006) and Rietz (1988), can explain the time series of the cost to
insure the CDX index and its tranches. Unlike previous quantitative models of structured
finance, firm prices in our model are derived endogenously from assumptions on investor
preferences and cash flows.3 Firm prices embed rare disaster fears, as well as risks that are
idiosyncratic. Importantly, our model can explain options as well as as equity prices (the
model is also consistent with the average return and volatility on the aggregate market).
We can therefore use it to back out a time series of rare disaster probabilities from option
prices alone. When we use these probabilities to calculate model-implied values for CDX
index and tranche prices, we find that it can explain the low spreads on senior tranches prior
to the crisis, the high spreads during the crisis, and the timing of the increase in spreads.
Our results imply that CDX spreads reflect an assessment of the risk in the economy that is
consistent with other asset classes.
       Our findings relate to a recent debate concerning the pricing of CDX tranches. Coval,
Jurek, and Stafford (2009) examine the pre-crisis behavior of CDX tranches, pricing these
tranches with a static options model that assumes that cash flows occur at a fixed maturity.4
Setting firm parameters so that the CDX itself is correctly priced, they find that spreads
for the senior tranches are too low in pre-crisis data. They conjecture that investors were
willing to provide insurance on these products, despite receiving low spreads, because of a
naive interpretation of credit risk ratings. Indeed, these products were highly rated because
   3
       One strand of the credit derivative literature models default as an exogenous event which is the outcome
of a Poisson process (Duffie and Singleton, 1997). Such models are known as “reduced form.” A second
strand builds on the assumption is that default occurs when firm value passes through a lower boundary
(Black and Cox, 1976). Such models are known as “structural.” Nonetheless, structural models typically
take the price process and the risk-neutral measure as exogenous. In our paper, both are derived from
investor preferences and beliefs.
   4
     Specifically, if all cash flows occur at year five, then in principle CDX prices can be calculated using
state prices derived from five-year options.


                                                        2
of their low default probabilities; these ratings did not take into account that defaults would
occur during the worst economic states.
      These conclusions are questioned by Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012). Collin-
Dufresne et al. note that the pricing of the so-called equity tranche (the most junior tranche)
is sensitive to the timing of defaults and the specification of idiosyncratic risk. Implicit in the
pricing technique of Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009) is that default occurs at the five-year
maturity. This need not be the case, and the difference could be important for the most
junior tranches. Assuming that defaults occur at the five-year horizon makes the junior
tranches look more attractive. The model spreads will thus be artificially low on the junior
tranches, and, because the model is calibrated to match the index, the model-implied spreads
on the senior tranches will be too high. Collin-Dufresne et al. also emphasize the need for
fat-tails in the idiosyncratic risk of firms to capture the CDX spread at the three, as well as
the five-year maturity. Introducing fat-tailed risk also raises the spread of junior tranches in
the model and lowers the spread of senior tranches.
      Once payoffs occur at a horizon other than five years, the method of extracting state
prices from options data no longer cleanly applies. Accordingly, Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein,
and Yang (2012) specify a dynamic model of the pricing kernel, which they calibrate to
five-year options, and which they require to match three- and five-year CDX spreads. They
find that this model comes closer to matching the spreads on equity tranches and on senior
tranches prior to the crisis.
      However, the results of Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012) point to the limita-
tions of the methodology of both papers, in which asset prices are exogenous. Collin-Dufresne
et al. show that pricing tranches during the crisis (October 2007 - September 2008) requires
some probability of a catastrophic event that cannot be directly inferred from options data.5
  5
      Without this catastrophic risk, matching the level of the CDX indices and option prices produces model-
implied spreads on the senior tranches that are too low, while the junior tranche spreads are too high.


                                                      3
The probability of a catastrophic event cannot be determined by option prices using no-
arbitrage arguments because there are not enough options with strikes in the relevant range.
Thus CDX tranches are non-redundant securities. A model may explain option prices, but
may fail to account for CDX senior tranches.
    The limitations of the no-arbitrage framework lead us to an equilibrium model in which
we derive firm valuations and the pricing kernel from assumptions on the endowment and
investor preferences. Analytical solutions for firm prices and for options facilitate what would
otherwise be an intractable numerical problem of computing CDX tranche prices. We require
the resulting equilibrium model to explain the equity premium and equity volatility, and the
low and smooth riskfree rate. Our model offers a joint, quantitative explanation for equity,
options, and credit derivative pricing. Despite the constraints of the equilibrium approach,
our model can match pre-crisis and crisis levels of the CDX and its tranches, ranging from
equity to super-senior.
    Our equilibrium model implies a link from rare disaster probabilities, to equity volatility,
and from there to option prices. We can then use the time series of option prices to infer
investor beliefs about rare event probabilities. Thus, besides matching the average levels,
our results show that the same probabilities of rare events that price CDX senior tranches
both before and during the crisis are fully consistent with prices on S&P index options.
Moreover, the disaster probabilities implied by these prices are reasonable. Prior to the
crisis, the disaster probability was close to zero. In September 2008 it rose precipitously, but
the resulting level needed to explain CDX and CDX tranche prices is only 4% per annum.
In our model, an shock to the probability of disaster endogenously lowers asset values, raises
asset value volatility, and, of course, implies that future tail events are more likely. This
combination of factors allows the model to match the level and time-variation in CDX/CDX
Matching the level of spreads during the crisis requires a lot of risk, and if this risk is idiosyncratic, it will
lead to counterfactually high equity tranche spreads and counterfactually low senior tranche spreads.


                                                        4
tranche spreads.
    Our results show that it is possible to account for the prices of senior tranches on the
CDX within a frictionless model with reasonable parameter values. Moreover, the time series
of these prices is consistent with the time series of options prices. We thus show that at
least some of pricing behavior that was attributed to market failures during the crisis can be
explained using the benchmark framework of representative agent asset pricing. Our findings
also support the view that beliefs about rare disasters are an important determinant of stock
market behavior.
    The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the model and Section 3
describes the data. Section 4 demonstrates the virtual impossibility of describing these data
using a lognormal model. This section argues that only a model with rare disasters would
be capable of explaining CDX tranche prices. Section 5 describes the evaluation of our
model using data on the aggregate market, on options and on CDX and CDX tranche data.
Section 6 concludes.



2     Model

2.1    Model primitives and the state-price density

We assume an endowment economy with complete markets and an infinitely-lived repre-
sentative agent. Aggregate consumption (the endowment) solves the following stochastic
differential equation:

                         dCt
                             = µc dt + σc dBc,t + (eZc,t − 1)dNc,t ,                      (1)
                         Ct−




                                               5
where Bc,t is a standard Brownian motion and Nc,t is a Poisson process. The intensity of
Nc,t is given by λt and assumed to be governed by the following system of equations:
                                                             p
                                  dλt = κλ (ξt − λt )dt + σλ λt dBλ,t                                    (2a)

                                  dξt = κξ (ξ¯ − ξt )dt + σξ ξt dBξ,t ,
                                                            p
                                                                                                         (2b)

where Bλ,t and Bξ,t are Brownian motions (independent of each other and of Bc,t ).
       The process defined by (1) has both normal-times risk, as represented by the Brownian
component σc dBc,t , and a risk of rare disasters represented by the Poisson term (eZc,t −
1)dNc,t . That is, at time t the economy will undergo a disaster with probability λt .6 Given
a disaster, the change in consumption (as a fraction the total) is eZc,t − 1, where Zc,t < 0
is a random variable. By writing the change in consumption as an exponential we ensure
that consumption itself remains positive. For simplicity, we assume the distribution of Zc,t
is time-invariant.
       The system of equations (2) implies that the probability of a disaster λt is time-varying,
and that it mean-reverts to a value ξt that itself changes over time. This type of multifre-
quency process has often been used for modeling asset price volatility and for option pricing
in reduced-form models (see Duffie, Pan, and Singleton (2000) for discussion and references).
Two-factor multifrequency processes are also used in the CDX literature (Collin-Dufresne,
Goldstein, and Yang, 2012). Because return volatility will inherit the multifrequency varia-
tion of λt , (2a) is a natural choice for the disaster probability process. The process (2) can
capture long memory in a time series, namely autocorrelations that decay at a slower-than-
geometric rate. For example, the 2008 financial crisis was characterized both by a spike in
λt that decayed quickly, and higher disaster probabilities in subsequent years. The equation
system (2) captures this feature of the data, while a univariate autoregressive process would
   6
       This description of Poisson shocks, which we adopt throughout the text, is approximate. In any finite
interval there could theoretically be more than one shock since λt is an intensity, not a probability.

                                                      6
not. Setting σξ to zero and assuming that ξt is at its (then deterministic) steady state of ξ¯
results in the one-factor model of Wachter (2013) and Seo and Wachter (2016).
   We assume a recursive generalization of time-additive power utility that allows for pref-
erences over the timing of the resolution of uncertainty. Our formulation comes from Duffie
and Epstein (1992), and we consider a special case in which the EIS is equal to one. That is,
we define continuation utility Vt for the representative agent using the following recursion:
                                            Z ∞
                                   V t = Et     f (Cs , Vs ) ds,
                                                 t

where
                                                                             
                                                            1
                  f (Ct , Vt ) = β(1 − γ)Vt log Ct −           log((1 − γ)Vt ) .
                                                           1−γ
The parameter β is the rate of time preference and γ is relative risk aversion. This utility
function is equivalent to the continuous-time limit of the utility function defined by Epstein
and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990). Assuming an EIS of one allows for closed-form solutions for
equity prices up to ordinary differential equations, and facilitates the computation of options
and CDX/CDX tranche prices.
   In Appendix A, we show that the pricing kernel is characterized by the process

  dπt
      = −rt − λt E e−γZc,t − 1 dt
                             
  πt−
                                                p                p
                          − γσc dBc,t + bλ σλ    λt dBλ,t + bξ σξ ξt dBξ,t + (e−γZc,t − 1)dNc,t . (3)

with
                                         s               2
                             κλ + β              κλ + β             E [e(1−γ)Zt − 1]
                     bλ    =        −                          −2                                (4)
                               σλ2                 σλ2                     σλ2
                                    v         !2
                                    u
                             κξ + β u κξ  + β      bλ κλ
                     bξ    =    2
                                   −t     2
                                                 −2 2 ,                                          (5)
                               σξ        σξ         σξ

In the special case of time-additive utility, γ = 1 and bλ = bξ = 0. The only risk that
matters for computing expected returns is consumption risk, given by the terms −γσc dBc,t

                                                     7
and (e−γZc,t − 1)dNc,t , the latter of which captures the effect of rare disasters. For γ > 1 (this
implies a preference for early resolution of uncertainty), bλ and bξ are positive. Assets that
increase in value when λt and ξt rise provide a hedge against disaster risk. All else equal,
these assets will have lower expected returns, and higher prices, than otherwise.
   The riskfree rate is given by

                        rt = β + µc − γσc2 + λt E e(1−γ)Zc,t − e−γZc,t .
                                                                     
                                                                                               (6)

Equation (6) implies that the riskfree rate is decreasing in the probability of an economic
disaster. The greater is this probability, the more investors want to save for the future, and
the lower the riskfree rate must be in equilibrium.


2.2     The aggregate market and index options

We assume that the aggregate market has payoff Dt = Ctφ (Abel, 1990; Campbell, 2003).
Empirically, dividends are more variable than consumption and more sensitive to economic
disasters (Longstaff and Piazzesi, 2004). We capture this fact by setting φ > 1. The process
for dividends then follows from Ito’s Lemma:
                             dDt
                                 = µd dt + φσc dBc,t + (eφZc,t − 1)dNc,t ,
                             Dt−
where µd = φµc + 21 φ(1 − φ)σc2 .
   In equilibrium, the price of the dividend claim is determined by the cash flows and the
pricing kernel:
                                                          Z   ∞           
                                                                   πs
                                 F (Dt , λt , ξt ) = Et               Ds ds ..                 (7)
                                                           t       πt
Let G(λt , ξt ) be the ratio of prices to dividends. Then
                                        Z ∞            
                                              πs D s
                     G(λt , ξt ) = Et                ds
                                          t   πt D t
                                    Z ∞
                                 =       exp (aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λt + bφξ (τ )ξt ) dτ,          (8)
                                       0

                                                      8
where aφ (τ ), bφλ (τ ) and bφξ (τ ) satisfy ordinary differential equations given in Appendix B.
Under the reasonable assumption of φ > 1, bφλ (τ ) < 0 (Wachter, 2013). Further, using the
reasoning of Tsai and Wachter (2015), it can be shown that bφξ (τ ) < 0. The value of the
aggregate market is thus decreasing in the disaster probability λt and its time-varying mean
ξt .
           Figure 1 shows the functions bφξ (τ ) and bφλ (τ ), given the parameter values discussed in
Section 5.1.1. Both functions are negative and decreasing as a function of τ . The function
bφλ (τ ) converges after about 20 years reflecting the relative lack of persistence in λt . In
contrast, the function bφξ (τ ) takes nearly 70 years to converge. For dividend claims with
maturities of 10 years or less, bφλ (τ ) is greater in magnitude than bφξ (τ ), namely λt -risk is
more important. However, in the limit as the horizon approaches infinity, the effect of ξt is
nearly three times as large as the effect of λt .7
           Applying Ito’s Lemma to Ft = Dt G(λt , ξt ) gives the equilibrium law of motion for the
aggregate market:

 dFt                          ∂G 1 p             ∂G 1 p
                                                      σξ ξt dBξ,t + eφZc,t − 1 dNc,t , (9)
                                                                              
      = µF,t dt + φσc dBc,t +      σλ λt dBλ,t +
 Ft−                          ∂λ G               ∂ξ G
                                 
The terms φσdBc,t and eφZc,t − 1 dNc,t represent normal-time and disaster-time variation in
dividends, respectively.8 At our parameter values, the latter is a much more important source
of risk than the former. Variation in λt and ξt produce variation in the price-dividend ratio G,
                                                                √                      √
and thus in stock prices. This is reflected in the terms ∂G 1
                                                              σ λt dBλ,t and ∂G
                                                         ∂λ G λ
                                                                                   1
                                                                                     σ ξt dBξ,t .
                                                                                ∂ξ G ξ

These can lead to highly volatile stock prices, even during normal times. Combining equa-
       7
           See Lettau and Wachter (2007) and Borovička, Hansen, Hendricks, and Scheinkman (2011) for discussion
of fixed-maturity dividend claims and the effect of exposures to risks of varying frequencies.
    8
      The drift rate µF,t is determined in equilibrium from the instantaneous expected equity return rte :

                                                                       Dt
                                          µF,t = rte − λt E eφZc,t − 1 +
                                                           
                                                                            ,
                                                                         Ft

where rte is determined by (10).

                                                          9
tions for the pricing kernel and for the aggregate market leads to the equation for the equity
premium:
                                                                1 ∂G            1 ∂G
    rte − rt = γφσ 2 − λt Et       e−γZc,t − 1 e−φZc,t − 1 − λt
                                                        
                                                                     bλ σλ − ξt      bξ σ ξ   (10)
                                                                G ∂λ            G ∂ξ
(Tsai and Wachter, 2015). The first term is from the CCAPM, and is negligible in our
calibration. The next term is the risk premium due to disasters itself, and is positive and
large. It represents the comovement of marginal utility and firm value during disaster times.
The last two terms arise from time-variation in the risk of a disaster, both due to changes
in λt and changes in ξt . Because disasters increase marginal utility (bλ and bξ are positive),
and decrease prices, these terms are positive. A calibration, like ours, that matches aggre-
gate stock market volatility, also implies that they have a significant impact on the equity
premium.
   Our analysis below will rely on the prices of put options written on the aggregate market.
A European put option gives the holder the right to sell the underlying security at some
expiration date T for an exercise price K. Because the payoff on the option is (K − FT )+ ,
no-arbitrage implies that
                                                                               
                                                                  πT          +
                         P (Ft , λt , ξt , T − t; K) = Et            (K − FT ) .
                                                                  πt
Lelt K n = K/Ft denote the normalized strike price (“moneyness”) and Ptn = Pt /Ft the
normalized put price. Like the price-dividend ratio, the normalized put price is a function
of λt and ξt alone:
                                                          "                + #
                                                              πT         FT
                       P n (λt , ξt , T − t; K n ) = Et             Kn −         .            (11)
                                                              πt         Ft
We use (11) to calculate normalized put prices, and then find implied volatilities as defined
by Black and Scholes (1973) (see Seo and Wachter (2016) for further details). As we show
in Appendix G, the transform analysis of Duffie, Pan, and Singleton (2000) allows us to
compute (11) analytically, avoiding the need for extensive simulations.

                                                   10
2.3        Individual firm dynamics

As explained in Section 2.4 below, CDX and CDX tranche pricing requires a model for
individual firms. Let Di,t be the payout amount of firm i, for i = 1, · · · , Nf , where Nf is the
number of firms in the CDX (the number has been 125). While we use the notation Di,t ,
we intend this to mean the payout not only to the equity holders but to the bondholders as
well. The firm payout is subject to three types of risk:

  dDi,t
        = µi dt + φi σc dBc,t + (eφi Zc,t − 1)dNc,t + Ii,t (eZSi − 1)dNSi ,t + (eZi − 1)dNi,t . (12)
  Di,t−           |              {z              } |             {z       } |        {z    }
                                     aggregate risk                  sector risk        idiosyncratic risk


where µi is defined similarly to µd , namely µi = φi µc + 12 φi (1 − φi )σc2 . The systematic risk
is standard: Dit has a multiplicative component that behaves like Ctφi , analogously to divi-
dends. Firms are exposed to both normal-times aggregate risk and aggregate consumption
disasters. Because financial leverage is not reflected in Ct , the value of φi will be substantially
below that of φ for aggregate (equity) dividends above. However, we will still allow firms
to have greater exposure to aggregate disasters than consumption, namely φi > 1 (labor
income could account for the wedge between unlevered cash flows and consumption).
       Firms are also exposed to idiosyncratic negative events that occur with constant prob-
ability λi . For simplicity, we assume all idiosyncratic risk is Poisson.9 When a firm is hit
by its idiosyncratic shock (which we model as an increment to the counting process Ni,t ),
the firm’s payout falls by Di,t− × (1 − eZi ). For parsimony, we assume µi , σi , φi , Zi , and
λi are the same for all i, and that Zi is a single value (rather than a distribution). The
shocks themselves, dNi,t , will of course be independent of one another and independent of
the aggregate shock dNc,t . Longstaff and Rajan (2008) estimate that a portion of the CDX
spread is attributable to risk that affects a nontrivial subset of firms. Following Longstaff
   9
       Campbell and Taksler (2003) show that idiosyncratic risk and the probability of firm default are strongly
linked in the data.


                                                        11
and Rajan and Duffie and Garleanu (2001), we refer to this as sector risk, and allow for it
in (12). Let S denote a finite set of sectors.10 Each firm is in exactly one sector; we let
Si ∈ S denote the sector for firm i and dNSi ,t the sector shock. When a sector shock arrives,
the firm is hit with probability pi , namely the sector term in (12) is multiplied by Ii,t which
takes a value 1 with probability pi and 0 otherwise. If a firm happens to be affected by this
sector shock, the firm’s payout drops by Di,t− × (1 − eZSi ).11 Again, for parsimony, pi and
ZSi are the same across firms. The shocks Ii,t are independent across firms and dNSi ,t are
independent across sectors.
       Intuitively, sector risk should be correlated with aggregate consumption risk. To capture
this correlation, we allow the intensity of NSi ,t , λSi ,t , to depend on the state variables λt and
ξt . In the Appendix, we solve for firm values under the specification λSi ,t = w0 + wλ λt + wξ ξt .
For parsimony, we will calibrate the simpler model λSi ,t = wξ ξt .
       Given this payout definition, we solve for the total value of firm i (the equity plus the
debt), which we denote Ai (Di,t , λt , ξt ):
                                                                Z    ∞             
                                                                          πs
                                   Ai (Di,t , λt , ξt ) = Et                 Di,s ds .                  (13)
                                                                  t       πt

Define the price-to-payout ratio as

                                                           Ai (Di,t , λt , ξt )
                                         Gi (λt , ξt ) ≡                        .
                                                                Di,t

Similar to the price-dividend ratio, the price-to-payout ratio for an individual firm can be
  10
       For concreteness, we can think of the sector classification as corresponding to that given by our data
provider Markit. There are five sectors: Consumer, Energy, Financials, Industrial, Telecom, Media, and
Technology, so S = {C, E, F, I, T}. We will use this classification to discipline our calibration. However,
neither the equations nor our empirical results require this interpretation.
  11
     This structure is isomorphic to one in which the set of firms is partitioned into a greater number of
sectors and firms are hit by sector shocks with probability one.




                                                           12
expressed as an integral of an exponential-linear function of the state variables:
                                      Z   ∞
                    Gi (λt , ξt ) =           exp (ai (τ ) + biλ (τ )λt + biξ (τ )ξt ) dτ,      (14)
                                      0


where ai (τ ), biλ (τ ), and biξ (τ ) solve the system of ordinary differential equations derived in
Appendix C. Like the aggregate market value, firm values are decreasing in the disaster
probability λt and its time-varying mean ξt .
   The dynamics of firm values Ait = Ai (Di,t , λt , ξt ) follow from Ito’s Lemma:

  dAi,t                             ∂Gi 1 p                   ∂Gi 1 p
        = µAi ,t dt + φi σc dBc,t +          σλ λt dBλ,t +           σξ ξt dBξ,t +
  Ai,t−                             ∂λ Gi                      ∂ξ Gi
                                    eφi Zc,t − 1 dNc,t + Ii,t (eZSi − 1)dNSi ,t + (eZi − 1)dNi,t (15)
                                                


where µAi ,t is the asset drift rate, determined in equilibrium. Equation 15 has some simi-
larity to processes that use reduced-form models for asset prices. For example, as in Collin-
Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012), there is Brownian risk with stochastic volatility (fol-
lowing a multifrequency process), a risk of an adverse idiosyncratic event, and a risk of
catastrophic market-wide decline. Here, however, the process is an endogenous outcome of
our assumptions on fundamentals and on the utility function. Specifically, volatility occurs
because of changes in agents’ rational forecasts of economic disasters.


2.4    CDX pricing

A credit default swap contract provides a means of trading on the risk of default of a single
firm. Under this bilateral contract, the protection buyer commits to paying an insurance
premium to the protection seller, who pays the protection buyer the loss amount in the
case of default. Recent statistical models of single-name credit default swaps suggest that
market participants price in the risk of rare idiosyncratic and market-wide events (Kelly,
Manzo, and Palhares, 2016; Seo, 2014). Our focus in this paper is on the CDX North

                                                          13
American Investment Grade, an index whose value is determined by default events on a set
of underlying firms, also known as reference entities. An investor who buys protection on
the CDX is, in effect, buying protection on default events of all the underlying firms.
       At each time t, we price a CDX contract initiated at t and maturing at T on Nf reference
entities whose asset prices are governed by (15). Define default as the event that a firm’s
value falls below a threshold AB (Black and Cox, 1976). The default time for firm i is
therefore
                                                                            
                                                    Ai (Di,τ , λτ , ξτ )
                              τt,i    = inf τ > t :                      ≤ AB .                        (16)
                                                    Ai (Di,t , λt , ξt )

To maintain stationarity, we define the threshold relative to the value of the firm at the
initiation.12 Let Rτt,i denote the recovery rate for a firm defaulting at τt,i . This recovery rate
is a random variable that depends only on the outcome of dNc,τt,i , namely whether default
co-occurs with a disaster. Note that this specification implies that the time-t distribution of
both τt,i − t and of Rτt,i is completely determined by λt and ξt .
       We first discuss contracts on CDX as a whole, and then consider tranches in Section 2.5.
Following the convention in our data, we assume that the protection buyer is paying to
insure $1 (namely, $1 is the notional). If firm i defaults, the loss on the CDX increases by
 1
Nf
   (1    − Rτt,i ). Let Lt,s denote the cumulative loss at time s. Then Lt,s is given by

                                                 Nf
                                              1 X
                                     Lt,s   =        1{t<τt,i ≤s} (1 − Rτt,i ).                        (17)
                                              Nf i=1

Increases in Lt,s trigger payments from the protection seller (the party providing insurance)
  12
       If we interpret AB Ai,t as the amount of debt that the firm has at time t, then (16) implies that the
firm is in default whenever the value of equity is below zero. This formulation is consistent with firms
maintaining stationary leverage, and but that reversion to the stationary levels takes place on the order of
years (Lemmon, Roberts, and Zender, 2008).




                                                            14
to the protection buyer. No-arbitrage implies that the value of these payments equals
                                                                Z   T           Rs
                                                                                                  
                         ProtCDX (λt , ξt ; T − t) =      EtQ            e   −   t    ru du
                                                                                              dLt,s ,
                                                                 t


where E Q denotes the expectation taken under the risk-neutral measure Q and ru is the
riskfree rate, both of which are implied by the pricing kernel (3).13 Equation 18 is sometimes
referred to as the “protection leg” of the contract.
       In a CDX contract, the protection buyer makes payments at quarterly intervals. If no
firms default, these premium payments add up to a fixed value S over the course of a year.
If default occurs, the premium payments fall to reflect the fact that a lower amount is now
insured under the contract. Let nt,s denote the fraction of firms that have defaulted s − t
years into the contract:
                                                    Nf
                                                 1 X
                                        nt,s   =        1{t<τt,i ≤s} .                                    (18)
                                                 Nf i=1

Like Lt,s , nt,s is a random variable whose value is realized at s and whose time-t distribution
depends only on λt , ξt , and s − t. Let ϑ = 1/4, the interval between premium payment dates.
For a given spread S, the premium leg is equal to
                                               "      4T
                                                   1 X − R t+ϑm ru du
  PremCDX (λt , ξt ; T − t, S) =      SEtQ                e t         (1 − nt,t+ϑm ) +
                                                   4 m=1
                                                         Z t+ϑm                                      
                                                                   − ts ru du
                                                                      R
                                                                 e            (s − t − ϑ(m − 1))dnt,s . (19)
                                                         t+ϑ(m−1)


The first term in (19) is the value of the scheduled premium payments. Note that nt,t+ϑm is
the fraction of the pool that has defaulted as of the mth payment, and so 1 − nt,t+ϑm ≤ 1
is the notional at that point in time. The second term represents the accrued premium.
  13
       Following longstanding practice in the literature on credit derivatives, we express prices as discounted
cash flows under the risk neutral measure rather than as cash flows multiplied by πt under the physical
measure. The mapping between the two is well-known (Duffie, 2001).


                                                          15
Consider the event of firm default at some time s between payments m − 1 and m. Until
time s, the protection buyer is insured against default of this firm. However, this is not
reflected in the scheduled payments; the value of the mth payment is the same as it would
be if the default occurred at time t + ϑ(m − 1) < s. Thus upon default the protection buyer
pays the fraction of S/(4Nf ) that accrues between the (m − 1)th payment and the default
time s, known as the accrued premium.
   The CDX spread SCDX (λt , ξt ; T − t) is the value of S that equates the premium leg (19)
with the protection leg (18). We describe the computation of this spread in Appendix D.


2.5     CDX tranche pricing

Generally, tranches are claims that partition a security and have different levels of subordi-
nation in case of default. In the case of the CDX (which is a synthetic collateralized debt
obligation and thus does not represent underlying physical assets), tranche losses are defined
in terms of the total loss Lt,s .
   Tranches are defined by two numbers: the attachment point, which gives the level of
CDX loss at which the tranche is penetrated, and the detachment point, after which further
losses detach from the tranche. For example, consider the 10-15% tranche. This tranche
loses value if the CDX accumulates more than a 10% loss. Losses of between 10% and
15% attach to this tranche. If the losses reach 15%, the notional amount of the tranche
is exhausted. Further losses attach to the next tranche. During our sample period, six
tranches commonly traded, with attachment-detachment pairs 0-3%, 3-7%, 7-10%, 10-15%,
15-30%, and 30-100%. The most junior tranche (0-3%) is referred to as equity, the second as
mezzanine, and the remaining four as senior. The last, and most senior tranche (30-100%),
is often called “super senior.”
   Let Kj−1 be the attachment point and Kj the detachment point of the j-th tranche for


                                             16
j = 1, . . . , J, where K0 = 0 and KJ = 1. Given a CDX loss Lt,s , the tranche loss is given by

                          L                       min{Lt,s , Kj } − min{Lt,s , Kj−1 }
                         Tj,t,s = TjL (Lt,s ) =                                       .                                      (20)
                                                              Kj − Kj−1

If the CDX loss is below both Kj and Kj−1 , it has not attached to the tranche, and the loss is
0%. If the loss is greater than both Kj and Kj−1 , it detaches from the tranche and the tranche
                                                                                                            Lt,s −Kj−1
loss is 100%. If the loss is between Kj−1 and Kj , then the loss equals 0 <                                 Kj −Kj−1
                                                                                                                         < 1. The
definition (20) implies that the notional amount on each tranche is equal to $1, which is the
convention in our data. Note that the weighted sum of tranche losses equals the total loss:
                                       J
                                       X
                                                           L
                                              (Kj − Kj−1 )Tj,t,s = Lt,s .                                                    (21)
                                        j=1


Given the specification for the tranche loss, the protection seller for tranche j pays
                                                              Z   T       Rs
                                                                                                  
                       ProtTran,j (λt , ξt , T − t) =   EtQ            −
                                                                       e   t    ru du     L
                                                                                        dTj,t,s       .                      (22)
                                                               t


      The protection buyer for tranche j makes quarterly premium payments. As in the case
of the CDX, the amount he or she pays depends on the tranche notional. However, the
adjustments in tranche notional for default is more complicated than for the CDX. The
adjustment in notional depends not only on the tranche loss, but also on something called
                                                                                                             1
tranche recovery. If a firm defaults, the notional on the CDX falls by                                      Nf
                                                                                                               .   However, the
                                                                                                   1
notional on the most junior tranche falls by the smaller amount of                                Nf
                                                                                                     (1    − Rτt,i ).14 To keep
the notional amount on the CDX tranches consistent with that of the CDX, the total change
                                                                                               1
in notional on the tranches following default must also add up to                             Nf
                                                                                                 .        This extra reduction
in notional is called tranche recovery.
      It is customary to apply the tranche recovery to the most senior tranche. Note that
nt,s − Lt,s is the amount recovered to date from defaults. Then tranche recovery for the
 14
      To be precise, this is the change in notional multiplied by the width of the tranche, Kj − Kj−1 .



                                                        17
super-senior tranche defined to be

                                                  R       nt,s − Lt,s
                                                 TJ,s =
                                                          KJ − KJ−1

(recall that KJ = 1). In the very rare event that this recovery exhausts the notional on the
senior tranche, the remaining recovery amount detaches from this tranche and attaches to
the next most senior tranche. A general definition for tranche recovery is thus

      R                              min{nt,s − Lt,s , 1 − Kj−1 } − min{nt,s − Lt,s , 1 − Kj }
     Tj,t,s = TjR (nt,s − Lt,s ) =                                                             .            (23)
                                                            Kj − Kj−1

Note that if nt,s − Lt,s < 1 − Kj , then no recovery applies to tranche j (it can all be applied
to the more senior tranches). It follows that nt,s − Lt,s < 1 − Kj−1 as well, and (23) is equal
to zero. If on the other hand, nt,s − Lt,s is greater than 1 − Kj and less than 1 − Kj−1 , then
the numerator in (23) equals nt,s − Lt,s − (1 − Kj ), which is the amount of the recovery not
reflected in the tranche loss for more senior tranches. If nt,s − Lt,s is above both 1 − Kj and
1 − Kj−1 then (23) is equal to 1. As is the case for tranche losses (24), the weighted sum of
tranche recovery is equal to total recovery:
                                     J
                                     X
                                                        R
                                           (Kj − Kj−1 )Tj,t,s = nt,s − Lt,s .                               (24)
                                     j=1


Combining (21) and (24), we see that the weighted change in notional from a default is nt,s ,
which is the change in notional for a contract on the CDX itself.
   Given these definitions of the tranche loss and recovery, we can define the premium
payments for a given tranche. Let S be the spread, and U the upfront payment (to be
discussed further below). Then the premium leg for tranche j is given by


  PremTran,j (λt , ξt ; T − t, U, S) =
                                             "      4T
                                                                                                        #
                                                 1 X − R t+ϑm ru du t+ϑm
                                                                   Z
                             U + SE Q                                             L        R
                                                                                                 
                                                       e t                   1 − Tj,t,s − Tj,t,s   ds       (25)
                                                 4 m=1              t+ϑ(m−1)



                                                           18
(the definitions of tranche loss and recovery imply that their sum cannot exceed 1). Except
for the upfront payment U , the tranche premium leg is nearly equivalent to that of the CDX,
(19), as can be shown by integration by parts. The difference is in the timing of the accrued
premium payment. For the CDX, this payment is made upon occurrence of default. For
the tranche, this payment is made at the next scheduled premium payment date.15 The
difference in the contract terms may reflect the fact that the event that a loss or recovery
attaches to a tranche is more difficult to determine than a default event, because it requires
the computation of Lt,s rather than nt,s . The computation of Lt,s requires firm i’s recovery,
Rτt,i , which may depend on the outcome of ISDA Credit Event Auction proceedings, and
thus will not typically be known in real time.
          For all but the equity tranche, the upfront payment U is set to zero in our data, and
the spread S is determined in the same way as the CDX as a whole. However, the equity
tranche trades assuming a set spread of 500 basis points, with U determined so as to equate
the premium and the protection legs. Why this difference? As Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein,
and Yang (2012) point out, the spread payments for the equity tranche are particularly
sensitive to losses, both because equity is hit first when default occurs, and because the
CDX loss is likely to be large relative to the detachment point of 3%. In practice, it is
difficult to know the precise moment of default, which affects the amount of spread to be
paid. Setting an upfront payment reduces the spread, and therefore reduces the sensitivity
of the cash flows to the precise timing of a default event.
          Following the conventions in the data, therefore, define UTran,1 (λt , ξt ; T − t) to be the
     15                                                   L        R
          Recognizing that nt,s is the CDX equivalent of Tj,t,s + Tj,t,s , the CDX equivalent of the integral in (25)
is
                     Z   t+ϑm                                            Z   t+ϑm
                                                    1
                                 (1 − nt,s ) ds =     (1 − nt,t+ϑm ) +              (s − t − ϑ(m − 1)) dnt,s ,
                      t+ϑ(m−1)                      4                    t+ϑ(m−1)

where the right hand side is derived using integration by parts. Note that this right hand side is equivalent
to the change in notional in (19), except for a change in the discounting of the accrued premium payment.


                                                                19
value of U that equates (25) and (22), for j = 1, and S = 0.05. For j = 2, . . . , J, define
STran,j (λt , ξt ; T − t) to be the value of S that, for U = 0 equates (25) with (22). Appendix D
describes CDX tranche pricing.



3        Data

Our analyses require the use of pricing data from options and CDX markets. The options
data, provided by OptionMetrics, consist of daily implied volatilities on S&P 500 European
put options from January 1996 to December 2012. To construct a monthly time series, we
use data from the Wednesday of every option expiration week. We apply standard filters to
extract contracts with meaningful trade volumes and prices. To obtain an implied volatility
curve for each date, we fit a polynomial in strike price and maturity (see Seo and Wachter
(2016) for more details on options data construction).
       Our CDX data come from Markit and consist of daily spreads and upfront amounts for
the October 2005 to September 2008 period on the 5-year CDX North American Investment
Grade index and its tranches excluding the super-senior. The CDX North American Invest-
ment Grade index is the most actively traded CDX product. We will refer to it in what
follows as “the CDX.” This index represents 125 equally-weighted large North American
firms that are investment-grade at the time the series is initiated.
       To maintain an (approximately) fixed-maturity contract, a new series for the CDX is
introduced every March and September and the previous series becomes off-the-run. Our
sample corresponds to CDX series 5 through 10.16 We use data from the series that is
  16
       The liquidity of CDX tranches significantly shrank after CDX10, the last series introduced before the
Lehman crisis. From series 11 on, these products were traded too infrequently for prices to be meaningful.
Moreira and Savov (2016) presents a model with time-varying disaster risk that accounts for qualitative
features of structured finance around the crisis, including the lack of trading in these securities following the



                                                       20
most recently issued, and hence most actively traded, in our analyses. For comparability
with prior studies (Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang, 2012; Coval, Jurek, and Stafford,
2009), we report average spreads for two subperiods, with September 2007 being the end of
the first subperiod. In our sample, the CDX and all tranches except for the equity tranche
are quoted in terms of spreads. The equity tranche is quoted in terms of upfront payment
with a fixed spread of 500 basis points.17



4     Why disaster risk?

Before quantitatively evaluating our model, we motivate our approach by examining what
would happen under a lognormal distribution for asset values.18 We will concern ourselves
in this section with the two most senior tranches, implying that we are interested in losses of
15% or more on the CDX. Given the effects of diversification, it is very unlikely for this level
of losses to occur due to anything other than a severe market-wide shock. It therefore suffices
to consider a single firm whose value follows a geometric Brownian motion. For simplicity,
we assume zero recovery and ignore discounting.19 Under these assumptions, the value of
the protection leg (22) equals the default probability of this single firm calculated under the
risk-neutral measure.
    The assumption of a geometric Brownian motion implies that the change in firm value
Lehman default.
  17
     Trading conventions changed with the introduction of the Standard North American Contract (SNAC)
in April 2009. Under SNAC, CDX products trade with upfront amounts and fixed coupons of either 100 or
500 bps.
  18
     To make this argument as transparent as possible, we assume that shocks are homoskedastic. However,
there is a strong reason to think that our results will generalize to the heteroskedastic case: Collin-Dufresne,
Goldstein, and Yang (2012) show that a model with stochastic volatility but no Poisson shocks generates
strikingly counterfactual predictions when forced to fit tranche data.
  19
     Allowing for recovery will make it harder for the lognormal model to fit the data.


                                                      21
between time s and time t is given by

                                log As − log At = µA (s − t) + σA (Bs − Bt ),

where Bt is a standard Brownian motion under the risk-neutral measure. To give the log-
normal model its best chance of success, we consider values for σA that are higher than
what data would suggest, ranging from 14% to 20% (under lognormality, the physical and
risk-neutral volatilities are identical). Note that these volatilities are for equity plus debt.
Historical stock return volatility is 18%; assuming leverage of 32% (see below) asset return
volatility would be 12%. Another useful benchmark is what our model, calibrated to option
prices, says about firm volatility during the crisis period. Substituting in the average value of
λt and ξt over the crisis subsample into (15), we find a volatility of 15%. However, using this
value for σA implies a belief on the part of market participants that this high value is likely
to persist for 3 to 5 years, which seems unlikely given the lack of persistence of volatility in
the data.20
       The probability of crossing the default boundary also depends on the drift. No-arbitrage
implies that this drift is equal to µA = r − δ − 21 σA2 , where δ is the ratio of dividends plus
interest to total firm value. We compute the probabilities of default for values ranging from
-6% to -2%. While these numbers are low given historical data, higher values lead to lower
probabilities, so choosing low numbers gives the lognormal model its best chance at success.
       Table 4 shows the resulting probability of default over three and five-year periods, defined
  20
       Note that accounting for this level of volatility given fundamentals is not an easy hurdle in and of itself.
Models that have the potential to do so (besides the time-varying disaster risk model that is the focus of this
paper) include Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Campbell and Cochrane (1999). These models are conditionally
lognormal. Returns over multiple periods will not be lognormal due to stochastic volatility. However, as
noted above, non-normalities due only to stochastic volatility are very unlikely to explain senior tranche
spreads.



                                                         22
as firm value below the boundary AB .21 As the previous discussion indicates, we can think of
these probabilities as approximating the value of the protection leg on the tranches. Because
the annual spread equates the protection leg and the premium leg, the spread should (again,
roughly), equal the probability divided by the number of years in the contract.
       Table 4 shows that, for a drift of -6% and a volatility of 20%, the probability of default in
three years or less is 0.0041%. That is, there is a less than one in ten thousand chance that
default would occur in under three years. The average annual spread for 3-year contracts is
48 basis points for the third senior tranche and 23 basis points for the super-senior tranche.
Even ignoring the fact that we should multiply these tranche spreads by three to obtain
the total payment, they are two orders of magnitude too high, given the predictions of the
lognormal model.
       While the failure of the lognormal model is most dramatic for 3-year contracts, we can also
see it in spreads on 5-year contracts. The highest probability shown in Table 4, corresponding
to very high asset value volatility and low drift, is 0.43% over five years. While this is the
same order of magnitude as the 5-year spread on the third senior tranche (69 basis points),
keep in mind that the 5-year spread is annual, and should be multiplied by 5 to compare
to the probability. Thus 5-year probabilities for the lognormal distribution are also clearly
unrealistic.22 These calculations suggest that only a model that admits large, sudden, and
  21
       The distribution of the default time τ defined in (16) is given by
                                                                      µA log AB
                                                                                                       
                                             − log AB + µA               σ2
                                                                                          − log AB − µA
                     P (τ < u) = 1 − Φ              √            +e        A      Φ              √            ,
                                                 σA u                                         σA u

where Φ(·) is the normal cumulative distribution function.
 22
    Nonetheless, the short-term CDX senior tranche spreads are particularly powerful in ruling out a log-
normal model. This result has a parallel in the literature on single-name corporate bonds. Zhou (2001)
shows that fat-tailed idiosyncratic risk is necessary to match single-name short-term bond yields. Culp,
Nozawa, and Veronesi (2014) show that securities that are equivalent, by no-arbitrage, to even shorter-term
bonds also have high credit spreads. Their results are further evidence of the need for fat-tailed events that



                                                         23
pervasive declines in firm values can explain the level of CDX tranche spreads during the
crisis. Such declines must be rare because such an episode has not been observed within the
last 100 years of U.S. history.
    The analysis in this section pertains to the risk-neutral process for prices, rather than
a physical process for cash flows and for the pricing kernel. That is, while the argument
establishes that the risk-neutral process for asset values must contain catastrophic jumps,
it does not imply that rare disasters are a feature of the physical world, nor that they have
an important affect on risk premia. Is this a limitation? We argue that it is not. If the
risk-neutral process for prices has jumps, the physical process must too (because of the
equivalence of the measures). Unless risk aversion is extraordinarily large, the jumps in the
physical process must also be catastrophic. Once the physical process has large jumps in
prices, such large jumps cannot but play an important role in determining risk premia, both
for individual firms and for the market as a whole, as we can see from the jump component in
the equation for risk premia, (10). Constant relative risk aversion implies that large declines
are much more costly for the representative agent then small declines, and the declines due
to catastrophic shocks implied by CDX tranche prices are quite large.
    What this argument does not identify is the source of the decline in prices. The model
in Section 2 assumes an instantaneous permanent decline in consumption and firm cash
flows. A model with Poisson shocks to consumption and dividend drifts generates similar
results (Tsai and Wachter, 2015), as might a model in which volatility jumps upward and is
persistent.23 What is necessary is that some aspect of the distribution of firm fundamentals
can shift suddenly and unpredictably in an unfavorable way, and that these shifts are far
are economy-wide.
  23
     When disasters result in a instantaneous decline in consumption and when dividends are given by
Dt = Ctφ , e−φZc − 1 is the change in value of the market portfolio. In general, however, Poisson shocks to
the distribution of dividends will be reflected in large changes market values.



                                                     24
beyond what one would expect from a normal distribution.



5     Evaluating the model

A standard approach to comparing an endowment economy model with the data is to sim-
ulate population moments and compare them with data moments. In a model with rare
disasters, this may not be the right approach if one is looking at a historical period that
does not contain a disaster. An alternative approach is to simulate many samples from the
stationary distribution implied by the model, and see if the data moments fall between the
5th and 95th percentile values simulated from the model. For this study, this approach is
not ideal for two reasons. First, the short length of CDX/CDX tranche time series will
likely mean that the error bars implied by the model will be very wide. Thus this test
will have low power to reject the model. Second, unlike stock prices which are available in
semi-closed-form, and options, which are available up to a (hard-to-compute, but nonethe-
less one-dimensional) integral, CDX prices must be simulated for every draw from the state
variables. Thus the simulation approach is computationally infeasible.
    For these reasons, we adopt a different approach. We first extract the time series of our
two state variables from options data and then generate predictions for the CDX index and
tranches based on this series of state variables. We are thus setting up a more stringent test
than endowment economy models are usually subject to. Namely, we are asking that the
model match not only moments, but the actual time series of variables of interest.


5.1    Calibration

In this section, we describe how we calibrate the model. Section 5.1.1 describes the choice
of parameter values for the utility, consumption, and dividend processes, as well as the fit to


                                              25
moments of the aggregate market and the riskfree rate in the data. Section 5.1.2 describes
the calibration of firm-level parameters.


5.1.1       Aggregate consumption and dividends

We keep risk aversion γ, the discount rate β, the leverage parameter φ, the normal-times
consumption distribution, and the disaster distribution the same as in Wachter (2013) and
Seo and Wachter (2016).24 Note that κλ and σλ will not have the same interpretation in this
model as in the earlier one.
       Our first goal in calibrating the model is to generate reasonable predictions for the ag-
gregate market and for the consumption distribution. One challenge in calibrating represen-
tative agent models is to match the high volatility of the price-dividend ratio. There is an
upper limit to the amount of volatility that can be assumed in the state variable before a
solution for utility fails to exist. The more persistent the processes, namely the lower the
values of κλ and κξ , the lower the respective volatilities must be so as to ensure that the
discriminants in (4) and (5) stay nonnegative. We choose parameters so that the discrimant
is equal to zero. Thus there are only a total of three free parameters to match the aggregate
market, the riskfree rate, and consumption.
       The resulting parameter choices are shown in Table 1. The mean reversion parameter κλ
and volatility parameter σλ are relatively high, indicating a fast-moving component to the λt
process, while the mean reversion parameter κξ and σξ are relatively low, indicating a slower-
moving component. The parameter ξ¯ (which represents both the average value of ξt and the
average value of λt ) is 2% per annum. This is a lower average disaster probability than in
Wachter (2013), and, in this sense, our calibration is conservative. The extra persistence
  24
       This disaster distribution is drawn from Barro and Ursúa (2008) who build on work of Barro (2006). We
also assume a 40% probability of default on the government bill in the case of disaster as in Barro (2006)
and following these two papers.


                                                      26
created by the ξt process implies that λt can deviate from its average for long periods of
time. To clarify the implications of these parameter choices, we report population statistics
on λt in Panel C of Table 1. The median disaster probability is only 0.37%, indicating
a highly skewed distribution. The standard deviation is 3.9% and the monthly first-order
autocorrelation is 0.986.
       Implications for the riskfree rate and the market are shown in Table 2. We simulate
100,000 samples of length 60 years to capture features of the small-sample distribution (Ap-
pendix E describes to simulate from the model). We also simulate a long sample of 600,000
years to capture the population distribution. Statistics are reported for the full set of 100,000
samples, and the subset for which there are no disasters (38% of the sample paths). To be
conservative, we take the view that this no-disaster distribution is the more appropriate
point of comparison for postwar data. However, whether the 2008-2009 crisis constitutes a
disaster in the U.S. depends on the data series one looks at (industrial production fell by
more than consumption). As in earlier work (Wachter, 2013), time-varying disaster proba-
bility implies a high equity premium, low riskfree rate, and high equity volatility.25 Only the
autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio falls (just) outside the 90% confidence bounds.26
  25
       The average Treasury Bill rate is slightly too high, though this could be lowered by lowering β or by
lowering the probability of government default.
  26
     While it is possible to calibrate the model to match this autocorrelation, it comes at the cost of raising
the autocorrelation of option prices beyond realistic levels. Moreover, so that utility converges, there is a
tradeoff between persistence and volatility. One view is that the autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio
observed in the postwar period may be driven by very long-run fluctuations in the tendency to pay dividends
(Fama and French, 2001), which are outside of the scope of the model. Note that these fluctuations could
also be partially responsible for the observed volatility of the price-dividend ratio, which is also somewhat
higher in the data than the model.




                                                      27
5.1.2       Firm-level payouts

To go from state variables to CDX/CDX tranche prices requires not only dynamics for the
market, but dynamics for individual firms and assumptions about what constitutes a default.
For parsimony, and following standard practice in this literature, we assume firms are ex ante
identical. However, firms face distinct idiosyncratic shocks and potentially distinct sector-
wide shocks.
       To calibrate individual firm dynamics, we use results from Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein,
and Yang (2012). The default boundary AB is set to be 19.2%. This implies that if the asset
value falls below 0.192 multiplied by what it was at the initiation of the contract, the firm is
assumed to be in default. This value derives from the average leverage ratio from firm-level
data (32%). Firms are then considered to be in default if their value is 60% of their debt
outstanding.27 We assume that the recovery rate is 40% in normal times and 20% in the
event of rare disasters. We choose the idiosyncratic jump size eZi − 1 to equal -80%, a value
sufficiently large to make default almost certain. Both assumptions are consistent with those
of Collin-Dufresne et al.
       The CDX index consists of investment-grade firms that are relatively large and stable.
Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012) estimate a different asset beta for each CDX
series; the asset betas are between 0.5 and 0.6 for pre-crisis series and between 0.6 and 0.7
for crisis series. This reflects a slight increase in leverage for the firms included in the series.
In our model, the asset beta will be mostly determined by the ratio φi /φ; however, the
connection between sector-wide and aggregate risk adds an additional degree of covariance.
  27
       The fact that our model can generate realistic CDX spreads given conservative assumptions on leverage
ratios and default suggests that our model can resolve the credit spread puzzle, namely, it will be able to
explain high credit spreads given low historical default rates. Papers that examine credit spreads from a
disaster-risk perspective include Christoffersen, Du, and Elkamhi (2016), Gabaix (2012), and Gourio (2013).
These papers do not look at the CDX.


                                                      28
We therefore choose φi /φ = 0.5 pre-crisis and φi /φ = 0.6 during the crisis. Given our
assumption of φ = 2.6, this corresponds to a pre-crisis value of φi of 1.3 and a crisis value of
1.6.28
       We use the results of Longstaff and Rajan (2008) to calibrate the parameters for the
sector-wide shocks. For simplicity, in the calibration we assume that the loss in the event of
a sector-wide shock is sufficiently large that all firms that experience this loss go into default.
Longstaff and Rajan estimate an approximately 5% loss rate on the portfolio in the event of
a sector shock. Because we assume a recovery rate of 40%, the fraction of firms defaulting
in the event of a sector shock is equal to 0.05/(1 − .4) = 8%. There are 125 total firms, so
a sector shock corresponds to a default of about 10 firms. Again, for simplicity, we assume
that there are 25 firms in each sector (there are 125 firms, with 5 sectors); this implies a
probability of 10/25, or 0.4, of firm default given a sector shock.29
       We directly estimate the remaining parameters using moments of junior tranches in the
data. To make this estimation computationally feasible, we impose some simplifying assump-
                                                                                          
tions. Similar to the idiosyncratic jump size, we assume sector-wide jump size eZSi ,t − 1 to
be constant. While Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012) calibrate the idiosyncratic
intensity for each series to match the term structure of CDX spreads (by assuming that the
intensity for each series is a distinctive deterministic step function), we assume that this
intensity (λi ) is truly a constant throughout the entire sample period. These simplifying
assumptions leave us only three parameters to be estimated (ZSi ,t , wξ , and λi ).
       Specifically, to estimate the three parameters, we use the following four moments: (1)
  28
       For simplicity we treat φ as a parameter rather than a process; namely the shift in φ corresponds to a
one-time change in regime that is not anticipated by the agents.
  29
     An equivalent approach is to consider a larger number of sectors, and have firm default be certain given
a sector shock. This is the approach of Longstaff and Rajan (2008). The implications for the payout process
are identical.



                                                      29
the average of pre-crisis equity tranche upfront payments, (2) the average of crisis equity
tranche upfront payments, (3) the average of pre-crisis mezzanine tranche spreads, and (4)
the average of crisis mezzanine tranche spreads.30 That is, we choose parameters to minimize
the sum of squared errors for these four moments. Thus we do not use data on senior tranches
or on the CDX index to fit these parameters. Table 3 reports the resulting parameter values.


5.2       Implied volatilities on index options

In an earlier paper (Seo and Wachter, 2016) we establish that a special case of the model in
Section 2.1 can fit average option-implied volatilities in the data. Our previous model (which
has one state variable rather than two) captures the fact that implied volatilities are higher
than realized volatilities and that out-of-the money (OTM) put options have higher implied
volatilities than at-the-money (ATM) options. Our model explains these facts because of
non-normalities arising from disasters, and high normal-times volatility arising endogenously
from time-variation in the disaster probability.
       Because the current model nests the previous one and is similarly calibrated, it is not
surprising that this model, too, can explain average implied volatilities. Moreover, the second
state variable allows it to capture time-variation in the slope of the implied volatility curve.
Because we will be using the model to infer the state variables for pricing CDX tranche
spreads, this property is desirable. To understand why the second factor can capture time-
variation in the slope of implied volatilities, recall the process for the stock price (9). Increases
in both λt and ξt increase the stock price volatility. Hence increases in these two variables
  30
       Note that CDX/CDX tranche pricing requires a large number of simulations. To reduce computation
time during the estimation procedure, for each date (i.e. for each pair of state variables), we construct a grid
of these three variables and compute CDX/CDX tranche prices on each grid. Then, we interpolate these
grid points using a 3-dimensional cubic spline. We confirm that this interpolation is very accurate because
each tranche spread is a monotonic function of each parameter.


                                                      30
will also increase option prices, and thus option-implied volatility. Figure 1 suggests that
increases in ξt have a larger effect on stock price volatility than increases in λt . On the
other hand, increases in λt raise the immediate probability of disaster more than increases
in ξt . We would thus expect ξt to have a larger effect on ATM options, and λt to have
a larger effect on OTM options. Figure 2 shows that this is indeed the case. This figure
shows 3-month implied volatilities as a function of moneyness (the strike price of the option
divided by the index price) for the state variables at their median levels, and at the 20th and
80th percentiles. The level of implied volatilities is increasing in both λt and ξt . However, ξt
affects mainly ATM implied volatilities while λt has a slightly greater effect for OTM implied
volatilities. Increases in ξt that are not accompanied by increases in λt bring the stock-price
distribution closer to log-normality, flattening the implied volatility curve.
   Using the time series of option prices, we extract a time series for λt and ξt that runs
from January 1996 to December 2012. While we choose these state variables to exactly fit
1-month ATM and OTM (0.85 moneyness) implied volatility, Figure 3 verifies that the fit to
3 and 6-month implied volatility is also very good. We show the time series of the extracted
state variables in Panel A of Figure 4. For most of this sample, the disaster probability λt
and its mean ξt lie below 5%. The state variables rise in late 1998 corresponding to the rescue
of Long Term Capital Management, following the Asian financial crisis and the moratorium
on payments on Russian debt. There are also increases corresponding to market declines
following the NASDAQ boom in the early 2000s. The sample, however, is dominated by the
financial crisis of late 2008-2009. At the Lehman default, the disaster probability rises as
high as 20%. The disaster probability remains high and volatile, as compared to the prior
period, until the end of the sample.
   Panel B focuses in on the sample period for which we have CDX tranche data. This
period captures the first hints of the crisis in early 2007, with slight increases in the level



                                               31
and volatility of λt and ξt . These variables become markedly higher and more volatile in
2007 and early 2008, culminating in the near-default of Bear Sterns. The CDX tranche
sample ends right before the Lehman default; the last values of λt are higher than before,
but notably lower than one month later.
       Before discussing the implications of these extracted state variables for CDX pricing, we
note the implications for equity prices. Table 2 already shows that the model is capable
of explaining moments of equity returns. Here, we ask whether the model can capture the
actual time series of stock prices. Given the option-implied values of λt and ξt , we can
compute a price-dividend ratio using (8). Figure 5 shows the results, along with the price-
dividend ratio from data available from Robert Shiller’s webpage. The model can match the
sustained level of the price-dividend ratio, and, most importantly, the time series variation
after 2004, despite the fact that the state variables are derived from option prices.31 Indeed,
between 2004 and 2013, the correlation between the option-implied price-dividend ratio and
the actual price-dividend ratio is 0.84, strongly suggesting these two markets share a common
source of risk.


5.3        CDX/CDX tranche spreads

Given the option-implied state variables, we price CDX and CDX tranches as described in
Sections 2.4 and 2.5. Recall that for the CDX and all tranches except the equity tranche,
these spreads represent the annual payment per unit notional. For example, the average
spread of 27 basis points for the 15-30% (3rd senior tranche) indicates that a protection buyer
pays $0.0027 per year to insure $1.00 of value for this tranche.32 For the equity tranche, the
  31
       Not surprisingly, the disaster-risk model is not able to match the run-up in stock prices from the late 90s
until around 2004. It may be that time-varying fears of a disaster will not be able to capture the extreme
optimism that characterized that period.
  32
     As described in Section 2.5 there are adjustments based on defaults in the portfolio.


                                                        32
spread is fixed at 500 basis points, so we report the upfront payment (in percentage points
per unit of notional). Section 5.3.1 considers average spreads over the pre-crisis and crisis
periods, while Section 5.3.2 discusses the time series.


5.3.1       Average spreads

Table 5 shows that the model can match the average spreads on the 5-year CDX and its
tranches for the full sample period. More importantly, the model can match the very large
shift in spreads between the pre-crisis and crisis periods. For example, on the 15-30% tranche,
the average spread changes 10-fold (from 6 basis points to 69 basis points) between the
samples. Our model captures both the low pre-crisis magnitude (the value is 8 basis points)
and the high crisis magnitude (71 basis points). While the model generates a substantial
change in the senior tranches, it correctly generates much less of a shift in the junior tranches.
As we will show, pricing of the equity and mezzanine tranche has much more to do with
idiosyncratic risk as opposed to market-wide risk of a rare disaster.
       Table 6 shows that the model can also match spreads for the 3-year maturity. For this
table, we take data values reported in Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012), who use
a different data source and slightly different data construction procedure.33 The model can
match the very low average spreads prior to the crisis, and the high spreads during the crisis.
The model also captures the fact that 3-year spreads are lower, but not much lower, than
5-year spreads. High 3-year spreads present a particular challenge to models that assume
normally distributed risk, as discussed in Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012), and
as we show in Section 4. The fact that the model can match the term structure is evidence
that the correlational structure for our disaster risk process corresponds to that in the data.
       Finally, Table 7 reports average spreads on the super-senior tranche. As is the case
  33
       See Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012) for details. We have verified that our data and theirs
are very similar for the instruments and dates where they overlap.


                                                      33
for Table 6, data are from Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012). The super-senior
tranche is only affected if there is a loss of 30% or more on the CDX itself. Supposing the
20% recovery rate we assume for disaster periods, about 40% of the 125 firms would need
to go into default for insurance on the tranche to pay off. Nowhere can rare disaster fears
be seen more clearly, than in the increase in average spreads, from near zero to 30 basis
points, on these tranches. Table 7 shows that the model captures the level of spreads before
the crisis, the dramatic change during the crisis, and the relative spreads between the 3
and 5 year maturities. Given our focus on rare events, the ability of the model to match
these average spreads is particularly encouraging. As explained in Section 4, the high crisis
spreads on these products are beyond the reach of models with normally distributed risk.


5.3.2   Time-variation in spreads

We now calculate the implied time series of spreads on CDX and CDX tranches based on
our state variables extracted from options data, and compare them to the historical time
series. Figure 6 shows the monthly time series of five-year maturity CDX and CDX tranche
spreads in the data and in the model. The blue solid line represents the data and the red
dotted line represents the benchmark model. On the same figure, we also show results for
the case without idiosyncratic risk, discussed further below. The top left panel presents the
CDX index, and the other five panels show tranches ranging from the equity tranche to the
3rd senior tranche (15-30%). As discussed in Section 3, when the equity tranche is traded,
the protection buyer makes an upfront payment to the protection seller in addition to fixed
annual premium payments of 500 bps. Thus, for the equity tranche (top right panel), we
report the amount of this upfront payment.
   Table 5 shows that the model accurately captures the levels of the spreads on the CDX
and its tranches for both the pre-crisis and crisis periods. What is new in Figure 6, and



                                             34
surprising, is that the timing of the increase in spreads, and the fluctuations both before
and during the crisis, are accurately captured by our model. That is, the same period of low
spreads and low volatility that characterized the stock and options markets in 2006 and 2007
is also apparent in the low spreads on structured finance products. The increased prices for
protection, which slightly predate the collapse of Bear Sterns, appear almost simultaneously
in options and CDX/CDX tranche spreads. The crisis period was one of high volatility in
both markets, with the two fluctuating in tandem. The model captures the increase in ATM
and OTM options over this period with an increase in both the probability of disaster, and
the long-run mean of this probability. The latter increase helps the model to explain the
magnitude of the increase in CDX spreads, which have a longer maturity than do options.
   In fact, the only tranche that the model does not fit closely is the equity one. While the
model can match the timing of the increase in the upfront payment on the equity tranche,
it does not entirely capture its magnitude. Nor does it capture some of the variation in the
early part of the sample, perhaps related to a credit crisis triggered by Ford and General
Motors’ downgrades. Nonetheless, the approximate magnitude of these spreads is well-
matched, despite the fact that we have constrained idiosyncratic risk to take on the same
value throughout the sample period.
   We now consider the effect of changes in our assumptions on firm cash flows (12). The
dashed line in Figure 6 shows the effect of setting the probability of an idiosyncratic decline in
firm cash flows, λi , to zero. We see that the tranches respond quite differently to elimination
of this risk. Specifically, the upfront payment on the equity tranche drops precipitously, to
a value less than zero, indicating that the spread of 500 basis points is higher than what
would be required under no upfront payment. It appears that almost all of the spreads on
this tranche are due to idiosyncratic risk. As tranches increase in seniority, idiosyncratic risk
has less and less of an effect. For the third senior tranche, there is no discernable effect of



                                               35
idiosyncratic risk at all.
   Figure 7 considers the effect of eliminating sector risk (the dashed line). This limiting
case is achieved by setting pi equal to zero. Eliminating sector risk has the largest effect
on tranches with intermediate levels of seniority. Without sector risk, the spreads on the
mezzanine and first senior tranche are near zero for the entire sample. CDX tranche data
thus clearly requires a level of commonality among firms somewhere between the firm-specific
idiosyncratic risk and market-wide risk.
   Figure 7 shows that the third senior tranche, with attachment point of 15% and detach-
ment point 30%, is barely affected when the probability of a sector shock is set to zero.
This confirms the intuition in Section 4 that only rare market-wide shocks have a significant
effect on the pricing of this tranche. We can also see the important role of rare disasters in
pricing this tranche by recalculating CDX/CDX tranche prices under a 2 percentage point
increase in the probability of rare disasters at every point in time (2 percentage points is
the annual mean of the disaster probability). Figure 8 shows the results. Spreads on the
third senior tranche increase by about 25 basis points in the pre-crisis period, and about 50
basis points in the crisis period. The increase is substantially less than the full 2 percentage
points because disaster risk is mean-reverting, and λt gives an instantaneous probability of
disaster. Thus over the full five years of the contract, investors expect λt to be elevated,
but by much less than 2 percentage points. The reason the effect is larger during the crisis
period is because ξt is larger, and thus λt falls more slowly. Moreover, because of the square
root term in (2a), higher values of λt (which prevail over the crisis period), are associated
with greater volatility of λt . Because λt is positively skewed, this raises the probability that
the high values will persist.
   Finally, note that the relative effects of a change in the disaster probability on the tranches
have the opposite pattern as a change in the probability of an idiosyncratic jump: the more



                                               36
senior the tranche, the greater the effect of a change in the probability of disaster. In
particular, the top right panel of Figure 8 shows the effect on the equity tranche is negligible
in proportion to the upfront payment. While an increase in the risk of a rare disaster does
increase the upfront payment required by this tranche, most of this payment is insurance
against idiosyncratic shocks. Only a small part represents insurance against the risk of rare
disasters.
    This section has shown how CDX tranche spreads and prices give insight into the correla-
tional structure of asset values, and through the lens of our model, underlying firm earnings.
Specifically, to match tranche data one needs the risk of a rare market-wide disaster, as
well as fat-tailed sector-wide and idiosyncratic events. Moreover, the rare event probabilities
needed to match time-series variation in CDX tranche prices are very similar to those in op-
tion prices, suggesting a rational basis for the apparently extreme pricing of these securities
during the crisis.



6     Conclusion

In this paper, we build a quantitative model for spreads on the CDX and its tranches based
on underlying economic fundamentals. When the model is calibrated to match the equity
premium and equity volatility, and when state variables are chosen to match the time series
of implied volatilities on option prices, the model can explain the level and time series of
spreads both before and during the 2008–2009 financial crisis.
    CDX senior tranches can be understood as extremely deep out-of-the money put options
on the U.S. economy because they incur losses only when a substantial portion of large
investment-grade firms default. We explain the level of spreads on these instruments by
introducing a time-varying probability of economic disaster. This economic disaster causes
large simultaneous declines in the consumption of representative agent, in aggregate cash

                                              37
flows, and in cash flows on individual firms. When agents foresee an increased probability
of economic disaster, risk premia rise, asset prices decline and become more volatile, and
systemic defaults become more likely. The economic disasters to which we calibrate the
model are reasonable in light of what has been observed in international data over the last
100 years. The probability of such a disaster need not be high to explain senior tranche
spreads: 4% is sufficient. On the other hand, we show that the spreads cannot be explained
with a lognormal model for asset values; under such a model, simultaneous defaults on a
significant fraction of investment-grade firms are a near-zero probability event.
   Besides rare disasters, our model incorporates idiosyncratic risks and sector-wide shocks.
These are important ingredients for explaining equity and mezzanine tranche prices. How-
ever, we show that the most senior tranches vary almost exclusively based on the disaster
probability. Our results strongly suggest that simultaneously matching tranche prices, op-
tion prices, and properties of cash flows requires a positive probability of rare disaster that
varies over time.




                                              38
Appendix

Sections A–C solve for utility, aggregate market prices, and firm values in closed form up to
a system of ordinary differential equations. Ratios of prices to payouts are functions of the
state variables λt and ξt . Taking limits as σξ approaches zero results in the model of Seo
and Wachter (2016) and Wachter (2013).


A     State-price density

Duffie and Skiadas (1994) show that the state-price density πt equals
                               Z t                     
                                     ∂                     ∂
                      πt = exp          f (Cs , Vs ) ds      f (Ct , Vt ) .                       (A.1)
                                  0 ∂V                    ∂C
Our goal is to obtain an expression for the state-price density in terms of Ct , λt and ξt .
    We conjecture that, in equilibrium, the continuation utility Vt equals a function J of
consumption and the state variables λt and ξt such that:
                                                   Ct1−γ a+bλ λt +bξ ξt
                                J(Ct , λt , ξt ) =      e               .                         (A.2)
                                                   1−γ
For future reference, we list the derivates of J with respect to its arguments:
                        ∂J          J                   ∂ 2J              J
                           = (1 − γ) ,                       2
                                                               = −γ(1 − γ) 2 ,
                        ∂C          C                   ∂C                C
                                                          2
                        ∂J                              ∂ J
                           = bλ J,                          2
                                                               = b2λ J,
                        ∂λ                              ∂λ
                        ∂J                              ∂ 2J
                           = bξ J,                             = b2ξ J.                           (A.3)
                        ∂ξ                              ∂ξ 2
Applying Ito’s Lemma to J(Ct , λt , ξt ) with conjecture (A.2) and derivatives (A.3):

  dVt                             1
      = (1 − γ)(µc dt + σc dBt ) − γ(1 − γ)σc2 dt
  Vt−                             2
                                                p                   1 2 2
                      + bλ κλ (ξt − λt )dt + σλ λt dBλ,t +             b σ λt dt
                                                                      2 λ λ
                                                                    1 2 2
                        + bξ κξ (ξ¯ − ξt )dt + σξ ξt dBξ,t +
                                                 p
                                                                       b σ ξt dt + (e(1−γ)Zt − 1)dNt .
                                                                      2 ξ ξ

                                                   39
   Under the optimal consumption path, it must be that
                              Z   t                         Z   ∞                    
                       Vt +           f (Cs , Vs )ds = Et            f (Cs , Vs )ds                (A.4)
                              0                              0


(see Duffie and Epstein (1992)). By definition,
                                                                                              
                                                           1
                  f (Ct , Vt ) = β(1 − γ)Vt log Ct −         log [(1 − γ)V ]
                                                         1−γ
                              = β(1 − γ)Vt log Ct − βVt log [(1 − γ)Vt ]
                                            Ct1−γ
                                                   
                              = βVt log                                                            (A.5)
                                          (1 − γ)Vt
                              = −βVt (a + bλ λt + bξ ξt ),

where the last equation follows from (A.2).
   By the law of iterative expectations, the left-hand side of (A.4) is a martingale. Thus,
                                                        Rt
the sum of the drift and the jump compensator of (Vt + 0 f (Cs , Vs )ds) equals zero. That is,

                 1                                 1                              1
  0 = (1 − γ)µc − γ(1 − γ)σc2 + bλ κλ (ξt − λt ) + b2λ σλ2 λt + bξ κξ (ξ¯ − ξt ) + b2ξ σξ2 ξt
                 2                                 2                              2
                                                     (1−γ)Zt      
                                           + λ t Eν e          − 1 − β(a + bλ λt + bξ ξt ). (A.6)

By collecting terms in (A.6), we obtain
                                            
                 1
  0 = (1 − γ)µc − γ(1 − γ)σc + bξ κξ ξ¯ − βa
                           2
                 2
     |                {z                     }
                      =0
                                                                     
                                   1 2 2          (1−γ)Zt    
                   + λt −bλ κλ + bλ σλ + Eν e              − 1 − βbλ
                                   2
                       |                       {z                     }
                                               =0
                                                                                 
                                                                        1 2 2
                                                  + ξt bλ κλ − bξ κξ + bξ σξ − βbξ . (A.7)
                                                                        2
                                                       |             {z           }
                                                                                          =0




                                                      40
Solving these equations gives us
                                                    bξ κξ ξ¯
                                               
                           1−γ          1 2
                       a =          µc − γσc +                                                (A.8)
                            β           2              β
                                      s           2
                             κλ + β      κλ + β             Eν [e(1−γ)Zt − 1]
                      bλ   =        −                 −  2                                    (A.9)
                               σλ2           σλ2                   σλ2
                                      v            !2
                                      u
                             κξ + β u     κξ  +  β          bλ κλ
                      bξ   =    2
                                    −t         2
                                                      −2 2 ,                                 (A.10)
                               σξ            σξ              σξ

where we have chosen the negative root based on the economic consideration that when
there are no disasters, λt and ξt should not appear in the value function. Namely, for Zt = 0,
bλ = bξ = 0. Lastly, note that these results verify the conjecture (A.2).
    It follows from (A.5) that
                ∂
                  f (Ct , Vt ) = β(1 − γ)Vt Ctγ−1 Ct−γ
               ∂C                                                        
                ∂                                      1
                  f (Ct , Vt ) = β(1 − γ) log Ct −        log ((1 − γ)Vt ) + β
               ∂V                                     1−γ
By (A.2), in equilibrium,
                            ∂
                              f (Ct , Vt ) = βCt−γ ea+bλ λt +bξ ξt
                           ∂C
                            ∂
                              f (Ct , Vt ) = −βa − β − βbλ λt − βbξ ξt .
                           ∂V
Therefore, from (A.1), it follows that the state-price density can be written as
                                      Z t             Z t      
        πt = exp −β(a + 1)t − βbλ          λs ds − βbξ     ξs ds βCt−γ ea+bλ λt +bξ ξt .     (A.11)
                                           0               0



B     Dynamics of the aggregate market

Let F (Dt , λt , ξt ) denote the price of the dividend claim. The pricing relation implies
                                                       Z ∞          
                                                            πs
                                F (Dt , λt , ξt ) = Et         Ds ds
                                                         t  πt
                                                    Z ∞          
                                                            πs
                                                  =     Et     Ds ds.
                                                     t      πt

                                                 41
Let H(Dt , λt , ξt , s − t) denote the price of the asset that pays the aggregate dividend at time
s, namely,
                                                                                  
                                                                              πs
                                    H(Dt , λt , ξt , s − t) = Et                 Ds .
                                                                              πt
By the law of iterative expectations, it follows that πt Ht is a martingale:

                                    πt H(Dt , λt , ξt , s − t) = Et [πs Ds ].

Conjecture that

                       H(Dt , λt , ξt , τ ) = Dt exp (aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λt + bφξ (τ )ξt ) .                          (B.1)

Applying Ito’s Lemma to conjecture (B.1) implies
          
  dHt                                   1                                         1
      =    µd + bφλ (τ )κλ (ξt − λt ) + bφλ (τ )2 σλ2 λt + bφξ (τ )κξ (ξ¯ − ξt ) + bφξ (τ )2 σξ2 ξt
  Ht−                                   2                                         2
                                                                      
                                − a0φ (τ ) − b0φλ (τ )λt − b0φξ (τ )ξt dt
                                                  p                              p
                      + φσc dBt + bφλ (τ )σλ          λt dBλ,t + bφξ (τ )σξ          ξt dBξ,t + (eφZt − 1)dNt . (B.2)

It follows from (B.2), (3), and the product rule for stochastic processes, that
                
  d(πt Ht )
                    − β − µc + γσc2 − λt Eν e(1−γ)Zt − 1
                                                       
            =
  πt− Ht−
                                                               1
                                + µd + bφλ (τ )κλ (ξt − λt ) + bφλ (τ )2 σλ2 λt
                                                               2
                                                            1
                                   + bφξ (τ )κξ (ξ¯ − ξt ) + bφξ (τ )2 σξ2 ξt
                                                            2
                                       − a0φ (τ ) − b0φλ (τ )λt − b0φξ (τ )ξt
                                                                                           
                               −   γφσc2   +   bλ bφλ (τ )σλ2 λt   +   bξ bφξ (τ )σξ2 ξt       dt
                                                           p                                         p
             + (φ − γ)σc dBt + (bλ + bφλ (τ ))σλ                λt dBλ,t + (bξ + bφξ (τ ))σξ             ξt dBξ,t

                                                                                                    + (e(φ−γ)Zt − 1)dNt .


                                                           42
Since πt Ht is a martingale, the sum of the drift and the jump compensator of πt Ht equals
zero. Thus:

  0 = −β − µc + γσc2 − λt Eν e(1−γ)Zt − 1
                                        

                                                           1
                            + µd + bφλ (τ )κλ (ξt − λt ) + bφλ (τ )2 σλ2 λt
                                                           2
                                                        1
                               + bφξ (τ )κξ (ξ¯ − ξt ) + bφξ (τ )2 σξ2 ξt
                                                        2
                                  − a0φ (τ ) − b0φλ (τ )λt − b0φξ (τ )ξt

                           − γφσc2 + bλ bφλ (τ )σλ2 λt + bξ bφξ (τ )σξ2 ξt + λt Eν e(φ−γ)Zt − 1 . (B.3)
                                                                                              


Collecting terms of (B.3) results in the following equation:

  0 = −β − µc + γσc2 + µd + bφξ (τ )κξ ξ¯ − γφσc2 − a0φ (τ )
                                                           
     |                       {z                             }
                             =0
                                                                                            
                        1        2 2               2
                                                              (φ−γ)Zt   (1−γ)Zt
                                                                                     0
      + λt −bφλ (τ )κλ + bφλ (τ ) σλ + bλ bφλ (τ )σλ + Eν e            −e          − bφλ (τ )
                        2
          |                                       {z                                          }
                                                  =0
                                                                                               
                                                             1      2 2             2     0
                          + ξt bφλ (τ )κλ − bφξ (τ )κξ + bφξ (τ ) σξ + bξ bφξ (τ )σξ − bφξ (τ ) .
                                                             2
                              |                                  {z                             }
                                                                      =0

It follows that

             a0φ (τ ) = µd − µc − β + γσc2 (1 − φ) + κξ ξb     ¯ φξ (τ )
                        1 2
            b0φλ (τ ) =   σλ bφλ (τ )2 + (bλ σλ2 − κλ )bφλ (τ ) + Eν e(φ−γ)Zt − e(1−γ)Zt
                                                                                        
                                                                                                 (B.4)
                        2
              0         1 2
            bφξ (τ ) =    σξ bφξ (τ )2 + (bξ σξ2 − κξ )bφξ (τ ) + κλ bφλ (τ ).
                        2
This establishes that H satisfies the conjecture (B.1). We note that by no-arbitrage,

                                       H(Dt , λt , ξt , 0) = Dt .

This condition provides the boundary conditions for the system of ODEs (B.4):

                                   aφ (0) = bφλ (0) = bφξ (0) = 0.

                                                   43
Finally,
                                      Z     ∞                   
                                                            πs
              F (Dt , λt , ξt ) =               Et             Ds ds
                                        t                   πt
                                      Z     ∞
                               =                H(Dt , λt , ξt , s − t)ds
                                        t
                                            Z       ∞
                               = Dt                     exp (aφ (s − t) + bφλ (s − t)λt + bφξ (s − t)ξt ) ds
                                                t
                                            Z       ∞
                               = Dt                     exp (aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λt + bφξ (τ )ξt ) dτ.
                                                0


That is, the price-dividend ratio can be written as
                                            Z       ∞
                          G(λt , ξt ) =                 exp (aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λt + bφξ (τ )ξt ) dτ.
                                                0



C        Individual firm value dynamics

Let Hi (Di,t , λt , ξt , s − t) denote the time-t value of firm i’s payoff at time s. That is,
                                                                                     
                                                                               πs
                                    Hi (Di,t , λt , ξt , s − t) = Et              Di,s ,
                                                                               πt

where Di,t is determined by (12).34
       We conjecture that Hi (·) has the following functional form:

                     Hi (Di,t , λt , ξt , τ ) = Di,t exp (ai (τ ) + biλ (τ )λt + biξ (τ )ξt ) .                (C.1)

To verify this conjecture, we apply Ito’s Lemma to the process πt Hi (Di,t , λt , ξt , s − t) and
derive the conditional expectation of its instantaneous change. This conditional expectation
must equal zero because of (C.1), which implies that πt Hi (Di,t , λt , ξt , s − t) is a martingale.
  34
       In the equations that follow, we will allow Zi and ZSi to be random variables (with independent and
time-invariant distributions) rather than constants, and denote them as Zi,t and ZSi ,t respectively. Zi,t is
assumed to be independent and identically distributed across firms, while ZSi ,t is independent and identically
distributed across sectors.


                                                                   44
   By applying Ito’s Lemma to equation (C.1), it follows that
            
  dHi,t                                    1                                        1
        =    µi + biλ (τ )κλ (ξt − λt ) + biλ (τ )2 σλ2 λt + biξ (τ )κξ (ξ¯ − ξt ) + biξ (τ )2 σξ2 ξt − a0i (τ )
  Hi,t−                                    2                                        2
                                                                        p                        p
              − b0iλ (τ )λt − b0iξ (τ )ξt dt + φi σc dBc,t + biλ (τ )σλ λt dBλ,t + biξ (τ )σξ ξt dBξ,t

                                        + (eφi Zc,t − 1)dNc,t + Ii,t (eZi,t − 1)dNi,t + (eZSi ,t − 1)dNSi ,t .

Note that firm i is hit by the idiosyncratic shock dNi,t and the sector shock dNSi ,t . The SDE
for πt is given in (3). By applying Ito’s Lemma for the product of two stochastic processes,
we obtain the SDE for πt Hi,t :
                  
  d(πt Hi,t )                                                                                             1
                      − β − µc + γσc2 − λt E e(1−γ)Zc,t − 1 + µi + biλ (τ )κλ (ξt − λt ) + biλ (τ )2 σλ2 λt
                                                                  
              =
  πt− Hi,t−                                                                                               2
                                                   1
                         + biξ (τ )κξ (ξ¯ − ξt ) + biξ (τ )2 σξ2 ξt − a0i (τ ) − b0iλ (τ )λt − b0iξ (τ )ξt − γφi σc2
                                                   2           
                           + bλ biλ (τ )σλ2 λt + bξ biξ (τ )σξ2 ξt dt + (φi − γ)σc dBc,t
                                                p                                  p
                          + (bλ + biλ (τ ))σλ       λt dBλ,t + (bξ + biξ (τ ))σξ       ξt dBξ,t

                                   + (e(φi −γ)Zc,t − 1)dNc,t + Ii,t (eZi,t − 1)dNi,t + (eZSi ,t − 1)dNSi ,t .

Since πt Ht is a martingale, the sum of the drift and the jump compensator of πt Ht equals
zero. This zero mean condition provides the system of ODEs for ai (τ ), biλ (τ ), and biξ (τ ):

 a0i (τ ) = µi − µc − β + γσc2 (1 − φi ) + λi E eZi,t − 1 + pi w0 E eZSi ,t − 1 + κξ ξb      ¯ iξ (τ )
                                                                                      

            1 2
b0iλ (τ ) =   σλ biλ (τ )2 + (bλ σλ2 − κλ )biλ (τ ) + E e(φi −γ)Zc,t − e(1−γ)Zc,t + pi wλ E eZSi ,t − 1
                                                                                                    
            2
            1
b0iξ (τ ) =   biξ (τ )2 σξ2 + (bξ σξ2 − κξ )biξ (τ ) + κλ biλ (τ ) + +pi wξ E eZSi ,t − 1 .
                                                                                        
            2

This shows that Hi satisfies the conjecture (C.1). Furthermore, since Hi (Di,t , λt , ξt , 0) = Di,t ,
we obtain the following boundary conditions:

                                         ai (0) = biλ (0) = biξ (0) = 0.

                                                          45
With the solution for the ODEs, equation (13) can be written as
                                         Z       ∞
                Ai (Di,t , λt , ξt ) =    Hi (Di,t , λt , ξt , s − t) ds
                                             t
                                          Z ∞
                                   = Di,t     exp (ai (τ ) + biλ (τ )λt + biξ (τ )ξt ) dτ.
                                                       0



D     Computing CDX and tranche prices

Given the closed-form expressions for asset prices, the prices for the CDX and its tranches
must be computed by simulation. That is, for each pair of state variables (λt , ξt ), we compute
the expectations that determine the protections legs (22) and (18) , and the premium legs
(19) and (25) by simulating 100,000 sample paths for the 125 firms (see Appendix E for more
detail on how we simulate the state variables and firm values). This exercise is complicated
by the fact that, while premium payments occur at fixed (quarterly) intervals, default could
occur at any time. Moreover, default is sometimes accompanied by an immediate payment,
as is the case for the protection seller, and is sometimes reflected in a change in notional
that matters for the premium payment at the next interval (as is the case for the premium
payments on the tranches).
                                                          L            R
    To reduce computation time, we compute nt,s , Lt,s , Tj,t,s , and Tj,t,s at quarterly intervals,
which correspond to the timing of payment premium dates. Given these series, we compute
the value of cash flows paid by the protection seller by assuming that default occurs at the
midpoint between two premium payment dates. This follows standard practice (Mortensen,
2006), and is more accurate than simply assuming that default occurs on the premium
payment date itself. Therefore
                                                       Z      T        Rs
                                                                                             
         ProtCDX (λt , ξt ; T − t) =             EtQ               e−   t    ru du
                                                                                     dLt,s
                                                           t
                                                 4T             R          1)
                                                                                                             
                                                 X                   t+ϑ(m− 2
                                         '             EtQ      e − t          ru du
                                                                                     (Lt,t+ϑm − Lt,t+ϑ(m−1) )    (D.1)
                                                 m=1


                                                                   46
Because default occurs at the midpoint between two payment periods, Lt,t+ϑm = Lt,t+ϑm−ϑ/2 .
   It will be computationally useful to write (D.1) in terms of the risk-neutral, discounted
expectation of Lt,t+ϑm and Lt,t+ϑ(m−1) . To do this, we need to introduce a second approxima-
tion. Note that the riskfree rate has continuous sample paths, and ϑ is small. We therefore
approximate
                                      Z   t+ϑm
                                                               ϑ
                                                     ru du '     rt+ϑm .                              (D.2)
                                       t+ϑ(m− 21 )             2
Combining (D.1) and (D.2), we have


 ProtCDX (λt , ξt ; T − t) '
    4T
 1 X  Q h 1 ϑrt+ϑm − R t+ϑm ru du        i     h 1                R t+ϑ(m−1)                  i
       Et e 2      e t             Lt,t+ϑm − EtQ e− 2 ϑrt+ϑ(m−1) e− t         ru du
                                                                                    Lt,t+ϑ(m−1) .
 4 m=1

   Recall that the premium leg equals


 PremCDX (λt , ξt ; T − t, S) =
           " 4T                                        Z t+ϑm                                             #
              1 X        R t+ϑm                                          Rs
     SEtQ             e− t      ru du
                                      (1 − nt,t+ϑm ) +               e− t ru du (s − t − ϑ(m − 1))dnt,s
              4 m=1                                     t+ϑ(m−1)
        4T
                                                                                  t,t+ϑm − nt,t+ϑ(m−1)
                                                         R t+(ϑ− 12 )m
                                                                                                      
       X     1 Q − R t+ϑm ru du                         −               r  du   n
    'S         Et e t                 (1 − nt,t+ϑm ) + e t               u
                                                                                                          .
       m=1
             4                                                                            2

where the approximation in the second equation holds if default is close to the midpoint
between two premium payment dates.
   Our goal is to compute the risk-neutral, discounted expectation of nt,t+ϑm . Using the




                                                      47
                         R t+ϑ(m− 21 )                  R t+ϑm
                     −
approximation e           t              ru du
                                                 ' e−   t            ru du
                                                                             ,

 PremCDX (λt , ξt ; T − t, S)
                     4T                                                       
                S X Q − R t+ϑm ru du              1             1
            '           E e t                1 − nt,t+ϑm − nt,t+ϑ(m−1)
                4 m=1 t                           2             2
                     4T                                                                                         i
                SX                            1 Q h − R t+ϑm ru du          i 1
                                                                                    Q
                                                                                      h R t+ϑm
                                                                                        −      r  du
            =             H0 (λt , ξt , ϑm) − Et e t                nt,t+ϑm − Et e t            u
                                                                                                     nt,t+ϑ(m−1)
                4 m=1                         2                                  2
                     4T 
                SX                            1    h R t+ϑm                 i
            '             H0 (λt , ξt , ϑm) − EtQ e− t        ru du
                                                                    nt,t+ϑm
                4 m=1                         2
                                      1 Q h −ϑrt+ϑ(m−1) − R t+ϑ(m−1) ru du            i
                                   − Et e              e t                 nt,t+ϑ(m−1) .
                                      2
where H0 (λs , ξs , τ ) is the price of the default-free zero-coupon bond with maturity τ , which
                                         35
we derive in Appendix F.                      we find
       Like the computation for the protection leg on the CDX, our computation for the pro-
tection leg for tranche j assumes that the default occurs at the midpoint between payment
periods, and uses approximation (D.2):
                               4T     R       1 )m
                                                                                      
                               X         t+(ϑ− 2
                                   Q  − t           ru du   L           L
ProtTran,j (λt , ξt , T − t) '    Et e                    (Tj,t,t+ϑm − Tj,t,t+ϑ(m−1) )
                                              m=1
                                               4T          h                        R t+ϑm                        i
                                                                    ϑ
                                              X
                                   '                  EtQ       e     r
                                                                    2 t+ϑm
                                                                                 −
                                                                                 e   t         ru du    L
                                                                                                       Tj,t,t+ϑm       −
                                              m=1
                                                                                               h                           R t+ϑ(m−1)                           i
                                                                                                   −ϑ
                                                                                         EtQ       e  r
                                                                                                    2 t+ϑ(m−1)
                                                                                                               −
                                                                                                                   e       t            ru du    L
                                                                                                                                                Tj,t,t+ϑ(m−1)        .

       Recall that

  PremTran,j (λt , ξt ; T − t, U, S) =
                                                         "   4T                                                                                     #
                                                                                Z                       t+ϑm
                                                                  − tt+ϑm rs ds
                                                             X     R
                                         U + SEtQ                                                                       L        R
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                 e                                                 1 − Tj,t,s − Tj,t,s ds                 .
                                                             m=1                                       t+ϑ(m−1)

  35
       In economic terms, this interest rate approximation implies that the accrued interest payment comes at
the same time as the premium payment, rather than upon default. Based on the argument in Section 2.5,
this implies an equivalence between the premium leg for the CDX and the premium leg for the tranches.

                                                                         48
Under the assumption that any default occurs at the midpoint between the two payment
periods, the integral above is an average:


PremTran,j (λt , ξt ; T − t, U, S) '
      4T
             "                       L    R                  L               R
                                                                                            #
   S X Q − R t+ϑm rs ds (1 − Tj,t,t+ϑm − Tj,t,t+ϑm ) + (1 − Tj,t,t+ϑ(m−1) − Tj,t,t+ϑ(m−1) )
U+       E e t                                                                                .
   4 m=1 t                                              2

(recall ϑ = 1/4). Because we want to write the premium leg in terms of risk-neutral expec-
tations of discounted variables, we approximate
                                      R t+ϑm                  R t+ϑm               R t+ϑ(m−1)
                    e−ϑrt+ϑ(m−1) e−   t        rs ds
                                                       = e−   t+ϑ(m−1) rs   ds −
                                                                             e     t            rs ds

                                                                             R t+ϑ(m−1)
                                                       ' e−ϑrt+ϑ(m−1) e−      t           rs ds




so that


 PremTran,j (λt , ξt ; T − t, U, S) ' U +
        4T 
    SX                            1 Q h − R t+ϑm rs ds L       i 1
                                                                       Q
                                                                         h R t+ϑm
                                                                          − t      rs ds R
                                                                                                    i
            H0 (λt , ξt , ϑm) − Et e         t        Tj,t,t+ϑm − Et e                  Tj,t,t+ϑm
     4 m=1                        2                                2
   1 Q h −ϑrt+ϑ(m−1) − R t+ϑ(m−1) rs ds L             i 1        h               R t+ϑ(m−1)                     i
                                                               Q   −∆r         −             r  ds   R
 − Et e                  e t           Tj,t,t+ϑ(m−1) ) − Et e t+ϑ(m−1) e t                    s
                                                                                                   Tj,t,t+ϑ(m−1) .
   2                                                        2

Next, for any u ∈ R, we define the following four expectations:
                                                   h         R t+τ           i
                         EDR(u, τ, λt , ξt ) = EtQ eurt+τ e− t rs ds nt,t+τ
                                                   h         R t+τ           i
                         ELR(u, τ, λt , ξt ) = EtQ eurt+τ e− t rs ds Lt,t+τ
                                                   h         R t+τ             i                        (D.3)
                       ETLRj (u, τ, λt , ξt ) = EtQ eurt+τ e− t rs ds Tj,t,t+τ
                                                                       L

                                                   h         R t+τ             i
                       ETRRj (u, τ, λt , ξt ) = EtQ eurt+τ e− t rs ds Tj,t,t+τ
                                                                       R




                                                         49
We re-write the pricing formulas for the CDX index and its tranches as follows:
                                    4T                                                   
                                   X            ϑ                        ϑ
       ProtCDX (λt , ξt ; T − t) =       ELR       , ϑm, λt , ξt − ELR − , ϑ(m − 1), λt , ξt
                                   m=1
                                                2                        2
                                      4T 
                                   SX                           1
    PremCDX (λt , ξt ; T − t, S) =         H0 (λt , ξt , ϑm) − EDR (0, ϑm, λt , ξt )
                                   4 m=1                        2
                                                                                                                         
                                                                             1
                                                                           − EDR (ϑ, ϑ(m − 1), λt , ξt )
                                                                             2
                                      4T                                                         
                                     X              ϑ                            ϑ
    ProtTran,j (λt , ξt ; T − t) =         ETLRj      , ϑm, λt , ξt − ETLRj − , ϑ(m − 1), λt , ξt
                                     m=1
                                                    2                            2
                                             4T 
                                          SX                          [ETLRj + ETRRj ] (0, ϑm, λt , ξt )
PremTran,j (λt , ξt ; T − t, U, S) = U +          H0 (λt , ξt , ϑm) −
                                          4 m=1                                    2
                                                                                                                             
                                                                            [ETLRj + ETRRj ] (ϑ, ϑ(m − 1), λt , ξt )
                                                                          −                                                      .
                                                                                            2

To price the CDX index and its tranches, it suffices to calculate the four expectations above.
Note that
                                                                                                                    
                              h
                                 urt+τ − tt+τ rs ds
                                        R                 i     h R t+τ                   i       πt+τ u·rt+τ
EDR(u, τ, λt , ξt ) =   EtQ    e      e                       Q
                                                    nt,t+τ = Et e− t    rs ds urt+τ
                                                                             e      nt,t+τ = Et       e       nt,t+τ
                                                                                                   πt

and similarly for the other expectations in (D.3). It therefore suffices to calculate the physical
                             R            L
processes for nt,s , Lt,s , Tj,t,s , and Tj,t at a quarterly frequency. For each value of the state
variables, we do this 100,000 times to obtain the expectation. This requires 100,000 5-year
simulations of the 125 firms in the index.


E    Model simulation

As discussed in Appendix D, we must simulate from the model in order to price the CDX
and its tranches.
    The first step is to simulate a series of state variables (λt , ξt ). The variable ξt follows
the square-root process of Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985), and so ξt+∆t |ξt has a non-

                                                       50
                                                          
                                                  4κξ ξ̄
central Chi-squared distribution with              σξ2
                                                               degrees of freedom and non-centrality param-
                    
               −κ ∆t
       4ξt κξ e ξ
eter (1−e−κξ ∆t )σ2 .
                     ξ

       Over a short time interval, λt will be well-approximated by a CIR process. That is, we ap-
proximate the conditional distribution λt+∆t |λt with a non-central Chi-squared distribution
                                                                               
                                                                 4λt κλ e−κλ ∆t
with 4κσλ2ξt degrees of freedom and non-centrality parameter (1−e     −κλ ∆t )σ 2   .36
             λ                                                                            λ

       Given λt , log consumption growth (log (Ct+∆t /Ct )), and each firm’s log payout growth
(log (Di,t+∆t /Di,t ))) can be drawn by discretizing the following stochastic differential equa-
tions, which follow from Ito’s Lemma, applied to (1) and (12).
                             
                          1 2
      d log Ct =     µc − σc dt + σc dBc,t + Zc,t Nc,t
                          2
                               
                         1 2 2
    d log Di,t =     µi − φi σc dt + φi σc dBc,t + φi Zc,t dNc,t + Ii,t ZSi ,t dNSi ,t + Zi,t dNi,t .
                         2
Firm value can then be computed as
                          Ai,t+∆t   Di,t+∆t Gi (λt+∆t , ξt+∆t )
                                  =
                           Ai,t       Di,t      Gi (λt , ξt )
                                                       
                                               Di,t+∆t        Gi (λt+∆t , ξt+∆t )
                                  = exp log                                       ,                   (E.1)
                                                 Di,t             Gi (λt , ξt )
while the pricing kernel can be computed as
               
 πt+∆t
        ' exp η∆t − βbλ λt+∆t ∆t − βbξ ξt+∆t ∆t
   πt
                                                                                     
                                          Ct+∆t
                                 −γ log           + bλ (λt+∆t − λt ) + bξ (ξt+∆t − ξt ) . (E.2)
                                           Ct
                                                           L
       Using (E.1), we can obtain a series of nt , Lt,s , Tj,t,s , and T Rt for all j. From these series,
(E.2) and the equation for rt , (6), we compute CDX and tranche pricing using simulations
as described in Appendix D.
  36
       The advantage of this approach over an Euler approximation of (2a) using a conditional normal process
is that, due to the presence of ξt , λt can spend long periods of time close to zero. Thus the Euler method
can lead to negative values of λt (which, are, strictly speaking, impossible under the model), which reduces
its accuracy.

                                                           51
F      Default-free zero-coupon bond price

Let H0 (λt , ξt , s − t) denote the time-t price of the default-free zero-coupon bond maturing
at time s > t. By the pricing relation,
                                                                          
                                                                        πs
                                        H0 (λt , ξt , s − t) = Et            .                               (F.1)
                                                                        πt

By multiplying πt on both sides of (F.1), we obtain a martingale:

                                          πt H0 (λt , ξt , s − t) = Et [πs ] .

Conjecture

                           H0 (λt , ξt , τ ) = exp (a0 (τ ) + b0λ (τ )λt + b0ξ (τ )ξt ) .                    (F.2)

By Ito’s Lemma,
              
    dH0,t                                1                                       1
          =    b0λ (τ )κλ (ξt − λt ) + b0λ (τ )2 σλ2 λt + b0ξ (τ )κξ (ξ¯ − ξt ) + b0ξ (τ )2 σξ2 ξt
    H0,t−                                2                                       2
                                                                   p                        p
              − a00 (τ ) − b00λ (τ )λt − b00ξ (τ )ξt dt + b0λ (τ )σλ λt dBλ,t + b0ξ (τ )σξ ξt dBξ,t . (F.3)

Furthermore, we also derive the stochastic differential equation for πt H0,t by combining
equation (F.3) and (3) using Ito’s Lemma:
                    
    d(πt H0,t )
                        − β − µc + γσc2 − λt E e(1−γ)Zc,t − 1
                                                            
                =
    πt− H0,t−
                                                                 1
                                      + b0λ (τ )κλ (ξt − λt ) + b0λ (τ )2 σλ2 λt
                                                                 2
                                                                1
                                       + b0ξ (τ )κξ (ξ¯ − ξt ) + b0ξ (τ )2 σξ2 ξt
                                                                2
                                          − a00 (τ ) − b00λ (τ )λt − b00ξ (τ )ξt
                                                                     
                                              2                    2
                                + bλ b0λ (τ )σλ λt + bξ b0ξ (τ )σξ ξt dt − γσc dBc,t
                                              p                                  p
                        + (bλ + b0λ (τ ))σλ       λt dBλ,t + (bξ + b0ξ (τ ))σξ    ξt dBξ,t + (e−γZc,t − 1)dNc,t .


                                                            52
Since πt H0,t is a martingale, the sum of the drift and the jump compensator of πt H0,t equals
zero. That is,


  0 = −β − µc + γσc2 − λt E e(1−γ)Zc,t − 1
                                         

                                                           1
                                + b0λ (τ )κλ (ξt − λt ) + b0λ (τ )2 σλ2 λt
                                                           2
                                                          1
                                 + b0ξ (τ )κξ (ξ¯ − ξt ) + b0ξ (τ )2 σξ2 ξt
                                                          2
                                   − a00 (τ ) − b00λ (τ )λt − b00ξ (τ )ξt

                                        + bλ b0λ (τ )σλ2 λt + bξ b0ξ (τ )σξ2 ξt + λt E e−γZc,t − 1 . (F.4)
                                                                                                 


By collecting terms of (F.4),


  0 = −β − µc + γσc2 + b0ξ (τ )κξ ξ¯ − a00 (τ )
                                              
     |                 {z                      }
                       =0
                                                                                             
                          1         2 2             2
                                                           −γZc,t     (1−γ)Zc,t
                                                                                     0
       + λt −b0λ (τ )κλ + b0λ (τ ) σλ + bλ b0λ (τ )σλ + E e        −e              − b0λ (τ )
                          2
           |                                      {z                                          }
                                                  =0
                                                                                                
                                                          1        2 2               2      0
                            + ξt b0λ (τ )κλ − b0ξ (τ )κξ + b0ξ (τ ) σξ + bξ b0ξ (τ )σξ − b0ξ (τ ) .
                                                          2
                                 |                            {z                                 }
                                                                       =0

These conditions provide a system of ODEs:

          a00 (τ ) = −β − µc + γσc2 + b0ξ (τ )κξ ξ¯
                                    1
         b00λ (τ ) = −b0λ (τ )κλ + b0λ (τ )2 σλ2 + bλ b0λ (τ )σλ2 + E e−γZc,t − e(1−γ)Zc,t
                                                                                          
                                    2
                                              1
         b00ξ (τ ) = b0λ (τ )κλ − b0ξ (τ )κξ + b0ξ (τ )2 σξ2 + bξ b0ξ (τ )σξ2 .                     (F.5)
                                              2

This shows that H0 satisfies the conjecture (F.2). We can obtain the boundary conditions
for the system of ODEs (F.5) because H0 (λt , ξt , 0) = 1, which is equivalent to

                                    a0 (0) = b0λ (0) = b0ξ (0) = 0.


                                                    53
G     Option pricing

G.1     A log-linear approximation for the price-dividend ratio

The transform analysis we use to price options requires that the log of the price-dividend ratio
be linear. Fortunately, the exact price-dividend ratio we derive can be closely approximated
by a log-linear function.
    Let g(λ, ξ) = log G(λ, ξ). For given λ∗ and ξ ∗ , the two-dimensional Taylor approximation
implies
                                                 ∂g                       ∂g
                     g(λ, ξ) ' g(λ∗ , ξ ∗ ) +               (λ − λ∗ ) +              (ξ − ξ ∗ ).        (G.1)
                                                 ∂λ   λ∗ ,ξ ∗             ∂ξ   λ∗ ,ξ ∗

We note that
              ∂g                  1         ∂G
                             =    ∗     ∗
              ∂λ   λ∗ ,ξ ∗     G(λ , ξ ) ∂λ λ∗ ,ξ∗
                                           Z ∞
                                  1
                             =                 bφλ (τ ) exp (aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λ∗ + bφξ (τ )ξ ∗ ) dτ    (G.2)
                               G(λ∗ , ξ ∗ ) 0
Similarly, we obtain
             ∂g                   1         ∂G
                             =    ∗     ∗
             ∂ξ    λ∗ ,ξ ∗     G(λ , ξ ) ∂ξ λ∗ ,ξ∗
                                           Z ∞
                                  1
                             =                 bφξ (τ ) exp (aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λ∗ + bφξ (τ )ξ ∗ ) dτ.   (G.3)
                               G(λ∗ , ξ ∗ ) 0
Expression (G.2) and (G.3) can be interpreted as weighted averages of the coefficients bφλ (τ )
and bφξ (τ ) respectively. The average is over τ , and the weights are proportional to
exp {aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λ∗ + bφξ (τ )ξ ∗ }. With this in mind, we define the notation
                                   Z ∞
               ∗          1
              bφλ =                      bφλ (τ ) exp (aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λ∗ + bφξ (τ )ξ ∗ ) dτ          (G.4)
                       G(λ∗ , ξ ∗ ) 0
                                   Z ∞
               ∗          1
              bφξ =                     bφξ (τ ) exp (aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λ∗ + bφξ (τ )ξ ∗ ) dτ,          (G.5)
                      G(λ∗ , ξ ∗ ) 0
and the log-linear function

                         Ĝ(λt , ξt ) = G(λ∗ , ξ ∗ ) exp b∗φλ (λt − λ∗ ) + b∗φξ (ξt − ξ ∗ ) .
                                                        
                                                                                                        (G.6)

                                                            54
It follows from exponentiating both sides of (G.1) that

                                           G(λt , ξt ) ' Ĝ(λt , ξt ).

                                            ¯ the stationary mean of both processes.
In our analysis, we choose λ∗ and ξ ∗ to be ξ,
       This log-linearization method differs from the more widely-used method of Campbell
(2003), applied in continuous time by Chacko and Viceira (2005). However, in this appli-
cation it is more accurate. This is not surprising, since we are able to exploit the fact that
the true solution for the price-dividend ratio is known. In dynamic models with the EIS not
equal to one, the solution is typically unknown.


G.2       Transform analysis

The normalized put option price is given as
                                          "                                         + #
                                                       πT         F (D T , λT , ξT )
                    P n (λt , ξt , T − t; K n ) = Et         Kn −                         .   (G.7)
                                                       πt          F (Dt , λt , ξt
It follows from (A.11) that
              Z T                                                                        
   πT                                                     CT
       = exp       −β(1 + a + bλ λs + bξ ξs ) ds − γ log     + bλ (λT − λt ) + bξ (ξT − ξt ) ,
   πt           t                                         Ct
where bλ and bξ are defined by (4) and (5) respectively. It follows from F (Dt , λt , ξt ) =
Dt G(λt , ξt ), Dt = Ctφ , and (G.6) that
                                                                           
                    FT                    CT    ∗                ∗
                          = exp φ log        + bφλ (λT − λt ) + bφξ (ξT − ξt ) ,
                    Ft                    Ct
where b∗φλ and b∗φξ are constants defined by (G.4), and (G.5), respectively.
       To use the method of Duffie, Pan, and Singleton (2000), it is helpful to write down the
following stochastic process, which, under our assumptions, is well-defined for given λt and
ξt :
                                                                        
                                                  log Ct+τ − log Ct
                                                                        
                                      Xτ =                              .
                                                                        
                                                        λt+τ
                                                                        
                                                         ξt+τ

                                                       55
Note that the {Xτ } process is defined purely for mathematical convenience. We further
define
                                                                                                           
                       0                     −γ                                 0                             φ
                                                                                                           
             d 1 =  bλ  ,     d2 =  bλ              ,        d3 =  b∗φλ        ,    d4 =  b∗φλ             .
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                     bξ                bξ                               b∗φξ                     b∗φξ

Using this notation, (G.7) can be rewritten as
                                            R T −t
                                                                                                              
    n                  n        n        −             R(Xτ ) dτ +d>         >
                                                                   2 XT −t −d1 X0
  P (λt , ξt , T − t; K ) = K Et e            0                                          1n   FT
                                                                                                   ≤K n
                                                                                                          o
                                                                                              Ft
                                                     R T −t
                                                                                                                                 
                                                  −            R(Xτ ) dτ +(d2 +d4 )> XT −t −(d1 +d3 )> X0
                                    − Et e             0                                                          1n FT ≤K n o       (G.8)
                                                                                                                      Ft



where

                                    R(Xτ ) = βd>
                                               1 Xτ + β(1 + a)

                               1n FT ≤K n o = 1{d> XT −t ≤log K n +d> X0 } .
                                  Ft             4                  3



Since {Xτ } is an affine process in the sense defined by Duffie, Pan, and Singleton (2000),
(G.8) characterizes the put option price in terms of expectations that can be computed using
their transform analysis. Specifically, if we define
                                            h R T −t         >
                                                                                  i
                    Gp,q (y; X0 , T − t) ≡ E e− 0 R(Xτ )dτ ep XT −t 1{q> XT −t ≤y} ,                                                 (G.9)

then the normalized put price is expressed as

                                   >
  P n (λt , ξt , T − t; K n ) = e−d1 X0 K n Gd2 ,d4 log K n + d>
                                                                                
                                                               3 X0 ; X0 , T − t
                                                                   >X
                                             − e−(d1 +d3 )                  K n Gd2 +d4 ,d4 log K n + d>
                                                                                                                          
                                                                        0
                                                                                                       3 X 0 ; X 0 , T − t  ,

where X0 = [0, λt , ξt ]. The terms written using the function G can then be computed
tractably using the transform analysis of Duffie et al: this analysis requires only the solution
of a system of ordinary differential equations and a one-dimensional numerical integration.

                                                                 56
References

Abel, Andrew, 1990, Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses,
  American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80, 38–42.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long-run: A potential resolution of asset
  pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

Barro, Robert J., 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 121, 823–866.

Barro, Robert J., and José F. Ursúa, 2008, Macroeconomic crises since 1870, Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity no. 1, 255–350.

Black, Fischer, and John C Cox, 1976, Valuing corporate securities: Some effects of bond
  indenture provisions, The Journal of Finance 31, 351–367.

Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes, 1973, The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,
  Journal of Political Economy 81, 637–654.

Borovička, Jaroslav, Lars Peter Hansen, Mark Hendricks, and José A. Scheinkman, 2011,
  Risk-price dynamics, Journal of Financial Econometrics 9, 3–65.

Campbell, John Y., 2003, Consumption-based asset pricing, in G. Constantinides, M. Harris,
  and R. Stulz, eds.: Handbook of the Economics of Finance, vol. 1b (Elsevier Science, North-

  Holland ).

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
  explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–
  251.



                                             57
Campbell, John Y., and Glen B. Taksler, 2003, Equity Volatility and Corporate Bond Yields,
  The Journal of Finance 58, 2321–2349.

Chacko, George, and Luis Viceira, 2005, Dynamic consumption and portfolio choice with
  stochastic volatility in incomplete markets, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1369–1402.

Christoffersen, Peter, Du Du, and Redouane Elkamhi, 2016, Rare Disasters, Credit, and
  Option Market Puzzles, Management Science.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S Goldstein, and Fan Yang, 2012, On the Relative Pricing
  of Long-Maturity Index Options and Collateralized Debt Obligations, The Journal of
  Finance 67, 1983–2014.

Coval, Joshua D, Jakub W Jurek, and Erik Stafford, 2009, Economic catastrophe bonds,
  The American Economic Review pp. 628–666.

Cox, John C., Jonathan C. Ingersoll, and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, A theory of the term
  structure of interest rates, Econometrica 53, 385–408.

Culp, Christopher L., Yoshio Nozawa, and Pietro Veronesi, 2014, Option-based credit
  spreads, NBER Working Paper No. 20776.

Duffie, Darrell, 2001, Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory. (Princeton University Press Princeton,
  NJ) 3 edn.

Duffie, Darrell, and Larry G Epstein, 1992, Asset pricing with stochastic differential utility,
  Review of Financial Studies 5, 411–436.

Duffie, Darrell, and Nicolae Garleanu, 2001, Risk and valuation of collateralized debt obli-
  gations, Financial Analysts Journal 57, 41–59.



                                              58
Duffie, Darrell, Jun Pan, and Kenneth Singleton, 2000, Transform analysis and asset pricing
  for affine jump-diffusions, Econometrica 68, 1343–1376.

Duffie, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, An Econometric Model of the Term Struc-
  ture of Interest-Rate Swap Yields, The Journal of Finance 52, 1287–1321.

Duffie, Darrell, and Costis Skiadas, 1994, Continuous-time asset pricing: A utility gradient
  approach, Journal of Mathematical Economics 23, 107–132.

Epstein, Larry, and Stan Zin, 1989, Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior of
  consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework, Econometrica 57, 937–969.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm
  characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3–43.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in macro-finance, Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 127, 645–700.

Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2012, Securitized banking and the run on repo, Journal
  of Financial Economics 104, 425–451.

Gourio, François, 2013, Credit risk and disaster risk, American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics 5, 1–34.

Kelly, Bryan T., Gerardo Manzo, and Diogo Palhares, 2016, Credit-Implied Volatility, Work-
  ing paper, University of Chicago.

Lemmon, Michael L., Michael R. Roberts, and Jaime F. Zender, 2008, Back to the beginning:
  persistence and the cross-section of corporate capital structure, The Journal of Finance
  63, 1575–1608.



                                             59
Lettau, Martin, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2007, Why is long-horizon equity less risky? A
  duration-based explanation of the value premium, Journal of Finance 62, 55–92.

Longstaff, Francis A., and Monika Piazzesi, 2004, Corporate earnings and the equity pre-
  mium, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 401–421.

Longstaff, Francis A, and Arvind Rajan, 2008, An empirical analysis of the pricing of col-
  lateralized debt obligations, The Journal of Finance 63, 529–563.

Moreira, Alan, and Alexi Savov, 2016, The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking, Working
  paper, New York University and Yale University.

Mortensen, Allan, 2006, Semi-Analytical Valuation of Basket Credit Derivatives in Intensity-
  Based Models., Journal of Derivatives 13, 8–26.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009, This time is different: eight centuries
  of financial folly. (Princeton University Press Princeton, NJ).

Rietz, Thomas A., 1988, The equity risk premium: A solution, Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 22, 117–131.

Salmon, Felix, 2009, Recipe for Disaster: The Formula that Killed Wall Street, Wired Mag-
  azine.

Seo, Sang Byung, 2014, Correlated defaults and economic catastrophes: Link between CDS
  market and asset returns, Working paper, University of Houston.

Seo, Sang Byung, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2016, Option prices in a model with stochastic
  disaster risk, NBER Working Paper #19611.

Tsai, Jerry, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2015, Disaster Risk and Its Implications for Asset
  Pricing, Annual Review of Financial Economics 7, 219–252.

                                             60
Wachter, Jessica A., 2013, Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock
  market volatility?, The Journal of Finance 68, 987–1035.

Weil, Philippe, 1990, Nonexpected utility in macroeconomics, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 105, 29–42.

Zhou, Chunsheng, 2001, The term structure of credit spreads with jump risk, Journal of
  Banking & Finance 25, 2015–2040.




                                           61
                      Figure 1: Solution for the price-dividend ratio


               0

              −5                             bφ λ(τ)

             −10

             −15

             −20

             −25
                                             bφ ξ(τ)
             −30

             −35
                0       10      20      30        40     50      60     70
                                              τ


Notes: The functions bφλ (τ ) and bφξ (τ ), which determine the sensitivity of the aggre-
gate market to changes in the disaster probability λt and to its time-varying mean
ξt . That is, the price-dividend ratio on the aggregate market is given by G(λt , ξt ) =
R∞
 0
     exp (aφ (τ ) + bφλ (τ )λt + bφξ (τ )ξt ) dτ . The horizon τ is in years.




                                             62
                                                     Figure 2: Implied volatilities in the model


                                                                Panel A: Varying λt

                                                    0.4                80th percentile
                                                   0.35
                     Implied Volatility (annual)
                                                    0.3

                                                   0.25                    median

                                                    0.2

                                                   0.15
                                                                       20th percentile
                                                    0.1

                                                   0.05

                                                     0
                                                     0.85        0.9            0.95      1
                                                                          Moneyness

                                                                Panel B: Varying ξt

                                                    0.4

                                                   0.35

                                                    0.3                80th percentile

                                                   0.25                   median
                                                    0.2

                                                   0.15                20th percentile
                                                    0.1

                                                   0.05

                                                     0
                                                     0.85        0.9            0.95      1
                                                                          Moneyness



Notes: Implied volatilities for 3-month put options on the equity index, shown as a function
of moneyness (the strike price divided by the index price), as calculated in the model. The
figures show the effects of varying the state variables λt (the disaster probability) and ξt (the
value to which λt reverts). Panel A sets ξt equal to its median value and varies λt , while
Panel B sets λt equal to its median value and varies ξt .
                                                  Figure 3: Time series of option-implied volatilities



                                                    1M ATM                                                             1M 0.85 OTM
       Implied Volatility (annual)




                                                                            Implied Volatility (annual)
                                     0.6                                                                  0.6
                                                   Data
                                                   Model
                                     0.4                                                                  0.4


                                     0.2                                                                  0.2


                                      0                                                                    0
                                           2006     2007      2008                                              2006    2007    2008

                                                    3M ATM                                                             3M 0.85 OTM
       Implied Volatility (annual)




                                                                            Implied Volatility (annual)
                                     0.6                                                                  0.6


                                     0.4                                                                  0.4


                                     0.2                                                                  0.2


                                      0                                                                    0
                                           2006     2007      2008                                              2006    2007    2008

                                                    6M ATM                                                             6M 0.85 OTM
       Implied Volatility (annual)




                                                                            Implied Volatility (annual)




                                     0.6                                                                  0.6


                                     0.4                                                                  0.4


                                     0.2                                                                  0.2


                                      0                                                                    0
                                           2006     2007      2008                                              2006    2007    2008




Notes: Monthly time series of option-implied volatilities in the data (blue solid lines) and in
the model (red dotted lines). Results are shown for 1, 3, and 6-month options. State variables
are computed to match the 1-month ATM and 0.85 OTM implied volatilities exactly.




                                                                          64
                                        Figure 4: Option-implied state variables
                                                     Panel A: Option sample period
                                                                                                   CDX sample period
        0.24
                                                                                                                                                  λt
                                                                                                                           Lehman default
                                                                                                                                                  ξt
        0.22



                              Russian default
                               & LTCM crisis

        0.08                                                9/11 attacks

                                                                                                             Bear Stearns collapse

        0.06
               Asian financial crisis



        0.04                                                                              GM/Ford downgrade



        0.02


           0
                          1998                  2000               2002            2004            2006                2008             2010   2012



                                           Panel B: CDX tranche sample period

                                                      λt
                               0.04                   ξt




                               0.03




                               0.02




                               0.01




                                    0
                                            De       Ma Ju          Se     De      Ma Ju         Se    De      Ma      J       Se
                                                 c     r (2 n         p       c.     r (2 n        p     c         r (2 un       p
                                                           00                            00                            00
                                                              6)                            7)                            8)




Notes: Monthly time series of the state variables λt (annual disaster probability) and ξt
(long-run mean of λt ) extracted from option prices. At each time point, the state variables
are chosen to match implied volatilities of 1-month ATM and OTM (moneyness of 0.85)
index put options in the data. Panel A shows these time series for the January 1996–
December 2012 period over which option data are available. The shaded area represents
the period over with CDX tranche data are available. Panel B zooms into the CDX sample
                                          65
period.
             Figure 5: The price-dividend ratio in the data and in the model

           100

            90
                                     Data
            80

            70

            60

            50

            40

            30

            20

            10
                    Model (implied by options data)

             0
             1996   1998    2000   2002    2004   2006    2008   2010    2012




Notes: The solid line shows the time series of the price-dividend ratio on the data. The red
line shows the price-dividend ratio implied by the model for state prices chosen to fit the
one-month ATM and OTM (0.85 moneyness) put options.




                                            66
Figure 6: Time series of CDX/CDX tranche spreads in the benchmark model and in a case
without idiosyncratic risk



                                                      CDX Index                                                      Equity (0-3%)




                                                                                  Upfront payment (%)
                                                                                                         80
                  CDX spread (bps)
                                                      Data
                                                      Model                                              60
                                         200          No idiosyncratic risk
                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                         20
                                         100
                                                                                                          0

                                           0                                                            -20
                                               2006     2007         2008                                     2006     2007    2008

                                                  Mezzanine (3-7%)                                               1st Senior (7-10%)
        Tranche spread (bps)




                                                                              Tranche spread (bps)
                                 1000
                                                                                                        400


                                         500
                                                                                                        200


                                           0                                                              0
                                               2006     2007         2008                                     2006     2007    2008

                                                 2nd Senior (10-15%)                                            3rd Senior (15-30%)
                  Tranche spread (bps)




                                                                              Tranche spread (bps)




                                         300                                                            150


                                         200                                                            100


                                         100                                                             50


                                           0                                                              0
                                               2006     2007         2008                                     2006     2007    2008


Notes: Monthly time series of 5-year CDX and CDX tranche spreads in the data (blue solid
lines), in the benchmark model (red dotted lines), and in a calibration without idiosyncratic
risk (black dashed lines). Spreads are annual and reported in terms of basis points (bps) per
unit of notional. For the equity tranche, we report the upfront payment assuming the spread
is fixed at 500 bps. We compute model values from state variables fit to the time series of
1-month ATM and 0.85 OTM implied volatilities. The version without idiosyncratic risk is
obtained from the benchmark by setting the probability of an idiosyncratic shock (λi ) to
zero.
                                                                              67
Figure 7: Time series of CDX/CDX tranche spreads in the benchmark model and in a case
without sector shocks


                                                   CDX Index                                                           Equity (0-3%)




                                                                                     Upfront payment (%)
                                                                                                           80
               CDX spread (bps)
                                                   Data
                                                   Model                                                   60
                                      200
                                                   No sector risk
                                                                                                           40
                                      100
                                                                                                           20

                                        0                                                                   0
                                            2006    2007            2008                                        2006     2007    2008

                                               Mezzanine (3-7%)                                                    1st Senior (7-10%)
     Tranche spread (bps)




                                                                           Tranche spread (bps)
                              1000
                                                                                                    400


                                      500
                                                                                                    200


                                        0                                                                   0
                                            2006    2007            2008                                        2006     2007    2008

                                              2nd Senior (10-15%)                                                 3rd Senior (15-30%)
               Tranche spread (bps)




                                                                           Tranche spread (bps)




                                      300                                                           150


                                      200                                                           100


                                      100                                                                  50


                                        0                                                                   0
                                            2006    2007            2008                                        2006     2007    2008



Notes: Monthly time series of 5-year CDX and CDX tranche spreads in the data (blue solid
lines), in the benchmark model (red dotted lines), and in a calibration without sector shocks
(black dashed lines). Spreads are annual and reported in terms of basis points (bps) per unit
of notional. For the equity tranche, we report the upfront payment assuming the spread is
fixed at 500 bps. We compute model values from state variables fit to the time series of 1-
month ATM and 0.85 OTM implied volatilities. The version without sector risk is obtained
by setting the probability that a firm will suffer a sector shock (pi ) to zero.

                                                                           68
Figure 8: Time series of CDX/CDX tranche spreads in the benchmark model and in a case
with higher disaster risk



                                                   CDX Index                                                          Equity (0-3%)




                                                                                    Upfront payment (%)
                                                                                                          80
               CDX spread (bps)
                                      300          Data
                                                   Model                                                  60
                                                   Higher disaster risk
                                      200
                                                                                                          40
                                      100
                                                                                                          20

                                        0                                                                  0
                                            2006     2007        2008                                          2006     2007    2008

                                               Mezzanine (3-7%)                                                   1st Senior (7-10%)
     Tranche spread (bps)




                                                                          Tranche spread (bps)
                              1000
                                                                                                   400


                                      500
                                                                                                   200


                                        0                                                                  0
                                            2006     2007        2008                                          2006     2007    2008

                                              2nd Senior (10-15%)                                                3rd Senior (15-30%)
               Tranche spread (bps)




                                                                          Tranche spread (bps)




                                      300                                                          200

                                                                                                   150
                                      200
                                                                                                   100
                                      100
                                                                                                          50

                                        0                                                                  0
                                            2006     2007        2008                                          2006     2007    2008



Notes: Monthly time series of 5-year CDX and CDX tranche spreads in the data (blue solid
lines), in the benchmark model (red dotted lines), and in a calibration with higher disaster
risk. Spreads are reported in terms of basis points (bps). For the equity tranche, we report
the upfront payment because the spread is fixed at 500 bps. The benchmark model values
are computed using the option-implied state variables fit to the time series of 1-month ATM
and 0.85 OTM implied volatilities. The calibration with higher disaster risk is obtained by
uniformly increasing the disaster probability λt by 2 percentage points.

                                                                          69
                     Table 1: Properties of aggregate cash flows and utility


                Panel A: Parameters for utility, consumption, and dividends
                Relative risk aversion γ                                    3
                EIS ψ                                                       1
                Rate of time preference β                                 0.012
                Average growth in consumption (normal times) µc          0.0252
                Volatility of consumption growth (normal times) σc        0.020
                Leverage φ                                                 2.6
                  Panel B: Parameters for the disaster probability process
                Mean reversion κλ                                         0.20
                Volatility parameter σλ                                  0.1576
                Mean reversion κξ                                         0.10
                Volatility parameter σξ                                  0.0606
                Mean ξ¯                                                   0.02
                 Panel C: Population statistics of the disaster probability λt
                Median                                                   0.0037
                Standard deviation                                       0.0386
                Monthly autocorrelation                                  0.9858

Notes: Panel A shows parameters for normal-times consumption and dividend processes,
and for the preferences of the representative agent. Panels B shows the parameter values for
λ and ξ processes:

                                                         p
                              dλt = κλ (ξt − λt )dt + σλ λt dBλ,t

                              dξt = κξ (ξ¯ − ξt )dt + σξ ξt dBξ,t
                                                        p


Note that ξ¯ is the average level of the probability of a disaster. Panel C shows population
statistics for the disaster probability λt . Except for the autocorrelation of λt , values are in
annual terms.
                                               70
Table 2: Moments for the government bill rate and the market return in the data and the
model



                           No-Disaster Simulations        All Simulations
                 Data      0.05    0.50       0.95       0.05   0.50    0.95     Population

 E[Rb ]          1.25      1.68    2.96       3.46      -0.47   2.41    3.37         2.02
 σ(Rb )          2.75      0.34    1.07       2.71       0.48   2.06    7.14         3.69
 E[Rm − Rb ]     7.25      5.40    8.01       12.36      5.30   8.49    14.25        9.00
 σ(Rm )          17.8      13.24   19.26      27.91     14.59   22.59   34.38       24.13
 Sharpe Ratio    0.41      0.32    0.42       0.55       0.26   0.39    0.53         0.37
 exp(E[p − d])   32.5      28.96   40.63      48.88     22.93   36.95   47.41       35.36
 σ(p − d)        0.43      0.15    0.27       0.47       0.17   0.33    0.59         0.43
 AR1(p − d)      0.92      0.59    0.79       0.91       0.62   0.82    0.92         0.90

Notes: Data moments are calculated using annual data from 1947 to 2010. Population mo-
ments are calculated from simulating data from the model at a monthly frequency for 600,000
years and then aggregating monthly growth rates to an annual frequency. We also simulate
100,000 60-year samples and report the 5th, 50th and 95th percentile for each statistic, both
from the full set of simulations and for the subset of samples for which no disasters occur.
Rb denotes the government bill return, Rm denotes the return on the aggregate market and
p − d denotes the log price-dividend ratio.




                                              71
                       Table 3: Parameter values for an individual firm

                Default boundary AB                                       19.2%
                Recovery rate Rt (normal times)                            40%
                Recovery rate Rt (disaster times)                          20%
                Aggregate risk loading φi (pre-crisis)                     1.3
                Aggregate risk loading φi (crisis)                         1.6
                                                 
                Idiosyncratic jump size eZi − 1                           -80.0%
                Bernoulli parameter for sector shocks P (Iit = 1) = pi     0.4
                                                
                Sector-wide jump size eZSi − 1                            -71.1%
                Coefficient for sector-wide jump intensity wξ             1.765
                Idiosyncratic jump intensity λi                           0.0093

Notes: This table reports the parameters for the payout process on an individual firm. Note
that default boundary AB is calculated as the firm’s leverage ratio (0.32) multilied by 60%
following Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012). Idiosyncratic jump intensity λi is in
annual terms.




                                              72
             Table 4: Default probabilities under a lognormal model for prices

                                                     Drift
                           -6%       -4%      -2%            -6%      -4%     -2%
            Volatility       5-year probability               3-year probability
              14%         0.0027   0.0007   0.0001      <.0001 <.0001 <.0001
              16%         0.0269   0.0093   0.0030      <.0001 <.0001 <.0001
              18%         0.1335   0.0580   0.0238       0.0005     0.0002   0.0001
              20%         0.4264   0.2182   0.1068       0.0041     0.0020   0.0009

Notes: The probability of hitting the default boundary for a firm subject to diffusive risk
only, for volatility ranging from 14% to 20% per annum and drift ranging from -6% to -2%
per annum. Volatility is for firm value (equity plus debt); the drift is under the risk-neutral
measure and so should be interpreted as the riskfree rate minus the ratio of total payout
to firm value. Values are in percentages (meaning that 1 denotes a 1% probability and 100
denotes certainty). The values on the left give the probability of default within 5 years. The
values on the right give the probability of default within 3 years.




                                              73
           Table 5: Average CDX and CDX tranche spreads (5-year maturity)


                 Upfront (%)                        Annual Spread (bps)
                     0-3%           3-7%     7-10%       10-15%      15-30%   CDX
                       Panel A: Pre-crisis (Oct. 2005 – Sep. 2007)
       Data           31            108        25          12             6   42
       Model          26            142        46          23             8   41
                           Panel B: Crisis (Oct. 2007 – Sep. 2008)
       Data           54            498       255          136         69     116
       Model          39            422       238          155         71     102
                      Panel C: Full sample (Oct. 2005 – Sep. 2008)
       Data           39            238       102          54          27     67
       Model          31            235       110          67          29     61

Notes: Historical and model-implied average 5-year CDX and CDX tranche spreads in basis
points (bps) per year. For the equity tranche (0-3%), the spread is fixed 500 bps, so we
report the upfront payment. Other tranches (3-7%, 7-10%, 10-15%, 15-30%) and the CDX
itself have no upfront payments. Data are monthly, from October 2005 to September 2008,
corresponding to CDX series 5 to 10. We divide the data into two sub-samples: pre-crisis
and crisis. The The pre-crisis sample is from October 2005 to September 2007 (CDX5 to
CDX8). The crisis sample is from October 2007 to September 2008 (CDX9 to CDX10). We
compute model values from state variables fit to the time series of 1-month ATM and 0.85
OTM implied volatilities on equity index options.




                                             74
            Table 6: Average CDX and CDX tranche spreads (3-year maturity)


                  Upfront (%)                          Annual Spread (bps)
                      0-3%           3-7%     7-10%         10-15%     15-30%     CDX
                        Panel A: Pre-crisis (Sep. 2004 – Sep. 2007)
        Data           11             20           8           3             2     27
       Model           14             42        13             6             3     32
                            Panel B: Crisis (Oct. 2007 – Sep. 2008)
        Data           43            364       168            87         48         –
       Model           24            243       130            80         46        82
                       Panel C: Full sample (Sep. 2004 – Sep. 2008)
        Data           21            127        58            29         16         –
       Model           17             91        42            24         13        44

Notes: Historical and model-implied average 3-year CDX and CDX tranche spreads in basis
points (bps) per year. For the equity tranche (0-3%), the spread is fixed 500 bps, so we report
the upfront payment. Other tranches (3-7%, 7-10%, 10-15%, 15-30%) and the CDX itself
have no upfront payments. Data, from Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012), are
monthly from September 2004 to September 2008. The pre-crisis sample is from September
2004 to September 2007 (CDX3 to CDX8). The crisis sample is from October 2007 to
September 2008 (CDX9 and 10). We compute model values from state variables fit to the
time series of 1-month ATM and 0.85 OTM implied volatilities on equity index options.




                                              75
                      Table 7: Average super-senior tranche spreads


                             Super senior tranche spread (annual bps)
               Pre-crisis (Sep. 2004 – Sep. 2007)    Crisis (Oct. 2007 – Sep. 2008)
               3-year             5-year             3-year             5-year
      Data        1                  4                 23                35
     Model        2                  3                 28                34

Notes: Historical and model-implied average 3 and 5-year super-senior tranche spreads in
basis points per year. The super-senior tranche has a 30% attachment point and a 100%
detachment point. Data, from Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2012), are monthly
from September 2004 to September 2008. The pre-crisis sample is from September 2004 to
September 2007 (CDX3 to CDX8). The crisis sample is from October 2007 to September
2008 (CDX9 and 10). We compute model values from state variables fit to the time series
of 1-month ATM and 0.85 OTM implied volatilities on equity index options.




                                           76
