NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSING FINANCE IMPERFECTIONS
AND PRIVATE SAVING:
A COMPARATIVE SIMULATION ANALYSIS
OF THE U.S. AND JAPAN

Fumio Hayashi

Takatoshi Ito
Joel

Slemrod

Working Paper No.

2272

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1987

Financial support from the Sloan Foundation grant on transactions costs administered by the University of Minnesota is gratefully acknowledged. This work
was initiated when Fumio Hayashi was visiting at the Department of Economics,
University of Minnesota. We thank the Ministry of Construction, Japan, for
supplying us with data which are not publicly available. Comments on previous
versions from Patric Hendershott, Joyce Manchester and participants of a seminar
at the Ministry of Finance, Japan, were very helpful. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research programs in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics
and Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #2272
June 1987

Housing Finance Imperfections and Private Saving:
A Comparative Simulation Analysis of the U.S. and Japan

ABSTRACT

This paper presents a life—cycle simulation
interaction

analysis of the

among savings decisions, housing purchase

the tax system in the United States and Japan.

decisions, and

To investigate this

issue, we first document the stylized fact that the typical Japanese

household purchases a house later in the life—cycle with a higher
downpayment ratio than its U.S. counterpart. Second,

simulation model that includes the housing
constructed

a life—cycle

purchase decision is

and used to compare the behavior of typical U.S.

Japanese households.

and

The Japanese household is induced to save more

early in the life cycle in order to meet the higher downpayment
requirement.

The saving—consumption pattern resulting from a higher

growth rate is shown to contribute to a higher appreciate saving rate

in Japan compared to the U.S.

However, the contribution of the

induced early saving due to the downpaymerit requirement seems to be

too small to explain a large differential in the saving rates of the
-two countries.

Only if we introduce a bequest motive can the model

generate the observed saving rate in Japan..

Finally, tax reform

concerning the tax deductibility of mortgage interest payments or the

tax exempt status of interest income is shown to have a small impact

on the aggregate saving rate in either country.

For example, the

introduction of tax—exempt saving in the U.S. would increase the
saving rate by only 1.57..
Fuinlo Hayashi

London School of Economits
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
ENGLAND

Takatoshi Ito
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 316

Cambridge, MA O?139

Joel Slenirod

Department of Economics
University of Michigan

Ann Arbor, MI 48109

1.

INTRODUCTION
It is widely noted that one

of

the major differences between the

U.S. and Japanese economies is found in the institutions and regula-

tions of financial markets. In addition, the tax incentives for
saving and borrowing in the two countries are quite different.

of the interest income from consumer savings is

Most

tax—exempt and

interest payments of consumer mortgages and debts are not tax deduc-

tible in Japan, while the opposite is true in the United States.*

Institutional arrangements concerning housing, one of the major
expenditure items in a lifetime for most consumers, are also quite
different in the two countries.

Many economists have suggested that

differences in housing financing between the two countries may be
partially responsible f or the large gap in the personal saving rate
between the two countries.
literature.)

(See Hayashi (1986) for a survey of the

In a world with perfect capital markets where a

consumer can borrow and lend over his lifecycle, whether a consumer
decides to rent housing or purchase a house would not have any effect

on the lifetime consumption—saving pattern. However, in the presence

* In Japan, interest income from the following savings (with a
ceiling on principal amounts) are tax—exempt:
(i)
regular postal
saving up to 3 million yen;
(ii) postal saving earmarked for housing
purchase up to 0.5 million yen;
(iii) "Maru—yu", that is, any deposits in banks securities and mutual funds, up to 3 million yen; (iv)

"special maru—yu", that is, government and municipal bonds, new
issues and secondary, up to 5 years after issue., up to 3 million yen;

and (v) only for employees of age 54 or younger, for the purpose of
accumulating assets for housing and retirement funds up to S million
yen.
Thus a young employee who wants to save for housing purchase
can receive tax—free interest up to 14.5 million yen
$90,625, if
$1=160 yen). Even beyond the tax—exempt ceiling, there are financial
instruments
(discount
bonds issued by investment
banks
and
governments) which are subject to a low tax rate (16X) regardless of
the income tax bracket of the bond holder. About 58 7. of personal
savings are in one of the above forms of tax exempt savings (Bank of
Japan (1986; p.156)).
(

1

of

a

a liquidity constraint (i.e.,

downpayment

requirement)

purchasing a house many create a distortion in the Ufetime consump-

tion—saving decision.

A higher dawnpayment requirement may induce

households to postpone consumption early in the lifecycle in order to
build up enough assets to qualify for buying a house.

The goal of this paper is to investigate the effect of
incentives and downpayment requirements on households' tenure

tax

choice

(own or rent) concerning housing and on consumption—saving patterns,
with a comparison of the United States and Japan in mind.

In parti-

cular, a life—cycle simulation model will be constructed to quantify

the effect of these policies on the personal saving rate.

The

methodology is based on Slemrod (1982), which constructed a lifecycle

model with endogenous home ownership decisions.* He showed that
although the favorable tax treatment of owner—occupied housing in the

United States favors an early purchase of housing, the downpaynient

constraint induces the consumer to delay the purchase to avoid
distortion in the consumption— saving pattern. Thus, an optimal hf e—

time pattern of tenure choice of housing is determined as a tradeoff

between the tax incentives and the required distortions in the
lifetime consumption stream.

In this paper, we apply an expanded version of the Slemrod model

to a comparative study of the U.S. and Japanese housing markets. The
model predicts that due to the imperfect capital market, transaction

costs and the relatively higher housing price, the Japanese are
*
As in Slemrod's model, land, a non—reproducible asset, is not
The value of land relative to
explicitly introduced in our model.

total household wealth is much higher in Japan than in the U.S.
Moreover, land has presumably appreciated more than financial wealth.
The potentially important role of land in the saving process and its
implications for the differential performance of the U.S. and Japan
ant not explored in this paper.
2

induced to save more toward the down payment and to acquire a home
later in their lifecycle.

One simplification adopted in the paper is that the model
considers only the demand side of the asset.

The supply of housing

is not modelled and the general equilibrium response of prices to
changes in policies is not included in the analysis.

Reasonable values are substituted from the stylized facts of the

two countries.

Most parameter values in the simulation model are

based on observed data of the U.S. and Japanese economies. Some
parameter values are chosen so that the tenure pattern and saving
rates that our model predicts are matched with the observed tenure
pattern in each country.

Exercises with the simulation model are developed to show how
much the difference in ta incentives contributes to the savings rate
gap between the two countries.

It is particularly interesting to

investigate how tax reform would affect the aggregate saving rate and

housing tenure choice.

In Japan, a proposal to abolish the tax

exemption for saving and replace it with a uniform low tax rate has
been gaining momentum recently.

Furthermore, a tax break for the

purchase of owner—occupied housing, in one form or another, has been
proposed.

In the United States, incentives for saving have been

introduced in the form of the all—savers' certificate and individual.

retirement accounts! although these programs have been cut back
recently.

In addition, same recent tax reform proposals, in

particular flat tax proposals, feature the elimination of the tax
deductibility of home mortgage interest payments.

In the discussion of tax reform in either country, no one has
presented quantitative estimates showing how much the house tenure

3

pattern and the saving rate would change due to the proposed reform.
This paper will take up this task using a simulation model.
In Section 2, we describe a life—cycle model with housing tenure

choice, which is a special case of Slemrod's (1982) model.

Sections

3 and 4, respectively, summarize the stylized facts of the U.S. and
Japanese housing markets.

Section 5 presents the results of various

exercises using the simulation model to investigate the effect of
changes in the economic environment in both countries.

Section 6

offers some concluding remarks.

2. A Lifecycle Model with Housing Tenure Choice
In this section, we describe a six—period life—cycle model which

will be used for the simulation analyses to be discussed later. Each
period is meant to represent ten years of a person's adult lifetime.
The household, which lives six periods, chooses the consumption of a

composite commodity and housing services for each period over the
lifetime.

Housing services may be obtained either by purchasing a

house or renting housing.

Imperfect capital markets are assumed in

that the household cannot borrow to finance nonhousing consumption.

The household can, however, obtain a mortgage toward purchase of a

house, provided it can come up with a downpayment which is some
fraction of the house value. The liquidity constraint may be binding
for two reasons.

First, when income early in the life cycle is less

than income later, as will be assumed, consumption smoothing may
become impossible. Second, if owner—occupying as opposed to renting
is preferred, the household has to save in order to accumulate enough

wealth for the downpayment.

Even if the liquidity constraint +or

consumption smoothing is binding, there may be positive saving in
order to build up the downpayment.

4

The desirability of owning a house comes from two sources.
First, it is assumed that a house owned would yield services with
higher utility than the identical house if rented, even if the cost
is identical.

This assumption is meant to represent some advantages

of eliminating the principal—agent relationship if one rents from
himself, i.e., a renter cannot alter, paint and improve a house as
desired, and a renter is subject to a risk of termination of lease or

rent increase in the future.

Second, in the United States, the

imputed income from owner—occupied housing is untaxed, while interest

payments are tax deductible and interest income from saving is taxable. This feature makes owning a house more attractive than renting
one, unless there are offsetting tax advantages offered to landlords.

This argument does not apply identically to Japan, where interest
payments are not tax—deductible and most of personal interest income

is practically tax—exempt.

To the extent that rental income is

taxed, however, there is a tax—related advantage to owning housing as
opposed to renting in Japan as welL as in the U.S.

It is assumed that in the first period the household cannot

purchase a house because of the liquidity and downpayment constraints.

Likewise, by the beginning of the last period, the house-

hold must sell any owned housing and move into a rental unit, consuming all the proceeds of the house sale in the last period.

(We

abstract from the bequest motive until later.) Thus the household

has a choice of owning a house during any of the second, third,
fourth and fifth periods, but can only buy once.

For each own/rent

lifetime pattern, the household can calculate the optimal consump—

tion/saving pattern by maximizing the discounted sum of lifetime
utility subject to the lifetime budget constraint, the liquidity and

S

downpayment constraints.

By comparing the maximized levels of life-

time utility for different patterns of tenure choice the household
picks the own/rent pattern that yields the highest utility..

(For

simplicity, depreciation on a house is ignored.)

We assume housing purchases and sales take place at the end of a

period. When a house is purchased with a downpayinent d of the house

value, the downpayment expenditure is deducted from income of the
period of house purchase. The mortgage debt (1—d) becomes (1-t-R) (1—d)

at the beginning of the next period. An equal payment of V for

in

periods amortizes the mortgage debt. (Later, m2 for Japan and m=3
f or the United States will be chosen).

The interest portion of the

mortgage repayment is tax deductible in the United States.

Thus the

"net" mortgage repayment V(m) in the United States is the mortgage
payment less the (deductible) interest portion of the repayment for
the m—th installment.

When a house is sold, after the mortgage is

paid up, the value of the house is used for consumption after the
period of the sale.

The instantaneous utility function is assumed to be log—linear
in consumption and housing services and lifetime utility is assumed

For example, suppose that a

to be additively separable over time.

household purchases a house at period t(b) and sells at period t(s).

The household has to solve the following problem:

respect to t(b), t(s), {c(t), t =

1,.-..

t(s)+1.... 6), 1-4,

t(b)

E 81{og c(t) + aflog

h(t))

t= 1

t(s)
+ E

B

Clog c(t) +

alog yHU

t=t (b) +1

6

6),

Maximize with

Ch(t), t1,..t(b),

6

+ E P

Clog clt) + ziog

hIt))

t=t Is) +1

subject to, A(O) =

0,

Alt) =

(l+R(lr))A(t_1)+Y(t)_ct_PrPhh(t),

Alt)

(l+R(l_r))A(t_l)4Y(t)_clt)_PrPhhlt)_dPhH, t = t(b)
(I+Rll...i))ACt_1)+Y(t)_c(t)_V(mHl_d)PhH, tt(b),..,t(s)—1
Cl+R(lr))A(t_1)+Y(t)_c(t)_V(m)(1_d)PhH + PhH, t — t(s)
t = tls)+1,...,6
(l+R(l_7))A(t_1)+ylt)_c(t)_PrPhP.s(t),

=

Alt) =

Alt) =
Alt) =

t —

t—t (b)

Alt)

maxtO, dPhH + E

CV —

(V—V(m))/y)

rn—I

[liquidity constraint)
A(6) =

where

0,

y(t)

t =

1,...

[no bequest condition]
and c(t) ,

respectively,

are labor income and consumption

in period t; Alt) is the end—of—the—period financial asset value; h

is the size of a rental unit (which could vary every period); H is

the size of an owner—occupied unit (which remains constant once
purchased);

R is the interest rate on

financial assets and

liabilities; P is the price per period of a rental unit;

price of the owner—occupied house;

r,

is the

7, d, are parameters,

respectively, representing the pride of ownership coefficient, the
tax rate on income from saving and the required downpayment ratio.

There is an implicit arbitrage condition assumed between rental
property investment and financial asset investment.

P equals R due

to arbitrage between the financial asset and real asset if both
incomes are taxable as in the United States.

P equals R,ll_Tr) if

interest income on financial assets is not taxed but rental income is
taxed, as in Japan, where 1r is the tax rate on rental income.

7

The liquidity constraint implies that total borrowing must be
less than or equal to the value of owned housing. The calculation of
V(m) needs some explanation. For Japan, where there is no tax deduc-

tibility for interest payments, V(m) = V,

and the equal installment

is calculated from a condition that the mortgage is just paid up
after the maturity of mortgage.

For the United States, V(m) repre-

sents the equal payments of mortgage less the tax rebate resulting
from tax—deductibility of the mortgage interest payment..*

*

For Japan, suppose that the mortgage matures in 2 periods

(twenty years). The condition of equal payments is
(1+R)C(t—d)(1+R)—V)—V =

0.

Solving this, we have
1. 2.

V(m) = V = (1—d)(1+R)4/(2+R),

in =

V(0) =0,

m=3,...

In addition, interest income from saving is tax—exempt, i.e., T = 0.

For the United States, suppose that the mortgage matures in 3
periods (thirty years). The condition of qual payments is
(1÷R)L(1+R)C(1—d)(1+R)—V}V1—V = 0
Solving this, we have

V = (1—d)(1+R)/C1+(1÷R)÷(1÷R)2).

In the period of first installment, the interest portion of
mortgage payment is (1—d)R. Therefore multiplying the tax rate t, we
obtain the amount of tax saving, y(1—d)R. The "net" mortgage payment
is defined as, V(1) = V — (1—d)RT.

Since the principal balance is shrinking as the installment
continues, the interest portion of installment change. Accordingly
the net mortgage payment in the m—th installment is calculated as:
V(2) = V — C(1—d)(1+R)—V}RT
V(3) = V — [(1+R)C(1—d)(1+R)—V}V]RT.

S

Due to time separability and log linearity of the utility func-

tion, backward induction yields an explicit solution for optimal
consumption, (rent/own) housing service for all periods.

One extension of the model that we consider is to include a

In particular, we specify that a fraction q of

bequest motive.

benefactor's first—period income is left at the paint of death.
Assuming that heirs are thirty years younger than parents, bequests

are equally divided by the heirs who are at the end of their third
period of life.

The population is larger and the lifetime income is

higher for later generations.

Thus, the size c-f the bequest on the

receiving end has to be adjusted accordingly. The budget set must be
modified as follows:
y(3,q)

y(3) +

qy(1)/{((1+n)(1+g))3};

A(6,q) =

qy(1),

where n is the population growth rate, and g is the <generational)
income growth rate.

3. Characteristics of the U.S. Housing Market

Data for mortgage financing with a government guarantee are
available from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
<HUD).

In 1979, the average ratio of mortgage value to the value of

a new one—family house whose finance was government guaranteed was
0.921.

This ratio seems very high, partly due to a sample bias of

government guarantees. The average loan—to—value ratio, 1—d, of conventional mortgage financing, according to the Federal Home Loan Bank

Board (1982). 4cr a new home was .731 in 1980 and .748 in 1981.
Based on these data, our first stylized fact is that the downpayment

ratio is about 25 to 30 percent for conventional mortgages and only

about 10 percent for housing with government loan guarantees.
select 257. as a benchmark of the U.S. downpayment ratio.

9

We

Second, the average age of inortgator was about 30 years old for
an owner occupant transaction in 1980, according to the FHA Trends of

Home Mortgage Characteristics.

Another source, Annual Housing

Survey, confirms that among the cohort 0+ 25—30 year—old household
heads, more than 50 percent own a house rather than a rent.

Third, the average maturity of a mortgage is about 30 years,
according to HUD (1979, p.293).

Fourth, the house—value/annual—

income ratio is 1.97 for a typical transaction of one—family housing,
according to HUD (1979, p. 134).)

Lastly, the lifecycle income pattern of the U.S. household is
calculated by multiplying the average income for an age bracket by

(Source: U.S. Department of

the labor participation rate in 1980.

Commerce (1981), Department of Labor (1985).) As a proportion to the

20—30 year old average income, the income of the 6 age brackets we

are interested in are calculated as follows, after normalizing so
that yLl)+y(2)+. . .+

=
=

Since

y(6)

=

1;

(2) = 0.248;
0.218; (Z) = 0.108;
0.169;

=

0.257;

=

0.000.

this income pattern with respect to age bracket is an

observation at a point of time t, the lifetime pattern of a generation must be estimated in order to be used in the lifecycle maximiza-

tion problem of one particular generation. In the steady state, this
can be done by multiplying the growth rate of (real) lifetime income
over a generation.

We assume that a lifetime income of a generation

later receives income in every age bracket g higher income than a

generation before: Y+(k) = (1+q)5y(k).

k = 1, 2,...,6.

Therefore, from the cross—section observation, we simulate the
lifetime income pattern as follows:

10

= (1+g)kly(k),

k= 1, 2,... ,6.

The decade population (of those 15 years old and over) growth

rate, n, is calculated as 20.047., the rate observed from 1970 to
1980.

The decad! income growth rate over one generation (10 years

apart), g, is fixed at lOt*
4.,

Stylized Fact, in the Housing Market. in Japan

4,1 Loans vs. Self—financing**

The ratio of downpayment (literally translated as a ratio of
self—financing) is defined by the ratio of the average amount the

owner of new home raised to the average cost of construction or
purchase of the home.

In the 1980s, the ratio of downpayment has

been about 40 percent for both (custom—made) home builders and home

purchased from developers. The rest, about 60 percent of purchase
costs, comes from subsidized and privately financed loans.

(See

TABLE A4—la for details.)

However, there are two problems with using these figures..
First, "downpayment" in this table is literally defined •as 'the
portion of self—financing", including the owner's savings, gifts
to the owner, and sales of another real asset. "Loans" in this table

refers to funds cther than the owner's.

If a new owner borrows

without collateral some amount of money from his parents and applies

it toward the "downpayment" to the developer, the amount of money

There are various ways to approximate the decade income growth,
depending on which income measures and which deflator is used,
For
example, the per capita real GNP growth over the past ten years less
the population growth rate is about 107..
*

** The facts are summarized from the survey study by the Ministry of
Construction in Japan, conducted annually since 1974.
(See Ministry
of Construction (1986).) The survey of 1985 was conducted to about
ten thousand individuals who ordered custom—made homes or bought
homes from developers.
11

would still be counted as "loans" instead of "downpayment". The ratio

of "downpayment" in this table may therefore be biased downward.
Although the exact division between "self—finance" and "loans" in

this Japanese table may not be comparable to the division into
"downpayment" and "mortgages" in the United States, this is the
closest approximation possible and the direction of possible bias
would not weaken our argument.

Second, the ratio of 407. is inclusive of second time buyers who

have trade—ins.

If we take the downpayment ratio of the first—time

buyers only, the downpayment ratio is about 35/..

(See Table A4—lb.)

In light of these facts, a plausible average for the downpayment ratio

for the first—time buyer is about 35%. This is our first stylized
fact for the Japanese housing market.

4.2 Average Age of New Owners

The average age of the head of households who built custom—made
house in 1985 is about 43.9 years old. However,

if only first—time

buyers are surveyed, the average age is about 40 years old.

(See

TABLE A4—2 for details.)

This evidence is not quite sufficient for the purpose o-f

our

study of an own/rent tenure choice in the life—cycle context.
Although it shows a distribution of ages of purchasers, it does not

show in the cross—section how many of the cohorts have previously
owned houses.

In order to overcome the difficulty, we consult a

source of representative cross—sectional data in Japan, the Survey o-f

Saving Movement, collected by the Statistics Bureau of the Prime
Minister's Office. The survey shows that the house ownership ratio
(among the cohort) increases monotonically up to the age of 85.

12

At

the age of 65, 86.7 7. of heads of households own housing. it is
between the ages of 35 to 39 when the majority of the cohort becomes
a home owner. The ownership rate increases rapidly between age of 30
and 40.

(See Table A4-3 for details.)

We present the second stylized fact: In Japan, the average age
of initial home purchase is about 40 years old.
However,

looking at the percentage of households holding

liabilities for purchase of houses and/or land, we note that less
than 407. of households hold such liabilities.

Investigating other

statistics, we can conclude that more than one third of house owners
have no liabilities connected to housing.

This is supporting evi-

dence that liabilities due to home/land purchases are rather quickly
paid up.

4.3 Japanese Idiosyncrasies:

Extended Families

Care must be taken in comparing the Japanese housing market with

its U.S. counterpart, in light of the prevalence of extended
families.

It is still common in Japan for young adults between the

age of 18 and the time of marriage to live with their parents, if
they live in the same town.

The prevalence of this arrangement is

partly due to the high relative cost of housing, both rental and
owner—occupied, and partly due to social customs.

it is not uncommon that children

Even after their marriage,
continue to live with their parents.

This phenomenon appears in the

above—mentioned survey concerning the question o-f what kind of hous-

ing the new owner had before.

About 137. of owner—construction and

6X of buyers used to "live together (with family)." This is a signi-

ficant proportion, because as mentioned before the survey includes
replacement and improvement demand for homes.
13

(See TABLE A4—4.)

It is common in Japan that when parents become very old, or
especially when one of them dies, they are "looked after" by one of
the children.

A parent (or parents) might move into a house of one

of the children, usually the eldest son; or the family of a child
might move into the parents' house. In the former case, they lose the

"head of household" status and become a dependent in the household
survey, thus dropping out of statistics using a classification by the

age of head of households. In the latter case, in "return" for being
taken care of, it is usual that the child who looks after the parents
inherits the parent's home.

(This is an extreme form of "strategic

bequests", as advocated by Bernheim, Shleifer and Summers (1983).)
The parent(s) usually remains as the legal owner of the house.

One

reason for this arrangement is that for real estate, as opposed to
financial securities, the inheritance tax is reduced since an asses-

sed value for the inheritance tax is usually less than the market
value.

In either case, it is rare that the elderly sell the home in

order to move into a rental unit.

These social and economic aspects

in Japan partly explains why the ratio of homeowners among 65 years

old and over, among "heads o-f households",

does not (seem to)

decline.

To repeat, the second case implies that a typical Japanese
family keeps an owner—occupied house, or even buys a new larger home,
after retirement.

This is very much in contrast to the typical U.S.

household that sells a big house after the children become adults,
This aspect might not be adequately dealt with in a model based on
the standard life—cycle theory, in particular Slemrod's life—cycle
model of tenure choice.

Careful consideration of the bias caused by extended families in
14

our study must be given.

As for the effect of the living—in arran-

gement after parents become old, we have two conflicting effects on
the validity of our study.

If the first case (parents moving in to

their children's home) is dominant, we do not have to worry about the

comparability of the two countries, since an apparently high ownership ratio among the retired household heads is caused by selection
bias

(upward).

In other words, in reality as opposed to in the

data, many sell their houses and live with a son's family or a
daughter's family. Thus, the life—cycle framework of own/rent tenure

choice still applies. However, if the second case (a son's or
daughter's family moving in to parent's home) is dominant, then a
bequest motive should be seriously modeled, and it may be the case
that we have to argue that the difference in saving and house—owner-

ship between the U.S. and Japan is due to the extended family practice and a peculiar bequest motive in Japan. (See Hayashi (1986) for
the extended family explanation of why the Japanese saving rate is so
high.)

Since we will not analyze the bequest motive seriously, we

are implicitly assuming the second aspect of extended family relationship to be relatively insignificant.

Further theoretical and

empirical analysis is required to investigate how much the Japanese
extended family relationship would affect housing tenure choice and
saving decisions.

4.4 Lifecycle Labor Income Pattern and Price of Housing

We need the lifecycle labor income pattern for the typical
Japanese household for our simulation model.

tion is the same as the United States.
Hayashi <1986: Table 3):

15

The method of calcula-

The result is given in

= 0.09;
y4(t)

y2(t)

= 0.22;

= 0.29; y5(t) = 0.13;

y3(t) =

y6(t)

0.28;

= 0.00.

The above number is the cross—section observation at time t of
the income pattern with respect to age brackets. As was discussed in
the preceding section, the income pattern of a particular generation

derived from this table depends on the growth rate of labor income
over generations: y(k) =

(19)k

'Yt(IC) k =

1,2,....6,

where g is the

growth rate of lifetime (real) labor income over a generation..
The decade income growth rate, g, is approximated at 40Z.* The population (age 15 and over) growth rate, n, is approximated at 13.057..
Lastly, some kind of an indicator of housing price is required.
It is difficult to pin down the price of housing relative to consump-

tion goods. In Japan, about a third of the price of housing services
can be traced to land. The average housing—price/annual—income ratio
for buyers of a house with a land (excluding those who rent land and

who are given land by family and relatives), constructed from a
survey by Ministry of Construction (1982, p.82), was 5.29.

5. Simulations
5. 1

Benchmark

In this section, the model presented in section 2 is used as a

simulation model with relevant parameter values set from observed
facts summarized in sections 3 and 4. Those parameters for a typical
resident in each country are summarized in Table 5—1.
Insert TABLE 5—1 about here

Again, the income growth rate can be approximated several ways.
*
For example, the growth rate of household disposable income less the
CPI growth rate less the population (age 15 and over) growth rate
from 1970 to 1980 would yield about 41X, while the per capita real
GNP growth rate is about 407..
16

First, we calculate the optimum housing tenure choice predicted
by our simulation model. Given a rent—own pattern n-f housing -for six

periods, maximum lifetime utility is calculated by solving a dynamic
problem of consumption (size of housing and consumption goods) and

saving. The model then compares the maximized values of lifetj
utility to decide the optimal pattern of tenure choice.

The model, as summarized as the benchmark case in Table 5—2
predicts that the representative Japanese resident rents in periods

1, 2 and 6 of his life, and that the representative U.S. resident
rents in periods 1 and 6 only.

That is, the typical Japanese pur-

chases a house when he is 40 years old with a 20—year mortgage and
the typical American purchases a house when he is 30 years old with a

30—year mortgage. These predicted patterns match the stylized facts
summarized in previous sections.
The saving rate predicted by the model is 8.817. for the U.S. and

11.16% for Japan. Hayashi (1986) calculates private saving rates for
the two countries after correcting -for the difference in statistical
definitions.

According to Hayashi's estimates, the average private

saving rates for the U.S. and Japan during the 1970s were 8.07. and
18.3% for Japan, respectively.

Thus the prediction for the U.S. is

quite reflective of the stylized fact but the prediction for Japan
-falls short of the actual rate by 7 percentage points.

The model also shows that in Japan, the housing stock share in
national wealth is much lower than in the United States despite the

high saving rate.

We will investigate contributing factors to the

low housing stock in Japan by simulation experiments later.

We next check to see how robust the benchmark result is with
respect to the pride of ownership parameter about which we do not

17

have strong confidence.

The tenure choice pattern and the saving

rate predicted by the model was found to be
respect to this parameter for either country.

not sensitive with
(See Table A5—1)

In the rest of this section, simulations with respect to the
bequest motive, downpayment ratio and the income growth rate will be
conducted to evaluate the impact of changes in the financial institutions and economic environment on the housing market.

5.2 Beguest Motive in Japan
According to the above results, the saving rate predicted by the

simulation model seems rather too low for Japan.

One possible

source for saving, which has not been incorporated so far,

bequest motive.*

I-f

is the

the the oldest generation does not consume

all its wealth, especially the proceeds from the house sale which

becomes available at the beginning of the last period of the
lifecycle, then the aggregate saving rate would increase.**

Thus, we investigate how large a bequest motive is required to
predict a saving rate comparable to the actual rate. Table 5—2 shows

that if a bequest motive that directs the benefactor to leave three
times his first—period income to his heir, then the predicted saving

rate in the model to be 17.38%, which is quite comparable to the
actual rate of 18.29%.
*
One Of the reasons that the bequest motive is more important in
If
Japan is the popularity of the extended family relationship.

parents expect to live with (and/or to be taken care of by) children,
they might leave bequests in return.

Without a bequest motive, an assumption that the individual sells
the house at the beginning of the sixth period is not critical. With
**

a bequest motive, the assumption becomes problematic, because in
Japan houses are often used as a vehicle for making a bequest due to
A
the tax advantage relative to bequeathing financial assets.

serious treatment of bequest strategy is an important topic for
future research.
18

Insert TABLE 5—2 about here

5.3 Simulations with respect to downpayment ratios.

We next investigate how much difference the downpayment constraint makes in the housing tenure choice and the saving rate,

Of

course, the higher the downpayment ratio, the more distortion in the

lifetime consumption pattern is required to finance the same amount
of owned housing.

Table 5—3 shows how sensitive the housing tenure pattern is with

respect to changes in the downpayment ratio. The U.S. housing tenure
pattern would look like Japan's (housing purchase postponed until the
third period) if the downpayment requirement was raised to 407..

In

Japan, the tenure pattern currently observed in the U.S. would emerge
only if the downpayment ratio was reduced to a mere 7.57..

Therefore,

although a change in the downpayment ratio could alter the tenure
choice pattern, the change would have to be very large. The observed

tenure pattern in each country is predicted -fOr a wide range of the
downpayment ratios around the respective benchmark cases.

Table 5—3 also shows that the saving rate is positively related

to the downpayment ratiO.

An increase of 107. in the downpayment

ratio increases the saving rate by slightly less than one—half a

percentage point in each country, given that the tenure choice
pattern is not altered.

The magnitude of the downpayment ratio

effect is not as large as one night think, because there are two
offsetting impacts from a higher downpayment ratio.

saving is required for a given size of house.

First, higher

Second! a higher

downpayment ratio causes a smaller house to be purchased given the
tenure choice pattern.

The simulation results show that the -first

19

effect is only barely dominant.

Table 5-3 also shows how the relative share of housing in natio-

nal wealth would be affected when the downpayment ratio is changed.

When the downpayment ratio in Japan becomes as low as 7.5%, so that
the tenure pattern becomes identical with that of the United States,

the housing share in national wealth becomes comparable, too.
However, the housing- share would be way down if the bequest- motive is
strong.

-

In sum, this model suggests that the difference in the required
downpayment ratios in the U.S. and Japan is not a major source of the

difference in the saving rate. However, a large enough decline in the

required downpayment ratio in Japan would induce a saving rate and
lifecycle tenure pattern similar to that of the U.S.

-

-

3.4

Insert

TABLE 5—3 about here

Simulations with respect to the Income Growth Rate

First, note that the model is constructed in such a way that the
slope a-f the earning profile for one generation is positively related

to the expected income growth over generations.
-from

the fact

This feature comes

that the observed cross—section data has to be

converted into a steady state lifetime earning profile. Thus, in the

+ollowing experiments, faster growth implies a steeper earnings
profile.

Results of the sensitivity analysis with respect to the income
growth rate are summarized as follows.

It is well—known that the

aggregate saving rate increases i-f the steady state growth rate of

labor income over generations increases as long as the younger
generations are the savers.

This is confirmed in our simulation

20

model.

In fact, if the Japanese growth rate is only 107., the growth

rate of the United States, then the predicted Japanese saving rate
(without a bequest motive) would be 7.187., which is even below the
current U.S. saving rate simulated in the model.

The tenure choice

of the Japanese case is not affected by the change in the income
growth rate.

However, in the U.S. the renting period is extended by ten more

years if income grows at the Japanese rate, i.e. the age earning
profile becomes steeper.

The steeper earning profile implies that

the utility penalty imposed by the distortion caused by saving toward
downpayments becomes more burdensome.

The saving rate is increased

to 9.587., which is far short of the actual and less even than the
simulated Japanese saving rate.

5.5 Simulations of tax reforms
Our final simulation experiments concern changes in the tax laws

which determine incentives for saving and borrowing.

As was-

discussed in the introduction, the tax incentives affecting saving
and borrowing in the two countries are quite different.

The United States and Japan differ in two aspects:

tax—exemp-

tion of an interest income from saving and tax deductibility of
mortgage interest payment.

For each aspect, the simulation will be

conducted for hypothetical situations given all other parameters.
Our model gives simulation results shown in Table 5—4 for a full

range of interesting policy questions both in the United States and
in Japan:

How much would the U.S. low saving rate be stimulated if

interest income becomes tax exempt?

How would tenure choice and

average housing size be affected if mortgage payments become nondeductible?

What are the combined effects of tax—exempt saving and
21

the interest payment non_deductibility?

paraphrased as follows.

The last question can be also

If the United States switched to the

Japanese tax system, what would happen to the saving rate and housing
tenure pattern?

Insert TABLE 5—4 about here

Some economists think that the United States saves

too little

and propose ways to increase the saving rate, including adopting
more favorable tax treatment of interest income.

a

The experiment of

issuing all savers' certificates was one such attempt, though temporary.

The results of allowing tax—exempt saving is shown in the

(YES—YES) column in TABLE 5—4.

The simulated aggregate saving rate

increases by 1.5%, without changing the tenure choice pattern, if

interest income from savings becomes tax—exempt, as in "maru—yu"
accounts in Japan.

The increase is not insignificant, if one is

interested in raising the saving rateS

However, even with an in-

crease of 1.%. the gap in the savings rates of the two countries
would remain large.*

Suppose next that mortgage interest payments become not tax
deductible in the United States.
NO) in TABLE 5—4.

This is the case indicated by (NO—

The model predicts that the saving rate would be

reduced by a small amount, less than 50 basis points.

This result

contrasts tO the usual presumption that the tax deductibility

of

interest payments reduces the saving rate because it makes the cost
c-f

borrowing

less.

However, since buying a house does not represent

* Note that the model is not general equilibrium in nature, so that
the interest rate is held constant when tax policy and the capital
Introducing general equilibrium considerations
stock are changed.
would presumably dampen the predicted changes in the saving rate.
22

dissaving (rather a change in portfolio) the aggregate saving rate in

-fact increases when the cost of borrowing to buy a house falls, due

to the increased saving required to purchase the now—optimal larger
house. *

Suppose that the U.S. switched to the Japanese tax

system in

that interest income is tax—exempt and mortgage interest payments are
not tax deductible.

In this case the model predicts that the saving
rate would increase by one percentage point.

Simulation experiments are then conducted for the Japanese case

in order to answer questions symmetric to the U.S. experiments:

How

much would the high Japanese saving rate be reduced if the tax exempt

saving system is abolished? Would the typical Japanese tenure choice
pattern be affected by the favorable tax treatment on mortgage

ments, like in the United States?

pay-

What would be the combined ef-

fect, i.e. i-f Japan switched to the U.S. tax system?

The first question is quite relevant since the Japanese

govern-

ment is currently considering abolishing the tax exempt status on
certain interest income (the "maru—yu" accounts)

-

The second ques-

tion is also relevant, since adopting a mare favorable tax treatment

a-f mortgage payments is always proposed when housing

problems are

discussed in Japan. The presumption is that the housing stock is one
are of comparative disadvantage For Japan compared to the U.S.

*

Remember that a liquidity constraints equivalent to a ban on
borrowing in excess a-f housing capital is imposed in the model.
Therefore, tax incentives for borrowing will not increase the demand
-for the composite consumption good during the first period, when the
liquidity constraint is binding.
I-f our focus is shifted from the
downpayment constraint to borrowing constraints for consumption, we
could investigate th.e effect of eliminating the tax deductibility of
interest payments on consumer loans.
In this case elimination could
raise the saving rate
23

The model predicts that abolition of the "maru—yu" accounts in
Japan would cause a drop in the saving rate by two to three percen-

tage points (depending on how strong the bequest motive is). The
housing tenure pattern would also change, so that the Japanese would
rent 10 more years before purchasing a house.
If

Japan were to introduce tax—deductibility of mortgage

interest payments, then the model predicts a very slight increase in

the aggregate saving rate, without changing the tenure choice pattern.

If Japan adopts the U.S. tax system with respect to interest

income and interest payments, then the model predicts a drop in the
saving rate of 2 percentage points if the bequest motive is strong,
or by 3 percentage points, if there are no bequests.

The tax—exempt status of interest income has a stronger impact

on the saving rate than the tax—deductibility of mortgage interest
payments in both countries. The latter does not change the aggregate
saving rate more than 50 basis points in any case in either country.

Simulation results indicate that differences in the tax incentives
between the two countries explain only one to three percentage points

out of the 10 percentage point gap between the saving rates of the
two countries.

6. Concluding Remarks

We constructed a simulation model in order to evaluate the
effects of changes in housing finance institutions and tax policy on
the housing tenure and the saving rate.

Simulation results suggest

that the factors do not offer a complete explanation of the large gap
in the saving rate between the two countries.

behind this conclusion.

There are two reasons

First, although the typical downpayrnent

24

ratio varies across the two countries, the variation is not sufficient to affect the aggregate saving rate by a significant amount.
Second, tax reform experiments indicate that only one to three perce-

ntage points out of the 10 point gap is attributable to the
difference in the tax incentives.

The model suggests that the difference in the income growth rate
over generations can explain a greater amount of the saving rate gap.
Given the difference in the income growth rates, we suspect also that

the Japanese have a stronger bequest motive, perhaps due to their
extended family relationships.

The actual saving rate is reproduced

in the model if the benefactor is planning to leave three times as
much as their first—period income.

As is true for all numerical simulation analyses, the quantitative results presented here depend on our choices about the specifi-

cation of the model.

Several aspects of this specification are

especially worthy cf note.

The use of a log linear utility function

implies an intertemporal and intratemporal elasticity of substitution

equal to one.

This is likely to overstate the actual degree of

substitutability, and thus understate the welfare cost of a given
distortion in saving/consumption patterns.

For example, with less

intertemporal substitutability, an increase in the required down
payment ratio is more likely to cause a household to postpOne and
reduce the size of a housing purchase, rather than have to reduce
consumption early in the lifecycle.

The six—period formulation is also rather arbitrary and allows

the consideration of only large discrete changes in the lifetime
tenure pattern. A model with more periods would be able to treat the
more continuous adjustment of tenure patterns in response to a change

25

in the economic environment. The cost of such a model is, of course,
the increased computational expense.

Finally, an improved model would more carefully treat the bequest motive and, in general, transactions between generations. Dif—

4erences in these transactions between the U.S. and Japan potentially

play a large role in the determination of housing decisions and
saving decisions as well as the effect of tax policy and other institutional arrangements on these decisions.
In spite 0+

these qualifications, we believe that this analysis

represents a valuable contribution to the quantitative analysis of

the interaction of housing market institutions, tax policy,
savings behavior in the U.S. and Japan.

and

It has demonstrated the

importance of treating demand for housing and savings behavior simultaneously within the context of a dynamic model.

26

REFERENCES
Bank of Japan, (1986) Economic Statistics Annual:

Tokyo.

Bernheim, B. D., A. Shleifer and L. Summers (1985), "The Strategic

Motive", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 93:

Bequest

pp. 1045—1076.

Federal Home Loan Bank Board (1982), Savings and Home Finance Source
Book.

Hayashi, Fumio (1986), "Why is Japan's Saving Rate so Apparently
High?" in NBER Macroeconomic Annual. 1986 (forthcoming).

Office of Prime Minister (1982), Survey of Saving Movement (in
Japanese).

Ministry of Construction (various years) Results of Survey on
Financing Private Housing (in Japanese).
Sakai, Eiji

(1982), "Results of survey on financing private housing

in 1981",

(in Japanese) Housing Finance Monthly, December.

Sakai, Eiji, (1981) "On results of survey on financing private
housing in 1980," (in Japanese) Housing Finance Monthly,
November.

Slemrod, Joel (1982), "Down—Payment Constraints: Tax

Policy

Effects in a Growing Economy with Rental and Owner—Occupied

Housing", Public Finance Quarterly, vol. 10: pp.193—217.

U.S. Department of Commerce, (1981) Money Income of Households,
Families, and Persons in the United States: 1980.
L'S. Department of Labor, (1985) Handbook of Labor Statistics.

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, (1979), Statistical
Yearbook.

Ref —

1

TABLE 5—1

==== ================================================_=============
Banchinark Parameter values: Stylized Facts
Tenure
Mortgage Aggregate
r
choice
d
maturity saving rate
R
U.S.

1.95 0.5 0.3 0.3 0.25

30 yrs.

8.0%

R 0 0 0 0 R

Japan

5.29 0.5 0.3 0.0 0.35

20 yrs.

18. 297.

R R 0 0 0 R

r

*

*

y

is the tax rate on rental income.
the tax rate on savings on financial assets.

is

* R: Rent

*0: Own

Stylized Facts: Cross—section income pattern at period t:

(4) yr(S) Có)

y(2)
U.S.

0.169 0.248

0.257 0.218

0.108 0.000

0.10 0.20

Japan

0.090 0.220

0.280 0.290

0.130 0.000

0.40 0.13

Banchmark Parameter values: Assumptions
a

$

r

U.S.

0.15 0.75

Japan

0.15 0.75 R(l_Tr)

R

q
—-

1.4

0.0

1.4

0.0 or 3.0

TABLE 5—2
Benchmark Theoretical Prediction

Facts*

U.S. no bequest (q0)
R
0
0
Tenurepattern
0
0
R
Labor income profile* .169 .273 .311 .290 .158 .000

Aggregate saving rate
Wealth/Income**

I R0000R

8.817.

8.07.

2.7

Housing! Weal th***

.74

Japan no bequest (q=0)

Tenurepattern
Labor income profile
Aggregate saving rate
Wealth/Income
Housing/Wealth

R

R

0

0

0

R

.090 .308 .549 .796 .499 .000

I RR000R

11..16X

2.4
.57

18.297.
2

Japan with bequest (q=3)

Tenurepattern
Labor income profile
Aggregate saving rate
Wealth/income
Housing/Wealth

R
R
0
0
0
R
.090 .308 .549 .796 .499 .000
17.387.

: RR000R
1

1

18.297.

3.3
.40

The labor income and saving rate profile is a life—time labor
income stream of a typical agent in the model.
The profiles are
calculated as longitudinal predictions, while the aggregate saving
*

rate is a cross—section prediction.
**
Wealth is the sum of financial assets and housing equity (value
Income in this table is measured on an
minus outstanding mortgage) .
annual basis.

The value of land is not included in the measure of housing or
the measure of wealth.
The observed housing/wealth ratio is indeed
***

higher in the United States than in Japan, as suggested by this
simulation table. However, the ratio of land value to wealth is much
higher in Japan than in the United States.
See also footnote 2 in
the text.

TABLE 5—3
_—==========:
Oownpayl%ent ratio

U.S. (no bequest)
257.

30%

40%

357.

::R0000R: R0000R R0000R RR000R
8.217.

T
S
W/I
11/W

9.037.

9.22%

.27
..74

.27
.70

.28
.66

25%

307.

357.

U

8.817.

H

.28
.84

JAPAN (no bequest)
7.57.

T R0000R : RR000R
8.90%

S
WiT
H/W

10.727.

1

.23
.63

.19
.77

407.

RR000R :RR000R: RR000R
11.357.
11.16%
.24
.57

10.95%
.23
.60

1

.24
.54

JAPAN (bequest, q3)
7.57.

T
S

1

257.

407.

357.

307.

R0000R RR000R RR000R
RR000RI
RR000R
17.557.
17.38%
17.19%

WiT
H/W

16.977.

15.327.
.28
.50

1

1

.32
.43

.32
.41

1

.33
.40

1

I

.33
.36

TA&..E 5—4

Effects of Tax Reforms on the Saving Rate
Country:

U.S.:

using U.S. parameters and income profiles
Tax treatment

*2

*1

(JAPAN)

*3
US status quo

*4

Interest income
tax exempt?

YES

YES

NO

NO

Interest payment
tax deductible?

YES

NO

YES

NC

Tenurechojce R0000R R0000R R0000R
Aggregate saving

10.277.

9.947.

8.817.

R0000R
8.437.

Country: Japan: no bequest
using Japanese parameters and income profiles
Tax treatment
Interest income
tax exempt?

*1

*2
*3
JAPAN status quo (US)

YES

YES

*4

NC

NO

YES

NO

Interest payment

tax deductible? YES

Tenurechoice
Aggregate saving

NO

RR000R
RR000R
RRROCR RRROOR
11.567.
11.16%
8.357.

8.077.

Country: Japan: bequest, q=3
using Japanese parameters and income profiles
Tax treatment
Interest income
tax exempt?

*1

YES

*2
*3
JAPAN status quo (US)
YES

*4

NO

NO

YES

NO

Interest payment

tax deductible? YES

Tenurechoice

NO

RR000R RR000R RRROOR RRRCOR

17.747.
Aggregate saving
17.38%
15.47%
15.22%
=====================—===============——===========——=======:-—========—_

