NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLUENCING CONNECTED LEGISLATORS
Marco Battaglini
Eleonora Patacchini
Working Paper 22739
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22739

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016

For useful comments and discussions we thank Gregory Besharov, Stephen Coate, Chris Cotton,
Quoc-Anh Do, David Easley, Francesca Molinari, Edoardo Rainone, Panle Jia and seminar
participants at Cornell, Queen Mary, LBS, LSE and at the 2016 Warwick political economy
conference in Venice. We thank Tiziano Arduini, Angela Cools, Liyuan Cui, Valerio Leone
Sciabolazza and Tianyi Li for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Marco Battaglini and Eleonora Patacchini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Influencing Connected Legislators
Marco Battaglini and Eleonora Patacchini
NBER Working Paper No. 22739
October 2016
JEL No. D72,D78
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how interest groups allocate campaign contributions when congressmen are
connected by social ties. We establish conditions for the existence of a unique Nash equilibrium
in pure strategies for the contribution game and characterize the associated allocation of the
interest groups' moneys. While the allocations are generally complex functions of the
environment (the voting function, the legislators' preferences and the social network topology),
they are simple, monotonically increasing functions of the respective legislators' Bonacich
centralities when the legislators are office motivated or the number of legislators is large. Using
data on the 109th-113th Congresses and on congressmen's alumni connections, we estimate the
model and find evidence supporting its predictions.

Marco Battaglini
Department of Economics
Uris Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
EIEF and NBER
battaglini@cornell.edu
Eleonora Patacchini
Cornell University
Uris Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
ep454@cornell.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22739

1

Introduction

There is a large theoretical and empirical literature studying interest groups’ influences on congressmen.

This literature aims to derive and test predictions about interest groups’ activities,

starting with the assumption that congressmen are self-interested, individualistic utility maximizers.

However, a long tradition in political science notes that treating legislators as solely

self-interested individuals may be reductive, because it ignores deep connections of friendship,
respect and patronage that transcend partisan or ideological divisions.1

Recent work has cre-

atively used a variety of data sources and methodologies to map legislators’ social ties and show
that these connections can help explain legislative success (Fowler [2006], Cho and Fowler [2010]),
voting behavior (Arnold et al. [2000], Masket [2008], Cohen and Malloy [2014]), and may provide
insights on congressional power centers (Porter et al. [2005], Zhang et al. [2008]). For the most
part, however, social connections among legislators have been ignored by the literature on interest
groups. If interpersonal relations truly play a role in legislators’ behavior, then we should expect
them to play a role in how interest groups allocate resources among legislators.
In this paper, we present a new theory of campaign contributions in which legislators care about
how other legislators in their social network behave. Even for realistically complex networks, our
theory provides sharp predictions on how the interest groups allocate their resources based on
social network topology. We then use data from the 109th-113th Congresses to estimate the
model. We find robust evidence that the measures of centrality suggested by our theory have a
significant influence on the spending decisions of Political Action Committees (PACs).
In our model,  legislators vote to pass or reject a policy. Legislators care about the policy
outcome, but also care about the resources they can obtain from interest groups and about the
behavior of other legislators to whom they are socially tied. We assume that legislators like to
receive resources from interest groups (for example, because these resources increase the likelihood
of being reelected);2 they also like to vote for the option that they think is chosen by their friends.
Social ties are represented by a network matrix whose generic element  represents the intensity
1 See, among others, Eulau [1962], Caldeira et al. [1993], Baker [1980], Arnold et al. [2000].
Among early
quantitative studies of legislators’ social interactions, see Rice [1927, 1928], Routt [1938], Patterson [1959] and
Matthews and Stimpson [1975]. For historical discussions, see for example Truman [1951], Bailey and Samuel
[1952] and Clapp [1963].
2 While it is useful to think of the interest groups’ resources as money, this does not need to be the case. An
example of a non-monetary resource is information that the group can provide to the legislator.

1

of the influence of congressman  on .

Two interest groups compete for the legislators’ votes.

Interest group  aims to maximize the share of legislators who vote for a given policy; interest
group  aims for the opposite result. Each interest group has a given budget and can commit
to oﬀer payments to the legislators that are contingent on the legislators’ votes; the legislators
cast their ballots after observing the oﬀers.

We establish the conditions for the existence of a

unique pure strategy Nash equilibrium of this game and characterize the associated equilibrium
allocation of resources.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, we find that the allocation of the interest groups’ moneys is generally a
complex function of the voting function, the legislators’ preferences for the policy and the geometry
of the social network. While this relationship can be characterized in closed form, in practice it
may be hard to compute it exactly for large networks, creating a challenge for empirical analysis.
However, we show that when legislators are oﬃce motivated or when their number is large, the
relationship between network topology and allocation of resources is simple: the interest groups
allocate their resources in a way that is proportional to the Bonacich measure of centrality, a well
known concept of centrality in network theory (see, for example, Zenou [2015]).3
We then estimate our model and test whether the legislators’ Bonacich centralities are good
predictors of business PACs’ contributions. To construct the social network, we use two alternative
approaches.
In the first, we exploit the insight from the political science literature that congressmen become well acquainted while serving in congressional committees (see Caldeira and Patterson [1987],
Masket [2008] and Bratton and Rouse [2011]). We construct social networks in which links between two congressmen are proportional to the number of shared committees.

An advantage

of constructing legislators’ social networks with committee memberships is that committees are
relatively stable over time, and thus determined long before PAC contributions are chosen.4
To control for possible unobserved factors driving both committee membership and PAC contributions, we implement a two-step procedure a’ la Heckman, as recommended by Blume et al.
[2015].
In the second approach, we exploit the idea that educational institutions provide a basis for
3 The exact relationship between the Bonacich measure of centrality and the resources of legislators can also be
characterized in closed form, but it depends on the specific assumptions on the legislator’s utility function.
4 For example, the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee in 2006 was Bill Thomas. He had become
chairman in 2001.

2

social networks (see Cohen et al. [2008], Fracassi and Tate [2012], Cohen and Malloy [2014], Do
et al. [2016], among others).

We therefore construct social networks using the congressmen’s

alumni connections: two congressmen are connected if they graduated from the same institution
or if (alternatively) they graduated from the same institution in the same period. This approach
gives us a network that is exogenous by construction to the political process.
Using networks constructed by committee membership and by educational institution, we
obtain consistent results that support our theory. We find that standard measures of centrality
like degree centrality (measuring the number of “connected” nodes), and betweenness centrality
(roughly speaking measuring how well a node connects to other nodes), have no power in explaining
business PAC contributions. We instead find that, as predicted by the theory, legislators’ Bonacich
centralities have an highly significant eﬀect. The relevance of the Bonacich centralities, moreover,
is robust to many natural controls suggested by the previous literature on the determinants of
PAC contributions: measures of members’ relative “power” inside the house (i.e., chairmanship,
seniority and participation in important committees such as Appropriations or Way and Means),
the per-capita income in their electoral districts, the margins of victory in the legislators’ elections
(as a proxy for the competitiveness in the district), gender, party aﬃliation, legislators’ ideologies
and Congress-specific eﬀects (as captured by Congress fixed eﬀects).

Adding information on

network topology as suggested by the theory significantly improves the fit of the model compared
with alternative specifications that ignore this information.
The intuition behind the result that Bonacich centrality is a suﬃcient statistic to determine
the allocation of resources for a suﬃciently large  depends on the following simple observation:
as  increases, the equilibrium probability that a legislator is pivotal for the outcome converges
to zero.

As the preferences of the legislator for the legislative outcome become decreasingly

important, the dominant factor becomes the social network (and the interest groups’ moneys).
At that point, only the Bonacich centrality matters (as opposed to other measures of centrality
like degree or betweenness that focus on diﬀerent dimension of the network topology). This result
depends on the fact that Bonacich centrality captures the recursive nature of the legislators’
social interactions in the network, a feature that has also been highlighted in other environments
(Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou [2006], Zenou [2015]).
Our work is related to three strands of literature that to date have had little overlap. First, it
relates to the political science literature on social networks in Congress already mentioned above.
3

In addition to providing a variety of approaches to describe the legislators’ social networks, this
literature has shown that legislators’ social connections explain voting behavior (Arnold et al.
[2000], Porter et al. [2005], Masket [2008], Ringe et al. [2013] and Cohen and Malloy [2014]) and
legislative success, as measured by successful amendments (Monsma [1966], Fowler [2006], Canen
and Trebbi [2016]), or the number of bills passed (Cho and Fowler [2010]). These recent works
follow an older (if less formal) tradition in political science (see Rice [1927, 1928], Routt [1938],
Eulau [1962], among others).
Our work is also connected to a large theoretical and empirical literature exploring how interest groups influence Congress.5

The theoretical literature has been characterized by two types

of models: informative theories, in which interest groups influence legislators by providing information (Calvert [1985], Austen-Smith and Wright [1992], Austen-Smith [1995], Bennedsen and
Feldmann [2002], Cotton [2012]), and campaign contribution theories, in which interest groups
influence legislators by providing resources (Denzau and Munger [1986], Snyder [1991], Groseclose
and Snyder [1996], Persson [1998], Diermeier and Myerson [1999], Helpman and Persson [2001],
Baron [2006], Dekel et al. [2009]).6

The empirical literature has studied the determinants of

PACs’ allocations of campaign contributions, documenting evidence of interest groups’ strategic
behavior consistent with the campaign contribution theories (Poole and Romer [1985], Snyder
[1990], Grier and Munger [1991]), Stratmann [1992], Romer and Snyder [1994] and Ansolabehere
and Snyder [1999]).7

This literature, however, has for the most part ignored social networks in

Congress and the impact that they may have on interest groups’ activities.
Finally, our work is related to the general literature on networks, which has also studied
related issues of policy intervention and marketing in networks. The seminal paper studying policy
intervention in networks is Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou [2006], which was among the first
to propose an economic model of how the removal of a “key player” influences individual behavior.
Our work diﬀers from this because interest groups alter the agents’ payoﬀs by making contingent
5 See Austen-Smith [1992] and Grossman and Helpman [2001] for surveys of theoretical research and Ansolabehere et al. [2003], Stratmann [2005] and de Figueredo and Richter [2014] for surveys of empirical research.
6 Related but distinct literatures are the literatures studying the influence of the choice of a single policy-maker,
and the direct acquisition of citizens’ votes. For the first, see Stigler [1971], Grossman and Helpman [1994],
Dixit [1996], Dixit, Grossmann and Helpman [1997], Besley and Coate [2001], among others. For the second, see
Buchanan and Tullock [1962], Anderson and Tollison [1990], Piketty [1994], Dal Bo [2007], Dekel et al. [2008].
7 More recent research has extended the analysis to behavior of lobbyists, uncovering evidence that they provide
expertise and access (Blanes i Vidal et al. (2012), Bertrand, Bombardini and Trebbi [2014], Kang [2015], Kang and
Young You [2015]).

4

promises, but they do not aﬀect the network topology. The issue of marketing in networks has been
studied in the computer science literature by Domingos and Richardson [2001] and Richardson and
Domingos [2002], who considered the problem of a monopolist attempting to influence customers
by allocating a budget of marketing resources.8

The case of competitive influencers has been

studied by Bharathi, Kempe and Salek [2007] who extend a contagion model by Kempe, Kleinberg
and Tardos [2003] and [2005]. In these works, marketers identify nodes in a network to start a
contagion process. Contagion models have been applied in the political science literature to study
influence on legislators by Groenert [2010], Guzman [2010] and Groll and Prummer [2016]. These
papers, however, do not provide microfoundations of the legislators’ decisions, since they assume
that legislators collectively decide according to an exogenous decision function and are influenced
through mechanical contagion processes that do not account for legislators’ incentives.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model of legislative
behavior and competitive interest groups’ activities. In Section 3, we study the equilibrium of this
game and characterize the relationship between the legislators’ preferences, the voting rule, the
network topology and the interest groups’ resource allocations.

Section 4 brings the model to

data, and Section 5 concludes.

2

Model

Consider a legislature with  members who choose between one of two alternatives: a new policy,
denoted by , and a status quo policy, denoted by . All members cast a vote for either  or
 and the legislature deliberates according to a -rule with a generic  ∈ (12 1), such that new
policy  is chosen if it achieves a share  of votes.
Two factors determine a legislator’s choice.

First, each legislator cares about whether the

policy is approved or not. This is described by a parameter   : the utility enjoyed by  if  is
approved. Since  can be either positive or negative, we can normalize the benefit of approving
 at zero.
Second, each legislator cares directly about the vote he casts. This reflects two facts: first,
interest groups observe a legislator’s actions and may choose to reward votes with monetary
contributions; and second, a legislator is influenced by other legislators and derives utility from
8 In their model, the key determinant of the monopolist’s allocation is the degree centrality of a node, a measure
that is not relevant in our theory and does not appear significant in our empirical analysis.

5

voting that depends on how his peers behave. We write legislator ’s direct utility of voting for
policy  ∈ { } as:

X
¡
¢
  () =   () + 
  () +  

(1)



The first term in (1) is the utility of the interest groups’ contributions:  () is the sum of
contributions pledged to  in exchange for a vote for  and  () is the utility that legislator ’s
receives from contribution .

We assume (·) is an increasing, concave, diﬀerentiable function

with lim→0  0 () = ∞, lim→∞  0 () = 0.
eﬀects.

The second term describes the social interaction

As in Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou [2006], the social network is described by

a  ×  matrix  with generic element   0:  () is an indicator function equal to one if
legislator  votes for  and zero otherwise and  measures the strength of the social influence
of legislator  on legislator . Without loss of generality, we normalize the social weights so that
P
P
for any ,   = 1 and we assume that   ≤  for all  and some bounded   1. The

final term in (1) represents other exogenous factors that may aﬀect ’s preference for or aversion
to voting for . We can set  =  , where  can be positive or negative, and normalize  at

zero.
For future reference, we say that a legislator is oﬃce motivated if he does not care about the
policy outcome (so   = 0); we say that a legislator is policy motivated if he does care about the
policy outcome (so   0 or   0).
The key assumption in (1) is that legislators like to conform to the behavior of the members of
their social circle. Apart from the general evidence on social influence in Congress mentioned in
the introduction, this assumption is well supported, both empirically and theoretically. On the
empirical front, conformism is a phenomenon that has been well documented in the psychology
literature (e.g., Asch [1951], Deutsch and Gerard [1955], Ross, Bierbrauer and Hoﬀman [1976]
and Jones [1984]). More specifically, Cohen and Malloy [2014] have recently shown that personal
connections amongst U.S. politicians have significant impacts on Senate voting behavior, even
after controlling for political ideology. Canen and Trebbi [2016] have formulated and structurally
estimated a model of legislative behavior in which voting depends on legislators’ social ties. On
the theoretical front, various authors have proposed microfoundations of conformist preferences
as in (1), rationalizing them as implications of the agents’ quests for social status (see Akerlof
[1980], Jones [1984] and Bernheim [1994]).

6

Two interest groups, also denoted  and , attempt to influence the policy outcome. Interest
group  is interested in persuading as many legislators as possible to chose policy ; interest group
, instead, is interested in persuading the legislators to choose policy . Each interest group is
endowed with a budget  and promises a contingent payment to each legislator who follows its
recommendation. Specifically, interest group  promises a vector of payments s = (1   ) to
the legislators where  is the payment received by legislator  if he chooses ; similarly, interest
group  promises a vector of payments s = (1   ) to the legislators where  is the payment
received by legislator  if he votes for .9
We assume that the interest groups do not know with certainty the legislators’ preferences,
and so are unable to perfectly forecast how payments aﬀect their voting behavior. Specifically,
we assume  is an independent, uniformly distributed variable with mean zero and density Ψ  0,
whose realization is observed only by . Let  be the probability that  votes for  and ϕ = ( )=1
be the associated vector of probabilities. Let moreover   (ϕ) be legislator ’s pivot probability,
that is the probability that a vote by  for  changes the outcome from  to  given ϕ. Legislator
 is willing to vote for  if and only if:
£
¤
   () −   () ≤    (ϕ)

(2)

The right hand side of (2) is the expected benefit of helping policy  win: the utility of the policy  
times the probability that the vote is actually decisive in determining the outcome. The left hand
side is the implicit cost of voting for  in terms of loss of monetary contributions, personal aversion
and “social” pressure.10
condition on

 ,

 ,

Naturally, we must have  = ( ()), so (2) can be re-written as a

 and  only:
 ≤ ( ) − ( ) +    (ϕ) + 

X



 (2 − 1) 

(3)

In the following, we focus on environments in which for any feasible    there is suﬃcient
uncertainty that the probability of (3) is interior and so no interest group can be sure about a
9 In Section 5 we extend this basic model in various directions: we allow for more than two interest groups
(Section 5.2); we consider alternative objective functions for the interest groups (Section 5.3); and we consider the
case in which the legislators vote on multiple policies and interest groups have heterogeneous preferences on the
policies (Section 5.4).
10 From (1), we can see that   () is a function of the actions of the other legislators,  () for  6= . Since the

agent does not know them, they are evaluated at their expected values: this is the reason we have an expectation
in (2). Note moreover that  is known to the agent, so it enters (2) only as a parameter.

7

¯ ¯
legislator’s decision. Let  be the highest valuation in absolute value:  = max ¯  ¯. A suﬃcient

condition for this to be true, which we will maintain throughout the paper, is the following:
Assumption 1. Ψ ( +  + (2 ))  12.

The important observation is that this condition is satisfied if Ψ is suﬃciently small, i.e. if there
is suﬃcient uncertainty on the legislators’ preferences.
A strategy for interest group  is a probability distribution over the set of feasible transfers ,
that is:
 = { :

X



 ≤   ≥ 0 for  = 1  }

A pair of strategies constitute a Nash equilibrium if they are mutually optimal: the strategy of
interest group  maximizes the expected number of legislators who adopt  given ϕ and interest
groups ’s strategy; and the strategy of interest group  minimizes the expected number of
legislators who adopt  given ϕ and interest group ’s strategy. In the remainder of the paper
we focus on equilibria in pure strategies, that is on pairs of vectors s  s in  ×  that are
mutually optimal. Proposition 1 and 2 guarantee that a pure strategy equilibrium exists and is
unique.
In the following pages we consider very complex networks that cannot be easily visualized.11
In these cases it is useful to define simple statistics that describe the position of an agent in
the network. A standard measure in the theory of networks that will play an important role in
the analysis below is Bonacich Centrality (Bonacich [1987], Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou
b the vector of Bonacich centralities, if it exists, is defined
[2006]). For a given network matrix ,

as:

³
´ ³
´−1
b =  − 
b
b  
·1

(4)

where   1 is a positive parameter that controls the rate of decay of the influence in indirect links,
 is the identity matrix and 1 is a column vector of ones. The Bonacich centrality of legislator 
³
´
b and  is the th entry of b  
b . Bonacich centralities may not exist because
with respect to 

b may fail to be invertible. Invertibility is guaranteed for any 
b if  is suﬃciently
the matrix  −  

small.

For the reminder of the paper, a condition that guarantees that the relevant Bonacich

centralities exist in our environment is the following:
11 In Section 4, we apply the model to the U.S. Congress.
congressmen) and thousands of links.

8

In this case, the network has over 400 nodes (the

Assumption 2. The matrix  − 2Ψ is invertible and positive.
Note that as for Assumption 1, this condition is satisfied if Ψ and/or  is suﬃciently small.12
In general, it is diﬃcult to compare the Bonacich centralities in networks with diﬀerent 
because an increase in the number of agents may completely change the topology of the network.
However, the comparison is straightforward when the agents in the networks can be classified
into a finite number of types, each comprising a given fraction of population. We say that two
legislators  and  have the same type if they have the same preferences,   =   , and if they
interact in the same way with the other legislators, so  =  and  =  for all  = 1  .
As we formally prove in Lemma 3.1, presented in the online appendix, in this case each agent of
the same type has the same centrality and, more importantly, the centralities depend only on the
share of the population of each type. In the following analysis we assume that there is at most a
finite number  of types of legislators.13

3

Equilibrium contributions

The game described in the previous section has two stages. In the first stage, the influence stage,
the interest groups simultaneously promise monetary contributions to the legislators contingent
on their votes. In the second stage, the voting stage, the legislators simultaneously choose how to
vote given the interest groups’ promises. We can solve this game by backward induction: first, we
solve the voting stage, taking as given the allocation of transfers; second, we solve the influence
stage, given the continuation value for the voting stage.

3.1

The voting stage

Each legislator chooses his ballot on the basis of his preferences, the monetary promises and his
expectations of the other legislators’ behavior. Because of this, the voting probabilities must be
jointly determined in equilibrium and no legislator can be treated in isolation. From (3) we have
12

See, for example, Theorem 1 in Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou [2006].

13 Naturally this assumption is without loss of generality if  is finite and it will play a role only when we consider
sequences of economies as  → ∞.

9

that the legislators’ probabilities of choosing , ϕ, are characterized by the nonlinear system:
⎛
⎞ ⎛
⎞
´
³
P
1
1
1 1
⎜ 1 ⎟ ⎜ 12 + Ψ ( ) − ( ) +   (ϕ) +   1 (2 − 1) ⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎜  ⎟ = ⎜
⎟
(5)

⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
³
´ ⎠
⎝
⎠ ⎝
P
12 + Ψ ( ) − ( ) +     (ϕ) +    (2 − 1)


For any s = s  s , the system of equations (5) defines a function  (s ϕ) that maps the vector

of probabilities ϕ to itself.

A voting equilibrium is a fixed point ϕ(s) =  (s ϕ(s)) of this

correspondence. Since  is continuous in ϕ from [0 1] to itself, Brouwer’s fixed point theorem
implies that an equilibrium exists for any pair s  s of transfers by the interest groups.
In general, (5) may admit multiple solutions and the solution may not be well behaved in the
monetary transfers (as, for example, multiplicity may induce ϕ to be discontinuous in s  s ).
The following result shows that, indeed, (5) admits a unique, well behaved solution when the
legislators are oﬃce motivated, or when they are policy motivated and there is suﬃciently high
uncertainty on the legislators’ types.
Lemma 1. With oﬃce motivated legislators, there is a unique vector of equilibrium probabilities
P
ϕ(s) = {1 ()   ()} solving (5). Moreover, the sum of the equilibrium probabilities   ()

is increasing, diﬀerentiable in  (respectively decreasing and diﬀerentiable in  ) for all i , and

concave in s (respectively convex in s ). With policy motivated legislators, there is a Ψ∗ such
that the same properties are true for Ψ ≤ Ψ∗ .
To see the intuition of this result, consider first the case in which legislators are oﬃce motivated
(i.e.   = 0 for all ). In this case, (5) is a linear system with a unique solution ϕ∗ . Consider
now the marginal eﬀect of an increase in  . Diﬀerentiating (5), we obtain:
h
i
X
∗  = Ψ  0 ( ) · 1 + 2
 · ∗  


where 1 is an indicator function equal to 1 when  =  and 0 otherwise.

(6)
The first term in

the square parenthesis is the direct eﬀect of an increase in  : it induces a marginal change in
legislator ’s utility of  0 ( ) if  = , and zero otherwise. The second term is the indirect network
eﬀect: the change in ’s behavior induces a change in legislator ’s behavior ∗  , which in
turn aﬀect ’s behavior in a recursive fashion. The system of equations (6) can be rewritten in
matrix form as: ϕ = Ψ [ω+2 · ϕ]. We therefore have:
ϕ = Ψ [ − 2Ψ · ]−1 ω
10

(7)

where ϕ and ω are the Jacobians of, respectively, ϕ and ω; and  −2Ψ exists and is positive
by Assumption 2. Since ω =(0 0 ( )   0) , we have that ∗  =   0 ( ) 
0 and  2 ∗ (s) 2  =   00 ( )  0 where  is the th element of ( − 2Ψ)−1 . Voting

probabilities are therefore unique, increasing and concave in  . A similar argument establishes
that they also are decreasing and convex in  .

With policy motivated legislators, the analysis is a little more complicated because we need
to take into account the pivot probabilities, which are nonlinear functions in . Lemma 1 shows
that when there is suﬃciently high uncertainty on the legislators’ preferences, these nonlinearities
are not problematic because the pivot probabilities are suﬃciently insensitive to changes in the
monetary allocations.
In the following, we will maintain the assumption that legislators are not policy motivated or,
if they are policy motivated, Ψ is suﬃciently small that the properties described in Lemma 1 are
satisfied:
Assumption 3. There is suﬃcient uncertainty on the legislators’ preferences so that

P



 ()

is increasing, diﬀerentiable in  (respectively decreasing and diﬀerentiable in  ) for all i , and
concave in s (respectively convex in s ).
Figure 1 illustrates the system (5) in a simple “star” network example in which there is a
central legislator, say legislator 0, who is connected to all other legislators and  − 1 peripheral
legislators  = 1  4, who in turn are connected only to the central legislator.14

The symmetric

structure implies that the probabilities of  = 1  4 are equal and so (5) collapses to two equations
in two unknowns, 0 and  = −0 for all  = 1  4. Assuming that legislators have the same
logaritmic utility  () = log(), the voting probabilities are characterized by:
0
−0

¡
¢
= Ψ · log(0 0 ) + 4 (2−0 − 1) + 6−0 (1 − −0 )2 −  
(8)
¡
¢
−0
2
2
= Ψ · log(−0
  ) +  (20 − 1) + 30 −0 (1 − −0 ) + 3(1 − 0 )(1 − −0 )−0 − 

where 0 (respectively, −0
 ) is the transfer by interest group  to legislator 0 (respectively, −0).
The intersection of the thick lines in Figure 1 illustrates the solution of (8) and a voting equilibrium
in the case in which the interest group allocates  = 10 evenly.15

Given ’s promise s , interest

14

Formally, 0 = 0 = 1 for all  and  = 0 if neither  nor  are equal to zero.

15

Specifically, in the example of Figure 2 we assume  = 025, Ψ = 1  = 0,  = 12 and   = 1 for all .

11

0

 -0
Figure 1: The flatter blue lines represent the reaction function of agent 0 to −0 (i.e. the first
equation in (8)). The steeper lines are the reaction functions of all the other agents agents to 0
(i.e. the second equation in (8)). The intersections of the reaction functions correspond to voting
equilibria for diﬀerent allocations of the campaign contributions.
group  can control the equilibrium probabilities by changing s .

The dashed lines in Figure

1 illustrate the eﬀect of a redistribution by  of money on ϕ =(0  −0 ) from the initial even
distribution ( = 2 for all ) to a distribution that favors  = 0: 0 = 4,  = −0
 = 32 for
 = 1  4. Despite the fact that each legislator does not directly care about the transfers sent to
the other players, his behavior is indirectly aﬀected by the transfers to the other legislators since
these transfers aﬀect behavior in his social network.

3.2

The influence stage

We can now turn to the interest groups’ problems in the first stage. Interest group  solves:
max

s ∈

nX



[ (s  s )]

o

(9)

taking s as given. Interest group ’s problem is the mirror image of ’s problem, as it attempts
to minimize the objective function of (9) taking  as given.
Under the conditions of Lemma 1, (9) is a standard maximization program.

This implies

that ’s optimal choice is uniquely defined and a continuous function in  (and symmetrically
’s reaction function is a continuous function of  ). The Brouwer’s fixed-point theorem implies
12

that a Nash equilibrium in pure strategies exists for suﬃciently low Ψ. The equilibrium solution,
moreover, must satisfy the first order condition:
X



 (s  s ) =  and

X


=1 

=  for  = 1    =  

where  is the Lagrangian multiplier associated with the budget constraints

P


 

(10)

≤  in interest

group ’s problem. As formally proven in Propositions 1 and 2, moreover, ’s and ’s problems
have the same Lagrangian multipliers  =  = ∗ , since they are symmetric.

To discuss

the implications of (10) intuitively, we will first consider the case in which legislators are oﬃce
motivated. We then generalize the results to the case of legislators that are policy motivated.
3.2.1

Oﬃce motivated legislators

We can rewrite the necessary and suﬃcient condition with respect to  (10) in matrix form as
ϕ · 1 = ∗
where ϕ =(∗1    ∗  ) and 1 is a -dimensional column vector of ones. Using (7),
we have:
ϕ · 1

¢−1
¡
Ψ · ω  ·  − ∗ · 
· 1 = ∗
¢
¡
⇒ ω  · b φ∗  G = ∗ Ψ
=

(11)

where ∗ = 2Ψ and for the last equality we used the definition of the vector of Bonacich centralities (4). Recall that ω is a vector of zeros except for its th element that is equal to  0 (∗ ).
We can therefore write our necessary and suﬃcient condition (10) as:
¡
¢
 ∗   ·  0 (∗ ) = ∗ for  = 1  

(12)

where, without loss in generality, we have incorporated the constant Ψ in the Lagrangian multiplier
∗ .
The necessary and suﬃcient condition (12) shows the determinants of the interest group’s
monetary allocation. The interest group chooses ∗ to equalize the marginal cost of resources and
their marginal benefit.

The marginal cost is measured by the Lagrangian multiplier ∗ of (9).

The marginal benefit is measured by the increase in expected votes for . Equation (12) makes
clear that, because of network eﬀects, the direct benefit of making a transfer to  is magnified by
13

¡
¢
a factor that is exactly equal to  ∗   , the Bonacich centrality of  in  with a constant
∗ .

An immediate implication of (12) is the following result:
Proposition 1. With oﬃce motivated legislators, there is a unique equilibrium in which the
interest groups choose the same vector of transfers ∗ . The vector ∗ solves the problem:
o
nX
¡
¢
max
 ∗   ·  ( )
s∈



(13)

¡
¢
where  ∗   is the Bonacich centrality measure of  in  with coeﬃcient ∗ = 2Ψ.

If we assume that the utility from money is logarithmic, then the transfer promised to legislator

 is exactly proportional to his Bonacich centrality, with a factor of proportionality that depends
on the inverse of the shadow cost of resources ∗ . In general, (13) shows that money is chosen
in order to maximize a weighted sum of the legislators’ monetary utilities, where the weights are
exactly equal to the respective Bonacich centrality measures.
3.2.2

Policy motivated legislators

When legislators are not purely oﬃce motivated, the analysis is complicated by the fact that
a marginal increase in a payment  has an additional eﬀect on voting probabilities that does
not exist with exclusively oﬃce motivated legislators. By aﬀecting the voting probabilities of all
players, an increase in  changes the pivot probabilities () = (  ())=1 . This eﬀect is irrelevant
with oﬃce motivated legislators because they do not care about the policy outcome.
Taking this into account, the analysis proceeds in the same way as above assuming  suﬃciently
large so that the objective function of (9) is concave. Concavity and the symmetry of the two
groups’ problems imply that the equilibrium is unique and symmetric with A =  = ∗ (a
formal proof is presented in the proof of Proposition 2 in the appendix). Given this, (5) becomes
the system:

⎛

⎞

⎛

⎞
´
³
¡
¢
P
⎜ ∗1 ⎟ ⎜ 12 + Ψ 1  1 (ϕ) +   1 2∗ − 1
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎜  ⎟ = ⎜
⎟

⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟ ⎜
⎟
³
´
⎝
⎠ ⎝
⎠
¡
¢
P
∗
12 + Ψ     (ϕ) +    2∗ − 1

(14)

¡ ¢
This system admits a solution that depends only on exogenous variables ,  and  =1 . The
equilibrium vector ϕ∗ = (∗1   ∗ ) can therefore be taken as a function of only the primitives of

the model.
14

Let q∗ be the Jacobian of q(ϕ) = ( 1 ()   ()) evaluated at ϕ∗ .

Moreover, let  be

the diagonal matrix with th diagonal term equal to  . Given this we can define the following
Modified Bonacich centrality measure in  ,  and coeﬃcients Ψ and ∗ :
£
¡
¢¤−1
bM (φ∗  V G ) =  − ∗  + Ψq∗ · 
· 1

(15)

This formula augments the standard Bonacich formula by incorporating information on the legislators’ preferences and equilibrium pivot probabilities. It is easy to see that when  = 0 for all
b =  .
, it coincides with (4) with  = ∗ and 

Following the same steps as in the previous section, we can now characterize the equilibrium

allocation solely in terms of the modified Bonacichs. We have:
Proposition 2. With policy motivated legislators, there is a unique equilibrium in which the
interest groups choose the same vector of transfers ∗∗ . The vector ∗∗ solves the problem:
max
s∈

nX



o
∗


M
 (    ) ·  ( )

(16)

∗


∗
where M
 (    ) is the Modified Bonacich centrality of  in  ,  with coeﬃcient  = 2Ψ.
∗

It should be stressed that bM (φ  V G ) can be constructed exclusively using the exogenous
fundamentals of the problem , ,  ,  and Ψ, so it can itself be taken as a primitive of the
model. Indeed bM (φ∗  V G ) and the solution s∗∗ can be found following simple steps:
• Solve (14) to find ϕ∗ as function of the primitives (that is , ,  ,  and Ψ).
• Find q∗ exclusively as function of ϕ∗ .
• Compute bM (φ∗  V G ) using (15) and solve (16) for s∗∗ .
A problem with Proposition 2 is that it may be laborious to compute the vector of weights
bM (φ∗  V G ) for large networks since the construction of the pivot probabilities is quite complicated in the presence of many heterogeneous legislators with diﬀerent voting probabilities. The
∗

weights bM (φ  V G ), moreover, do not have an immediate interpretation in terms of the standard measures of network centrality because they do not depend only on the network topology ,
but on preferences and the voting rule as well.
There are two cases in which we should expect the formulas in (15) to be simple. The first is
when the legislators have weak preferences for the policy outcome, so  is small in absolute value
15

for all . This is a simple implication of the fact that (15) is continuous in  , so the modified
Bonacichs converge to the originals as  → 0. Recalling that  = max | |, we have:
Corollary 1. The equilibrium allocation with policy motivated legislators converges to the allocation with oﬃce motivated legislators as  → 0.
The second case is when the number of legislators is large. Intuitively, we should expect pivot
probabilities to be quite low and irrelevant in all cases except when  is very small. In situations
with a suﬃciently large  we should expect the social factors described by the simple Bonacich
centralities to be dominant.

To formalize this point, consider a sequence of networks  with

 legislators of  types  = 1   with associated sequences of equilibria with oﬃce motivated

1


legislators, s∗ = (1
∗   ∗ ), and policy motivated legislators, s∗∗ = (∗∗   ∗∗ ).

In the

case with policy motivated legislators, the legislators’ preferences are descibed by some vector
v = (1    ), where  is the preferences of a legislator of type  = 1  . We have:
Proposition 3. The equilibrium allocation with policy motivated legislators converges to the
allocation with oﬃce motivated legislators as  → ∞.
Proposition 3 make clear that when  is large, the main determinant of the allocation of money
¡
¢
is eﬀectively the centrality of the legislator as measured by the standard Bonacichs  ∗   .

Therefore, when studying the U.S. Congress (which has hundreds of legislators), it is essentially
without loss of generality to use simple Bonacich centralities to predict how interest groups allocate
resources.

4

Evidence from the U.S. Congress

4.1

Empirical model

To make the empirical predictions of the model precise, let us assume we observe data from ̄
congresses ( = {1  }), each comprised of  congressmen, characterized by a network  =
{ } and by a budget for an interest group’s activities  . In equilibrium, each congressman 

receives an oﬀer  from  and an oﬀer  from , both equal to a common value  . Since
the congressmen all vote either for  or , the model predicts that all congressmen receive a
contribution  with probability one.
Propositions 1-3 show that, in equilibrium, the contributions either solve (13) or are close to
this solution.

From the first order necessary and suﬃcient condition of this problem we have
16

 (∗   ) · 0 ( ) =  , where  (∗   ) is the Bonacich centrality of  in Congress  and  is
the Lagrangian multiplier in Congress  associated with a budget  . We now assume that the
utility is a logarithmic function  () = log(). The first order condition can then be written as:
 = (1 ) ·  (∗   )

(17)

Using the definition of the Bonacich centrality, this relation can be re-written in matrix form as:
sr = (1 ) · ( − ∗  )−1 · 1

(18)

where sr = (1    ) and 1 is a vector of ones.
Before bringing (18) to the data, it is useful to note that there is evidence supporting the
assumption that interest groups may have direct preferences on the characteristics of the legislators
whose votes they buy. For example, women in congress receive smaller campaign contributions
from PACs than men, a fact that is probably better explained by interest groups’ biases than by
other factors influencing, say, women’s preferences for contributions. To allow for these potentially
relevant factors, it is useful to consider a slightly more general model in which interest groups
maximize a weighted sum of the voting probabilities, where the weights capture their preferences
for the legislators. Interest group ’s problem becomes:
)
(
X
max
[ ·  (s  s )] 
s ∈

(19)



Following similar steps as in the derivation of (11), we can see that condition (18) becomes:16
sr = ( − ∗  )−1 · θ

(20)

where θ∗ =(1    ) and  =   Condition (20) says that transfers are proportional
to a weighted Bonacich centrality measure with weights .17

This generalization provides us

additional flexibility to control for factors influencing interest groups’ preferences and lets the data
speak about the relative importance of these factors.
To bring (20) to the data, we assume that  is a linear function of a -dimensional vector of
congressman ’s characteristics in congress ,  , with coeﬃcients  = (1    ) :
θ =  · 1 +  β + ² 
16

(21)

The formal steps for this equation are presented in the online appendix.

17

The concept of weighted Bonacich centrality measure is introduced by Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou
[2006].

17

where  = (1    ) is a vector of random variables uncorrelated with  and with mean zero,
describing unobserved heterogeneity in interest group preferences for the various congressmen.
Premultiplying both sides of (20) by ( − ∗  ) and using (21), our first order necessary and
suﬃcient condition generates the following model:
sr =  · 1 + ∗  sr +  β + ² 

(22)

For a sample with ̄ networks, stack up the data by defining s = (01  · · ·  0̄ ) , ² = (01  · · ·  0̄ ) ,
̄
̄
 = diag{ }=1
,  = diag{ }=1
. For the entire sample, the model is:

s =  · 1+∗  s + β + ²

(23)

Once we specify the social networks per Congress  and the relevant vector  of variables
aﬀecting ’s utility in congress , we can estimate , ∗ and β. Model (23) is a spatial autoregressive
model (SAR), the parameters of which can be jointly obtained using Maximum Likelihood (see,
e.g. Anselin, 1988).18
This model allows us to obtain an estimate of the impact of a congressman’s social ties on
the allocation of PACs’ campaign contributions. Recall that ∗ = Ψ, where Ψ is the density of
the unobserved preference parameter  (see (1)) and  is the parameter describing the network
externality (again see (1)).

Since Ψ  0, we the social network matters in the allocation of

political contributions if and only if ∗  0. The key hypothesis to be tested is therefore whether
∗  0.
In Section 4.2, we describe the construction of the networks  , the control variables  and
the data on PAC contributions used for . In Section 4.3, we present the empirical results.

4.2
4.2.1

Data description
Congressional networks

Naturally, the most accurate way to map a congressman’s social ties is to directly observe his social
behavior and habits, or use surveys and direct interviews.

This type of data is unfortunately

available only for a few state assemblies and limited to a few years,19 but insights from this
18 An OLS estimation of this system would not be consistent because of the simultaneity which is endemic in
spatial autoregressive models (see, e.g., Anselin, 1988).
19 Routt [1938] presents a quantitative analysis on the social interactions of the members of the floor of the Illinois
Senate in 1937. Masket [2008] uses data on the seating assignments in the 1949 California Assembly. Caldeira
and Patterson [1987] analyze survey data from the 1965 Iowa legislature. Arnold et al. [2000] present evidence
from a survey of the Ohio legislature in 1993.

18

literature can be used to take advantage of richer and more widely available datasets.
following, we adopt two alternative but complementary approaches.

In the

In the first, we construct

social networks using membership in congressional committees: we postulate that a higher number
of shared committees between two congressmen implies a stronger social connection between them.
This approach is motivated by the fact that, as we will discuss more extensively below, works
studying direct surveys of legislator social networks have identified committee memberships as a
key factor in the formation of social links (Caldeira and Patterson [1987], Caldeira et al. [1993]
and Arnold et al. [2000]). In the second approach, we construct the network using congressmen’s
alumni connections: two congressmen are connected if they graduated from the same educational
institution, using academic institutions attended for both undergraduate and graduate degrees.20
This approach is motivated by studies showing long-lasting eﬀects of shared educational networks.
In particular, Cohen and Malloy (2014) have shown that alumni connections can help explain
voting behavior in the Senate.

The two approaches are complementary: in the first, social

connections are assumed to be generated by shared work experience in Congress; in the second,
by shared educational experiences before being elected. In the remainder of this subsection, we
describe these approaches in greater detail.
Committee membership network Studying social ties in a state legislature for which a detailed survey is available, Caldeira et al. [1993] find that representatives who share committee
assignments are more likely to identify one another as a “friend” or “respected legislator,” and
that the probability of social bonds increases with the number of shared assignments. As noted
by Caldeira et al. [1993], “the business of the legislature largely happens in its committees and
subcommittees, where legislators become familiar with and take a measure of colleagues in a taskoriented environment. Legislators on the same committees or subcommittees share substantive
interests and common workloads, so they have good reasons for establishing a relationship” (p.
12).21
20

In our baseline analysis of Section 4.3, we do not include information on the period of graduation. In an
extension presented in Section 5.1, we show that the results remain qualitatively unchanged if we add information
on the graduation period. Specifically, if we establish a link between two legislators if they graduate in the same
institution within four years and within two years.
21 These findings are confirmed using data from diﬀerent legislatures and years. Arnold et al. [2000] shows that
membership in the same congressional committee is among the most significant predictors of friendship, even after
accounting for factors such as gender, race, party aﬃliation and distance between districts. Masket [2008] shows
that the number of common committees is significant factor determining agreement in voting behavior. Bratton

19

Following this insight, we construct a legislative network using data on congressional committee
assignments published by the Clerk’s Oﬃce of the House of Representatives. We set a link between
two congressmen to be equal to the number of committees in which they both sit.22

We use

information on the last five election cycles, i.e. from the 109th Congress (election cycle 2004)
to the 113th Congress (election cycle 2012). Each network includes roughly 440 Representatives
(including midterm replacements) and about 20 standing committees.
Naturally, legislators’ unobservable characteristics may aﬀect both the amount of contributions
received and committee assignments. If this is the case, the network structure is (at least in part)
endogenous. To control for network endogeneity, we implement an Heckman correction.

The

idea is to estimate an extended version of our model in which we explicity account for a possible
correlation between unobserved factors driving network formation and outcomes. Qu and Lee
(2015) implement a control function approach for the estimation of a spatial autoregressive model
with an endogenous spatial matrix in a geographic context. The strategy is to model proximity
between areas as a function of observed characteristics at a first stage and then add a function of
the first stage residuals to the outcome equation. We apply this framework to the case of a network
model: while Qu and Lee (2015) model links between areas, we model links between politicians.
We consider a standard dyadic model of link formation, used previously in the literature (see,
e.g., Fafchamps and Gubert [2007)], Mayer and Puller [2008)], Lai and Reiter [2000], Apicella,
Marlowe, Fowler and Christakis [2012] and Attanasio, et al. [2012]). When used in our context,
the probability that two politicians  and  are assigned to the same committee is explained by
distance between them in terms of characteristics:

 = 0 +

X



 | −  | +  ,

(24)

where  for  = 1   are ’s characteristics. Let us assume that (2 ) = 2 , that (  ) =
 for all  6=  and that (  ) = 2 ∀ =  and (  ) = 0 ∀ 6= .23

Un-

der such assumptions, the expected value of the error term conditional on the link formation is
and Rouse [2011] show that sharing a committee is a significant factor determining cosponsorship between two
representatives. Interestingly, these works suggest that committee aﬃliation appears to provide a milieu in which
friendship and respect may unfold across party lines.
22 We have also considered alternative ways to constrict the network by weighting links on the basis of party
aﬃliation. Results are robust to these alternative specifications. We discuss these extensions in Section 5.1.
23 These assumptions imply that the selection eﬀect is the same for all politicians (i.e., the correlation between
unobservable characteristics determining link formation and unobservable characteristics driving outcome is the
same for everyone).

20

( |1      −1 ) =  , where  =  2 and  =

P

6=

  If  = 0, the links

between individuals can be treated as exogenous. It is possible, however, that selection on unobservables can generate a positive . In this case, equation (22) can be rewritten as:
sr =  · 1 + ∗  sr +  β + ξr + ² 

(25)

0

where ξ r = (   ) and the term ξ r captures the selectivity bias.24 Following Qu and Lee
(2015), we can now estimate equation (25) after replacing ξr with its estimated counterpart ξbr
from the first stage OLS regression of (24).25

Alumni network Following Cohen and Malloy (2014), we extract information on the universities attended by the congressmen using the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
available online (http://bioguide.Congress.gov/biosearch/biosearch.asp) and construct a membership network based on educational experience.26

Specifically, we match politicians to their

colleges and universities. A tie between two congressmen exists if they graduated from the same
institution.27
Relative to the committee membership network described above, this approach gives us a
network that is exogenous to the political process. To prove that alumni networks are still relevant
even many years after the congressmen attended school, in Table 1 we have estimated a dyadic
regression model (similar to (24)) where links between legislator  and  in the alumni networks,
 are used as explanatory variables for cosponsorship activities in congress, controlling for
similarities in terms of party, gender, state, number of shared committees and Congress fixed
eﬀects. Cosponsorship activity is measured by directional links  equal to the number of bills
24 The extended model (24)-(25) is identified even if the 
 variables used in the link formation and in the
outcome equation completely overlap. The dyad-specific variables in the link formation equation (24) (i.e. nonlinear
functions of  s) are naturally excluded from the outcome equation (25). See also Hsieh and Lee [2016].
25 It should be noted that we are not directly interested in estimating choice probabilities, but only the degree
of correlation between  and  . Therefore, similarly to Qu and Lee [2015], we use a linear probability model for
(24). Inference is complicated because the selectivity term is a generated regressor from a previous estimation and
no closed form solution is available for the ML adjusted standard errors estimates in a network context. We use
bootstrapped standard errors with 1000 replications.
26 We use academic institutions attended for both undergraduate and graduate degrees. In dealing with multiple
campuses, we match each satellite campus as a separate university (e.g., University of California at Los Angeles,
San Diego, and Berkeley are treated as separate universities). We match specialized school to the university. We
drop observations where a specialized school name could match multiple universities (e.g., School of Management).
27 As noted in footnote 21, in Section 5.1 we extend the analysis considering two variations of link definition in
which two legislators are linked if they attended the same institution in overlapping periods.

21

by  that  has cosponsored.28 We thus run the following OLS regression:
 = 0 + 1  +

X



 | −  | +  

(26)

Panel (a) of Table 1 shows that two politicians who attended the same college or university are
more likely to cosponsor the same piece of legislation than two politicians who attended diﬀerent
universities, keeping constant similarities in terms of observed characteristics. The results are
robust to the inclusion of both legislator  and legislator ’s total number of connections. This
check addresses the concern that two politicians may happen to endorse the same bill simply
because they are connected to many politicians.29
It should be highlighed that the alumni network and the committee assignment network capture two alternative channels through which social connections in Congress are formed: as said
before, the first through a shared educational experience; the second through a shared work
experience in Congress. This can be seen from Panel (b) of Table 1, showing the OLS results
of model (26) where the the alumni connections are used as explanatory variables for committee
membership, keeping unchanged the structure of the control variables. In this model specification,
the dependent variable,  , takes value one if the two politician sit in the same committee and
zero otherwise.

We find only a mild association between the two networks in this case. The

regression explains less than 1% of the committee formation process versus about 11% of the
legislative endorsement process. These results are consistent with the idea that the allocation of
politicians into committees is largely beyond the choice of the single politician.30
By using alma mater connections, we are able to link more than fifty percent of congressmen.
As shown in the online appendix (Table A.1), these congressmen do not significantly diﬀer from
the entire sample in terms of characteristics. We only oversample legislators who graduated from
top 10 universities, since they are relatively more likely to be in the Congress. In the following
analysis, we control for attendance at a top-10 university with a dummy variable.
28 To construct the cosponsorship networks we collected all pieces of legislation proposed in the U.S.
House from the 109th-113th Congresses from the Library of Congress data information system, THOMAS
(http://thomas.loc.gov).
29 This finding is in line with Cohen and Malloy’s [2014] results showing that alumni networks help explain voting
patterns of Senators from the 101st to the 110th Congresses.
30 We do not use patterns of cosponsorship to measure network centrality in our analysis precisely because
cosponsorship is determined simultaneously with monetary contributions and is entirely determined by endogenous
choices of the congressmen.

22

4.2.2

Other variables and controls

Control variables The vector of variables  (and the associated matrix ) measures the
susceptibility of a congressman to PAC contributions.

The classic variables used to explain

campaign contributions to legislators in the literature are the degree of electoral competition,
the per capita income in the electoral district, measures of members’ relative “power” inside
the house and indicators of a congressman’s ideology, political party, gender and seniority in his
current committee.31
Information on politicians’ characteristics including gender and party of aﬃliation is provided
by GovTrack.32

Charles Stewart and Jonathon Woon’s website is used to obtain information

on committee appointments, seniority and chairmanship.33

One-year estimates of per capita

income by congressional district are provided by the American Community Survey (ACS). For each
congressman, electoral competition is measured by the margin of victory.34

Each candidate’s

margin of victory is derived from the FEC’s Federal Elections publications. These publications
provide statistics on candidates’ vote shares. Since the publications often omit special election
results, we supplement the FEC reports with information from individual state agencies. The
ideologies of the congressmen are measured using the first dimension of the dw-nominate score
(McCarty et al. [1997]).35 The “power” of the congressman is measured by three variables. First,
we have a dummy variable indicating whether the member is a committee chair.36

Secondly,

we have a dummy variable indicating that the member is on one of the powerful committees
(Ways and Means, Energy and Commerce, Appropriations, Rules or Financial services), in which
31 For electoral competitiveness, the idea is that a close race increases an incumbent’s demand for PAC contributions, producing an exogenous shift in contributions via an increase in the propensity to “sell” services, including
roll call votes. For the “power” of a member, the argument is that groups give more to powerful members because
their support is especially valuable. The political district income is used to capture price diﬀerences in most campaign inputs, such as labor and advertising prices, between districts. The inclusion of the politicians’ ideologies
captures the fact that congressmen with more extreme ideologies are more diﬃcult to persuade.
32 Seniority has been manually adjusted for the few cases in which a congressman changed commission during
the term.
33 See http://web.mit.edu/17.251/www/data page.html#2. This website does not contain information for the
113th Congress. We extract the House of Representative committee roster for the 113th Congress from the website
http://media.cq.com/pub/committees/index.php.
34

Margin of victory as a measure of electoral competition is used by Poole, Romer and Rosenthal [1987], Grier
and Munger [1991] and Romer and Snyder [1994], among others.
35 To isolate this index for one Congress at a time, we used the modified DW-Nominate coordinates developed
by Nokken and Poole [2004]. Data are available at http://voteview.com.
36

A dummy variable for commitee leadership is used in Romer and Snyder [1994].

23

an individual is likely to receive greater PAC contributions (Grier and Munger [1991], [1993]
and Romer and Snyder [1994]). Finally, we include a dummy variable indicating whether the
politician is on one of the committees that is joint with the Senate (Economic, Taxation, Library
or Printing). To control for electoral cycle fixed eﬀects, we include in our analysis four election
cycle dummies, Y06-07, Y08-09, Y10-11, Y12-13. These are intended to control for changes in
the number of PACs over time and changes in nominal and real PAC budgets, as well as for
year-specific factors aﬀecting PAC contributions. We also use the information on the college
attended by each politician to control for unobserved ability. Politicians who graduated from a
top university may be particularly able individuals, and such an ability may also attract campaign
contributions. As mentioned before, we add in the regression a dummy variable which is equal to
one if the politician attended a top-10 university and zero otherwise. In our sample about 6% of
the congressmen attended a top-10 university.37 Table A.1 contains a detailed description of our
data, as well as summary statistics for our sample.
Campaign contributions data. Campaign contributions data from the Federal Election Commission (FEC) files are collected and aggregated by the Center for Responsive Politics (CRP). The
CRP provides details on the date, type, industry to which the PAC is associated and recipient of
each contribution. We consider the total amount of contributions from PACs and reduce the eﬀect
of possible outliers by trimming the distribution at the 1st and 99th percentiles.38 In our data,
the money spent by PACs for a given candidate range from $9519 to $7,178,406, whereas total
spending ranges from $310 million for the 110th Congress to $453 million for the 112th Congress.

4.3

Empirical findings

Column (1) of Table 2 presents the Maximum Likelihood estimates of our model (equation (23))
using the committee membership network.39

The estimates reveal a positive and statistically

significant estimate of ∗ , which confirms the presence of externalities as predicted by our theory.
37

US university ranking is taken by U.S News and World Report available online at http://www.usnews.com/
rankings. The top 10 universities include Princeton University, Harvard University, Yale University, Columbia
University, Stanford University, University of Chicago, Duke University, University of Pennsylvania, John Hopkins
University and Darthmouth College. We report the results that use the most recent ranking (year 2014). Results
using the top 10 dummy based on ranking from diﬀerent years remain qualitatively unchanged.
38 This data has been extensively used in the literature on economics and politics, following Poole and Rosenthal
[1997].
39 We report here the estimates with the more extensive set of controls. In the online appendix, we show the
robustness of the results for alternative sets of controls (see Tables A.2 and A.3).

24

In column (2), we show the estimation results when controlling for network endogeneity in the
committee membership network (model (25)). Here too we find a statistically significant estimate
of ∗ .

It is interesting to note that the estimate of the selection correction term is negative.

This is consistent with the presence of politicians’ unobservable characteristics that are correlated
positively with the contributions received and negatively with the probability of having links. A
politician’s expertise on a specific topic could be an example of such an omitted factor. Indeed,
highly specialized politicians are likely to sit on fewer committees, and politician expertise is likely
to be positively correlated with the contributions received (at least from the interest groups focused
in that area). The last column of Table 2 (column (3)) reports the results when social connections
in Congress are measured using the alumni network. In this case too, the evidence remains highly
supportive of network eﬀects: the estimate of our target parameter ∗ is statistically significant
and positive.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, we find that the eﬀects of the Margin of Victory, Chair, Relevant
Committee and Party are all significant and with the expected sign. A positive eﬀect of Chair and
Relevant Committee confirms the fact that congressmen in positions of leadership and members of
important committees receive more attention from interest groups. The estimated eﬀect of Joint
Committee is also positive, though statistically diﬀerent from zero only when using the Committee
networks. Since the variable Party is equal to 1 when the legislator is Republican, our results shows
that Republicans receive more contributions than Democrats. Among other reasons, this can be
explained by the fact that the Republicans had the majority in all Congresses we consider except
for the first two. A negative eﬀect of the Margin of Victory coeﬃcient suggests that congressmen
who face tight elections have higher needs for campaign finance, are more susceptible to interest
groups’ influence, and therefore receive more money.

We also find a positive and significant

eﬀect of Per Capita Income, indicating that politicians facing higher local prices in campaign
inputs need more money.

Being female is associated with receiving lower contributions, but

this eﬀect is not statistically significant when using the alumni network. The negative eﬀect of
Seniority is consistent with the results in Grier and Munger [1986]. A negative and statistically
significant eﬀect of DW ideology indicates that politicians with more extreme ideologies receive
less money, in line with the idea that they are more diﬃcult to persuade. Perhaps unsuprisingly,
when using the committee network, we find that legislators who studied in top universities receive
more contributions ceteris paribus.
25

The findings discussed above should be contrasted with two benchmarks: the OLS estimates
ignoring the network eﬀects; and estimates using other standard measures of centrality that do not
have a theoretical foundation. With respect to the first benchmark, Table 3 column (1) reports
the OLS estimates of the traditional model where campaign contributions are explained using
legislators’ characteristics and Congress fixed eﬀects, ignoring that congressmen are connected.
In column (3), we report the OLS results for the model with no network eﬀects for the restricted
sample that we use for the alumni network. The important observation is that for both the
committee network and the alumni network, the inclusion of network eﬀects significantly improves
the fit of the model. The relative goodness of fit of the diﬀerent models is measured estimating
both models by maximum likelihood and using the Akaike information criterion (AIC).40 It is
reported in the bottom panel of Table 3. Given a set of candidate models for the data, the preferred
model is the one with the minimum AIC value (see, e.g., Burnham and Anderson [2002]). Table 3
shows that the model with network eﬀects (columns (2) and (4)) outperforms the model with no
network eﬀects (columns (1) and (3)), irrespective of the network definition. We formally test the
model fit increase of the spatial autoregressive model versus the traditional linear regression (i.e.
∗ = 0) using a likelihood ratio test.41

In both cases, the likelihood comparison clearly rejects

the hypothesis that ∗ can be set to 0 (p-value equal to 0.000).
In comparing the estimates of the covariates in the models with and without network eﬀects,
we should note that the interpretation of the coeﬃcients of the control variables in the OLS and
in the ML models are diﬀerent.

When ∗  0, the marginal eﬀect of the -th covariate in

model (22) is not just   but Σ = ( − ∗  )−1 (  ), which is an  ×  matrix with its
( )-th element representing the eﬀect of a change in  on  . Thus, while the OLS model
produces homogeneous estimates for the eﬀects of covariates, the model with network eﬀects
displays marginal eﬀects that are necessarily heterogeneous across individuals.
The second set of benchmarks that we consider are the predictions obtained using other standard measures of network centrality (which are not supported by a theoretical analysis). Table
4 presents OLS estimates of the relationship between PAC electoral contributions and Degree,
40 The AIC is a measure of the relative quality of statistical models for a given set of data. Let  be the maximum
value of the likelihood function for the model; let  be the number of estimated parameters in the model. Then
the AIC value of the model is 2 − 2 ln  (Akaike [1974]).
41 Let  define the log-likelihood of the unrestricted model (column (2)) and  the log-likelihood of the
1
2
restricted model (column (1)), the likelihood ratio test statistic  = 2(1 − 2 ) is asymtotically distributed as
a chi-squared with 1 degree of freedom.

26

Betweenness and Closeness centralities using both network definitions.42

We find that the ef-

fects of Degree and Closeness centralities are not significantly diﬀerent from zero. The eﬀect of
Betweenness is statistically significant in sign for the committee networks, but insignificant in
magnitude and negative. All the control variables have the expected signs, the same as in the
estimates of Table 2. The important observation is that as it is shown by the -squared in the
bottom part of Table 4, the performance of these models with traditional network centralities is
not diﬀerent from the performance of a regression model where PAC contributions are explained
with no reference to the network topology (columns 1 and 5 in Table 4).

5

Discussions and extensions

5.1

Robustness checks: alternative network definitions

Table 5 collects the maximum likelihood estimation results of (23) when we adopt network definitions enriched with additional information. In the first two panels, the committee membership
data is enriched with additional information on party aﬃliation or the role of congressmen in the
legislature. The first column of each panel shows the baseline MLE estimates, while the second
column reports the MLE estimates with the control function correction. In the network presented
in Section 4, congressmen are linked if they belong to the same committee; the intensity of the
link is a count variable representing the number of shared committees, and does not incorporate
information on the party aﬃliations of the linked congressmen. In the first two columns of Table
5, we adopt a Partisanship Weighted Network (PWN) that reflects the fact that two congressmen
from the same party have more opportunities to form a social bond and influence each other.
Specifically, in the PWN, the intensity is doubled when legislators are aﬃliated with the same
party. Using this network, the results of the estimate of (23) are qualitatively the same as in the
previous analysis, though the estimate of ∗ is now larger.
Politicians connected with committee chairs may be more influential than those who are not.
To reflect this fact, in the second panel of Table 5 we adopt a Chairmanship Weighted Network
(CWN) in which the intensity of the   link (i.e., the link describing the influence of  on ) is
doubled when  and  are in the same committee and  is its chairman. The resulting network
42 Degree centrality counts the total number of direct connections. Closeness centrality measures the length of
the average shortest path passing between a node and all the others. The measure is normalized by the degree.
Betweenness is equal to the number of shortest paths from all nodes to all others that pass through that node. See
Jackson [2008] for an introduction and detailed description of these measures.

27

is directional as it reflects asymmetric influences between members of the same committee when
one of the two has a position of leadership. Table 5 shows that our results remain qualitatively
unchanged irrespective of the definition of Congressional network adopted.
The last panel of Table 5 enriches the alumni network by using information on graduation time.
In this definition, two congressmen are connected if they attended the same academic institution
at the same time. We use four-year and two-year windows. Again, the results of the analysis
remain unchanged.

5.2

Multiple interest groups

In the preceding analysis, we maintained the assumption of two interest groups, one for  and
one for . It is natural to extend the results to the case in which we have  interest groups for
 and  for , each endowed with a budget  . Let  be the contribution promised by the
th interest group for  to the th legislator with s = (1    ) and s = (s1   s ).
The problem faced by an interest group  of the  type is similar to (9), with the only diﬀerence
being that now both s− , the choice of all other  − 1 interest groups supporting , and s ,
the choice of all  interest groups supporting , are taken as given.
Following the same steps as above, we can show that, if legislators are oﬃce motivated or if
they are policy motivated and there is suﬃcient uncertainty on their preferences, there is a unique
equilibrium in which all interest groups commit to the same transfer  =  = ∗ for any ,
 and . This implies that the voting probabilities are derived exactly as in Section 3.2. The
analysis is unaﬀected by the size of  because the marginal eﬀect of a contribution on the voting
probabilities is independent of the contributions of other interest groups.43

Assuming, as in

Section 4.1, that the monetary utility is  () = log() and the interest group’s objective is (19),
we have that the total contribution received for voting  in congress  is just  times the formula
in (20): sr =  · ( − ∗  )−1 · θ  . Given (21), we obtain the same spatial autoregressive model
(23) discussed in Section 4.1. Since these values diﬀer from the previous analysis only by a factor
of proportionality, there is no qualitative change in the result and its implications for the empirical
analysis.
43

This can be seen from (6) with oﬃce motivated and (27) with oﬃce and policy motivated.

28

5.3

Alternative objective functions

In the analysis presented above, we assume that interest groups maximize the expected number
of supporters.

This objective function is typically assumed in probabilistic models of electoral

competition (see Lindbeck and Weibull [1987]).

There are, however, environments in which

interest groups care about legislators’ votes only to the extent that it allows them to reach a given
threshold of support (such as a majority). The analysis presented above easily extends to these
cases.
To extend the analysis, let us now assume that the interest groups’ preferences are represented
by a sequence of thresholds (   )=0 for some finite  with 0 = 0 and 0  0 and   +1
and   +1 for all  = 0   − 1, such that ’s utility can be written as a step function:
P
P
P
 (   ( )) =  if   ( ) ∈ (  +1 ] for  ≤  − 1 and  for   ( )   . A special

example of these preferences is when interest groups care only about obtaining a majority. In this
case, the utility is characterized by just one threshold and 1 =

−1
2

for  odd or 1 =


2

for 

even and utility level 1  0 .
Following the same steps as above, it is straightforward to verify that, when legislators are
oﬃce motivated or when they are policy motivated and there is suﬃcient uncertainty on their
preferences, we have a unique equilibrium in which interest groups oﬀer the same monetary contributions s = s = s∗∗ . Also, as before, s∗∗ is characterized as the maximization of a weighted
sum of the monetary utilities:
max
s∈

nX



o
∗


zu
 (    ) ·  ( ) 

¡
¢
∗
 
∗

where bzu (∗  V G ) = zu
 (    ) =1 are weights that depend on     and on the


thresholds z u = (   )=0 (a formal derivation of these weights is presented in Section 5 in

the online appendix). The key observation is that the importance of the thresholds vanishes as
 → ∞. Indeed, as we formally prove in Section 5 in the online appendix, for any z u we have
¡ ∗ ¢
∗

zu
. In this case too, therefore, the equilibrium allocation of transfers
 (    ) → b φ  G
depends only on the Bonacich centralities for large .

5.4

Heterogeneous policies

Another assumption we made in the previous analysis is that legislators vote only on one policy.
In reality, legislators vote on many policies that could be very diﬀerent and attract the attention
29

of diﬀerent sets of interest groups (defense, agriculture, trade, etc.). In these cases, we might have
a set  = {1  } of diﬀerent votes, with policy  = 1   associated with  interest groups
in favor and  against, and a per interest group budget  .
Once again, the analysis is quite similar to the analysis presented above. Assuming logaritmic
utility, it is easy to see that in this environment each interest group interested in policy  ∈ 
makes a transfer s = (1 ) · ( − ∗  )−1 · θ and so the total vector of contributions is
hP
i
P
∗  −1
S =  s =
· θ, that is proportional to ( − ∗  )−1 · θ as in
   · ( −   )
Section 4.1.

6

Conclusions

In this paper, we present a new theory of competitive vote-buying to study campaign contributions when legislators care about the behavior of other legislators to whom they are socially
connected.

The theory predicts that campaign contributions are increasing in the legislators’

Bonacich centralities, a standard measure of centrality in networks.
As a first attempt to bring these predictions to the data, we estimate the model with data
on PAC contributions in the last five Congresses (the 109th-113th). To measure the legislators’
social network and control for endogeneity we propose two approaches. In the first, we exploit the
insight from the political science literature that congressmen become well acquainted while serving
in congressional committees. We therefore construct social networks in which links between two
congressmen are proportional to the number of committees in which they both sit, controlling
for possible unobserved factors driving both committee membership and PAC contributions by
including an Heckman correction term.

In the second approach, we exploit the insight that

educational institutions provide a basis for social networks.

We therefore construct the social

network using the congressmen’s alumni connections: two congressmen are connected if they
graduated from the same institution or if (alternatively) they graduated from the same institution
in the same period.

This approach provides a network that is exogenous by construction to

interest groups’ activities.
With both approaches, we obtain results supporting our theory. As predicted by the theory,
legislators’ Bonacich centralities significantly impact campaign contributions. The results are robust to the inclusion of established determinants of PAC contributions used in previous literature.
Adding information on the topology of the legislators social network significantly improves the fit
30

of the model compared with alternative specifications that ignore this information.
We believe there is significant room for further analysis on the impact of legislators’ social
networks on interest groups’ campaign contributions and other influence activities.

While our

analysis has focused on monetary contributions, it would be interesting to extend the basic theory
to situations in which interest groups oﬀer other types of valuable resources, including expertise
and contacts with other legislators. It would be particularly interesting to allow the interest groups
to aﬀect the network topology by establishing links between legislators, blending our analysis
with Ballester, Calvo-Armengol and Zenou [2006]’s analysis of key players. This would improve
understanding of the extent to which legislators’ social networks aﬀect the activities of lobbyists,
who provide campaign contributions, services, and networking resources in the U.S. Congress.

31

References
Akaike, H. (1974), “A new look at the statistical model identification”, IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control, 19 (6): 716—723.
Akerlof, G. (1980), “A Theory of Social Custom, of Which Unemployment May be One
Consequence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94: 749-75.
Anderson, Gary M., and Robert D. Tollison (1990), “Democracy in the Marketplace,” In
Predicting Politics, edited by W. Mark Crain and Robert D. Tollison. Ann Arbor: Univ.
Michigan Press.
Anselin, Luc (1988), “Lagrange multiplier test diagnostics for spatial dependence and spatial
heterogeneity, ” Geographical Analysis, 20(1): 1-17.
Ansolabehere, S. and J. M. Snyder (1999), “Money and Institutional Power,” Texas Law
Review, 77: 1673-1704.
Ansolabehere, S., J. M. de Figueiredo and J. M. Snyder (2003), “Why Is There so Little
Money in U.S. Politics?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1): 105-130
Apicella, C. L., F. W. Marlowe, J. H. Fowler, and N. A. Christakis (2012), “Social networks
and cooperation in hunter-gatherers,” Nature 481 (7382): 497 - 501.
Asch, S. E. (1951), “Eﬀects of group pressure upon the modification and distortion of judgments,” In H. Guetzkow (Ed.), Groups, leadership and men. Pittsburg, PA: Carnegie Press.
Attanasio, O., A. Barr, J. C. Cardenas, G. Genicot, and C. Meghir (2012), “Risk pooling,
risk preferences, and social networks,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4
(2): 134 - 67.
Arnold L., R. Deen, S. Patterson (2000), “Friendship and Votes: The impact of Interpersonal
Ties on Legislative Decision Making,” State and Local Government Review, 32(2): 142-147.
Austen-Smith, David (1992), “Strategic models of talk in political decision making,” International Political Science Review, 13(1): 45-58.
Austen-Smith, David (1995), “Campaign Contributions and Access,” American Political
Science Review, 89(3): 566-581.
Austen-Smith, David, and Wright, John R. (1992), “Competitive Lobbying for a Legislator’s
Vote,” Social Choice and Welfare, 9(3): 229—57.
Bailey S. and H. Samuel (1952), Congress at Work, New York: Henry Holt and Co.
Baker, R. K. (1980), Friend and Foe in the U.S. Senate, New York: Free Press/Collier
Macmillan.
Baron, D. P. (2006), “Competitive Lobbying and Supermajorities in a Majority-rule Institution,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 108(4): 607-642.
Ballester, C., Calvó-Armengol, A. and Y. Zenou (2006), “Who’s who in networks. Wanted:
the key player,” Econometrica 74(5): 1403-1417.
Bennedsen M. and S. E. Feldmann (2002), “Lobbying Legislatures,” Journal of Political
Economy, 110(4): 919-946
32

Bernheim D. (1994), “A theory of Conformity,” Journal of Political Economy, 102(5): 841877.
Bertrand M., M. Bombardini and F. Trebbi (2014), “Is It Whom You Know or What You
Know? An Empirical Assessment of the Lobbying Process,” American Economic Review,
104(12): 3885-3920.
Besley T. and S. Coate (2001), “Lobbying and Welfare in a Representative Democracy,” The
Review of Economic Studies, 68(1):67-82
Bharathi, S., D. Kempe and M. Salek (2007), “Competitive Influence Maximization in Social
Networks,” Internet and Network Economics Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 4858: 306311.
Blanes i Vidal, J., M. Draca, and C. Fons-Rosen (2012), “Revolving door lobbyists, ” The
American Economic Review, 102(7): 3731-3748.
Blume L., W. Brock, S. Durlauf and R. Jayaraman (2015), “Linear Social Interaction Models,” Journal of Political Economy, 123(2): 444-496.
Bonacich, P. (1987), “Power and centrality: A family of measures, ” American Journal of
Sociology, 92(5): 1170-1182.
Bratton K. and S. Rouse (2011), “Networks in the Legislative Arena: How Groups Dynamics
Aﬀect Cosponsorship,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 36(3): 423-460.
Buchanan, J. M., and G. Tullock (1962), The Calculus of Consent. Ann Arbor: Univ.
Michigan Press.
Burnham, K. P., and Anderson, D. R. (2002), Model Selection and Multimodel Inference: A
Practical Information-Theoretic Approach (2nd ed.), Springer-Verlag
Caldeira, Gregory A., John A. Clark, and Samuel C. Patterson (1993), “Political respect in
the legislature” , Legislative Studies Quarterly, 18(1): 3-28.
Caldeira, Gregory A. and Samuel C. Patterson (1987), “Political Friendship in the Legislature,” The Journal of Politics, 49(4): 953-975.
Calvert, Randall L. (1985), “Robustness of the multidimensional voting model: Candidate
motivations, uncertainty, and convergence, ” American Journal of Political Science, 29(1):
69-95.
Canen N. and F. Trebbi (2016), “Endogenous Network Formation in Congress,” Vancouver
School of Economics, mimeo.
Cho W. and J. Fowler (2010), “Legislative Success in a Small World: Social Network Analysis
and the Dynamics of Congressional Legislation,” The Journal of Politics, 72(1): 124-135.
Clapp, Charles L. (1963), The Congressman: His Work as He Sees It, Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution.
Cohen L., A. Frazzini and C. Malloy (2008), “The Small World of Investing: Board Connections and Mutual Fund Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(5): 951-979.

33

Cohen L. and C. Malloy (2014), “Friends in High Places,” American Economic Journal:
Economics Policy, 6(3): 63-91.
Cotton, C. (2012), “Pay to play politics: Informational lobbying and contribution limits
when money buys access,” Journal of Public Economics, 96: 369-386.
de Figueiredo, John M., and Brian K. Richter (2014), “Advancing the Empirical Research
on Lobbying, ” Annual Review of Political Science, 17: 163-185.
Dal Bo E. (2007), “Bribing Voters,” American Journal of Political Science, 51(4): 789—803.
Dekel, E., M. O. Jackson, and A.Wolinsky (2008), “Vote Buying: General Elections,” Journal
of Political Economy, 116(2): 351—380.
Dekel, Eddie, Matthew O. Jackson, and Asher Wolinsky (2009), “Vote buying: legislatures
and lobbying, ” Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 4(2): 103-128.
Denzau A. and M. Munger (1986), “Legislators and Interest Groups,”American Political
Science Review, 80(1): 89-106.
Deutsch, M., & Gerard, H. B. (1955), “A study of normative and informational social
influences upon individual judgment,” The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
51(3), 629.
Diermeier, D., and R. B. Myerson (1999), “Bicameralism and its consequences for the internal organization of legislatures.”American Economic Review, 89(5):1182-1196.
Dixit, A. (1996), “Special Interest Lobbying and Endogenous Commodity Taxation,” Eastern
Economic Journal, 22(4): 375—388.
Dixit, A., G. Grossman, and E. Helpman (1997), “Common Agency and Coordination: General Theory and Application to Government Policy Making,” Journal of Political Economy,
105: 752—69.
Do Q., Y. Lee and B. D. Nguyen (2016), “Directors as Connectors: The Impact of the
External Networks of Directors on Firms,” mimeo.
Domingos P. and M. Richardson (2001), “Mining the Network Value of Customers,” Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pp. 57-66, San Francisco, CA: ACM Press.
Eulau, H. (1962), Class and Party in the Eisenhower Years, New York: Free Press.
Fafchamps, M. and F. Gubert (2007), “Risk sharing and network formation,” American
Economic Review 97 (2): 75 - 79.
Fowler, J. (2006), Connecting the Congress: A study of cosponsorship Networks, Political
Analysis, 14(4): 456-487.
Fracassi, C. and G. Tate (2012), External networking and Internal Firm Governance. Journal
of Finance, 67 (1):153-194.
Grier, K. B., and M. C. Munger (1986),“The Impact of Legislator’s Attributes on Interest
Group Campaign Contributions,” Journal of Labor Research, 7: 349-61.

34

Grier, K. B., and M. C. Munger (1991), “Committee Assignments, Constituent Preferences,
and Campaign Contributions,” Economic Inquiry, 29(1): 24-43.
Grier, K. B., and M. C. Munger (1993), “Comparing interest group PAC contributions to
House and Senate incumbents, 1980-1986, ” The Journal of Politics, 55(3): 615-643.
Groenert, V. (2010), “Strategic Equilibrium in Social Networks and Games: Theory and
Applications,” Ph. D. Thesis, Vanderbilt University.
Groll, T, and A. Prummer (2016), “Whom to Lobby? Targeting in Political Networks,”
Working Paper, The Cambridge INET Institute.
Groseclose, T. and J. Snyder (1996), “Buying Supermajorities, ” American Political Science
Review, 90: 303—15.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1994), “Protection for Sale,” American Economic Review,
84(4): 833—50.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (2001), Special Interest Politics, Cambridge, Mass., and
London, U.K.: MIT Press.
Guzman, L. (2010), “Strategic Spending in Voting Competitions with Social Networks,”
Working Paper n. 2010-16, Banco de Mexico.
Helpman, E. and T. Persson (2001), “Lobbying and Legislative Bargaining,” Advances in
Economic Analysis and Policy. 1(1): article 3.
Hsieh, C.-S. and L.-F. Lee (2016), “A Social Interaction Model with Endogenous Friendship
Formation and Selectivity,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, forthcoming
Jackson, M.O. (2008), Social and Economic Networks , Princeton University Press.
Jones, S. (1984), The Economics of Conformism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kang, K. (2015), “Policy Influence and Private Returns from Lobbying in the Energy Sector,” Review of Economic Studies, 83 (1): 269-305.
Kang, K. and H. Young You (2016), “Lobbyists as Matchmakers in the Market for Access,”
mimeo, Carnegie Mellon.
Kempe, D., J. Kleinberg, E. Tardos (2003), “Maximizing the spread of influence in a social
network,” Proc. 9th KDD: 137-146.
Kempe, D., J. Kleinberg, E. Tardos (2005), “Influential Nodes in a Diﬀusion Model for Social
Networks.” Proc. 32nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming
(ICALP).
Lai, B. and D. Reiter. (2000), “Democracy, political similarity, and international alliances,
1816-1992,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 44 (2): 203 - 227.
Lindbeck A. and J. Weibull (1987), “Balanced-Budget Redistribution as the Outcome of
Political Competition,” Public Choice, 52:273-97
Mayer, A. and Puller, S.L. (2008), The old boy (and girl) network: social network formation
on university compuses, Journal of Public Economics, 92, 329-347.
35

Masket, S. E. (2008), “Where You Sit is Where You Stand: The Impact of Seating Proximity
on Legislative Cue-Taking,” Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 3: 301-311.
Matthews, D. R., and J. A. Stimson (1975), Yeas and Nays: Normal Decision-Making in
the U.S. House of Representatives. New York: Wiley.
McCarty N., K. T. Poole, H. Rosenthal (1997), Income Redistribution and the Realignment
of American Politics, Washington D.C: AEI Press.
Monsma S. (1966), “Interpersonal Relations in the Legislative System: A Study of the 1964
Michigan House of Representatives.” Midwest Journal of Political Science, 10(3): 350-363.
Nokken, T P. and T. Poole. 2004. ”Congressional Party Defection in American History.”
Legislative Studies Quarterly, 29:545-568, 2004
Patterson S. C. (1959), “Patterns of Interpersonal Relations in a State Legislative Group:
The Wisconsin Assembly.” Public Opinion Quarterly, 23(1): 101-109.
Persson, T. (1998), “Economic policy and special interest politics, ” Economic journal,
108(447): 310-327.
Piketty, Thomas (1994), “Information Aggregation through Voting and Vote Trading.” Manuscript, http://www.jourdan.ens.fr/piketty/fichiers/public/Piketty1994c.pdf.
Poole K. and T. Romer (1985), “Patterns of Political Action Commitee Contributions to
the 1980 Campaigns for the U.S. House if Representatives, Public Choice, 47(1): 63-112.
Poole, K.T., T. Romer and H. Rosenthal (1987), ”The Revealed Preferences of Political
Action Committees,” AEA Papers and Proceeding, 77 : 298-302.
Poole, K.T., and H. Rosenthal (1997), Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call
Voting. New York: Oxford University Press.
Porter, M. A., P. J. Mucha, M.E.J. Newman, and C. M. Warmbrand (2005), “A Network
Analysis of Committees in the U.S. House of Representatives,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 102(20): 7057-7062.
Qu, X. and L. Lee (2015), “Estimating a spatial autoregressive model with an endogenous
spatial weight matrix. ” Journal of Econometrics, 184(2): 209-232.
Rice, S. A. (1927), “The Identification of Blocs in Small Political Bodies, ” American Political
Science Review 21(3): 619-627.
Rice, S. A. (1928), Quantitative Methods in Politics. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Richardson M. and P. Domingos (2002), “Mining Knowledge-Sharing Sites for Viral Marketing,” Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, pp. 61-70), Edmonton, Canada: ACM Press.
Ringe N., J. Nicoll Victor and J. H. Gross (2013), “Keeping Your Friends Close and Your
Enemies Closer? Information Networks in Legislative Politics,” British Journal of Political
Science, 43(3):601-628.
Romer, T. and J. M. Snyder Jr (1994), “An Empirical Investigation of the Dynamics of PAC
Contributions,” American Journal of Political Science, 38(3): 745-769.
36

Ross, L. G. Bierbauer and S. Hoﬀman (1976), ”The Role of Attribution Processes in Conformity and Dissent: Revisiting the Asch Situation,” American Psycologist, 31: 148-157.
Routt, C. G. (1938), “Interpersonal Relationships and the Legislative Process,” The Annals
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 195(1): 129-136.
Snyder, J. M. Jr. (1991), “On Buying Legislatures,” Economics and Politics, 3(2): 93-109.
Snyder, J. M. Jr. (1990), “Campaign Contributions as Investments: The House of Representatives, 1980—1986,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(6): 1195-1227.
Stigler, G. (1971), “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science, 2: 3—21.
Stratmann T. (1992), “Are Contributors Rational? Untangling Strategies of Political Action
Committees, ” Journal of Political Economy, 100(3): 647-664
Stratmann T. (2005), “Some Talk: Money in Politics. A (Partial) Review of the Literature,”
Public Choice, 124: 135-156.
Truman, D. B (1951), The Governmental Process: Political interests and Public Opinion.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Zenou, Y. (2015) “Networks in Economics,” In: J.D. Wright (Ed.), International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2nd Edition, Amsterdam: Elsevier Publisher,
572-581.
Zhang Y, A. J. Friend., A. Traud, M. Porter, J. Fowler and P. Mucha (2008), “Community
Structure in Congressional Cosponsorship Networks,” Physica A, 387 (7): 1705-1712.

37

7
7.1

Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1

The proof for the case with oﬃce motivated legislators is presented in Section 3.1. For the case
with policy motivated legislators, see the online appendix.

7.2

Proof of Propositions 1-2

¢
¡
We prove the result for general  =  1     . This allows us to prove Proposition 2 and then

Proposition 1 as a special case of Proposition 2. Following the same steps as in Section 3.2.1, we
can derive:
ϕ = Ψ( − Ψ ( · q∗ + 2))−1 · ω

(27)

where  is the -dimensional diagonal matrix with th diagonal entry equal to  , q∗ is the
-dimensional matrix with generic   element equal to  as defined in Section 3.2.2. The first
order necessary and suﬃcient condition of the problem solved by interest group  can be written in
matrix form as ϕ · 1 =  , where  is the Lagrangian multiplier of interest group ’s program.
Using (27), we have:
ϕ · 1

=
=

£
¤
Ψ( − Ψ ( · q + 2))−1 · ω · 1
¡
¢
Ψ · ω  ( − ∗  + Ψq∗  )−1 · 1 = 

(28)

⇒ ω  · bM (φ∗  V G ) =  Ψ

for  =  , where for the last equality we used (4) and ∗ = 2Ψ. Note that ω is a vector of
zeros except for its th element that is equal to  0 (∗ ). We can therefore write our necessary and
suﬃcient conditions (10) as:
∗

0 
M
 (    ) ·  ( ) = 

(29)

∗

0 
M
 (    ) ·  ( ) = 

(30)

where, without loss of generality, we have incorporated the constant Ψ in the Lagrangian multipliers. Assume by contradiction that    (respectively,    ), we then must have
P 
P 
 0 ( )   0 ( ) (resp.,  0 ( )   0 ( )) for any , implying
 
 =  (resp.,
P 
P 
 
 =  ), a contradiction. We conclude that there is a unique solution (∗  s∗ )

such that  = ∗ and s = s∗ for  =  .

¥

38

7.3

Proof of Proposition 3

Let (·) be a function that maps agents to their respective groups and let  be the  × 
matrix describing the relationships between the types, so that  = ()() .

We start from

two preliminary results. The first result shows that, when we have a finite number of types, the
Bonacich centralities are well-defined functions of only the shares of the types α and of the matrix
 describing the relationships between the types. We have:
Lemma 3.1. For any  = 1  ,  (∗   ) is equal to () ( α) defined by:
h
i−1
e
b( α) =  + ∗ 
· 1

(31)

e is the  ×  matrix with element   equal to
where b( α) = (1 ( α)   ( α)) and 
P
e
 =   (   ).
¥

Proof. See the online appendix.

P
P
e is a  ×  matrix with bounded elements since e
Note that 
 ≤  e
 ≤   ≤ .

The second preliminary result shows that as  → ∞, the equilibrium pivot probabilities and

the sum of their derivatives converges to zero. For a sequence of equilibria ( ) , let  be the

associated pivot probability of legislator , and 
be the derivative of  with respect to  .

We have:
Lemma 3.2. lim  = 0, lim
→∞

→∞

X

Proof. See the online appendix.

=1

¯  ¯
¯ ¯ = 0, for any , .


¥

To complete the proof, consider a sequence of populations of size  → ∞ in which the network
∗

is  and the share of type  is  →  . We need to show that M
 (    ) → () ( ) for

all  as  → ∞. To keep the notation simple, let e be the Modified Bonacich of an agent of
type . We can write:

e
()

P

P

 ()e + () =1 

P  e
P
()
= 1 +  =1 e
()  + () =1  e e

= 1+

=1

(32)

()
where e
 =   and e is the derivative of the pivot probability of an agent of type ()
X ¯¯ () ¯¯
X ¯
¯
¯  ¯
with respect to the voting probability of a type . Note that
¯ e ¯ =

=1
=1
X ¯
¯
e = Ψ ·
¯  ¯ → 0 as  → ∞. It follows that we can write b
and, by Lemma 3.2,

=1

39

∙
¸−1
h i
e  = (e   e ) , 
e  is the  ×  matrix with element  
e  + ()
 + ∗ 
· 1, where b
1


equal to e
 =   and () is a  ×  matrix with all terms converging to zero as  → ∞.
P
P
e  converges to a positive and bounded  × 
Note that e
 ≤ =1   = =1  ≤ , so 
h
i−1
e  = Ψ  + ∗ 
e Taking the limit as  → ∞, we obtain: lim→∞ b
e
matrix .
· 1. It follows
∗

that M
 (    ) → () ( α) for all  as  → ∞ as requested.

40

¥

TABLE 1. Predictive power of alumni network for cosponsorship and committee networks

Link in alumni network
(gij,A=1)

Dep. Var.:
Link in cosponsorship network
(gij,L=1)
OLS
OLS
OLS

OLS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.180***
(0.008)

0.069***
(0.007)

0.069***
(0.007)

0.006
(0.006)

0.012*
(0.007)

0.012*
(0.007)

0.284***
(0.002)
-0.0001
(0.002)
0.255***
(0.004)
0.083***
(0.002)

0.285***
(0.002)
-0.0001
(0.002)
0.254***
(0.004)
0.087***
(0.002)

-0.007***
(0.001)
-0.006***
(0.001)
-0.024***
(0.003)

-0.007***
(0.001)
-0.006***
(0.002)
-0.025***
(0.003)

Same party (1=yes)
Same gender (1=yes)
Same state (1=yes)
N. of shared committees

Dep. Var.:
Link in committee network
(gij,C=1)
OLS
OLS

Intercept

0.362***
(0.002)

0.188***
(0.003)

0.182***
(0.002)

0.204***
(0.002)

0.213***
(0.002)

0.213***
(0.002)

Legislator i connections

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Legislator j connections
Time dummies

No
Yes

No
Yes

Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

R2

0.008

0.11

Yes
0.11

0.002

0.003

0.003

N.obs.

244,519

244,519

244,519

242,735

242,735

242,735

Notes: OLS estimated coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are reported. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the
10, 5 and 1 percent levels.

TABLE 2. Main estimation results
Dep. Var.: PAC contributions ($mil)
Committee network

Alumni network

MLE

MLE-corrected

MLE

(1)

(2)

(3)

Φ

0.2088 ***
(0.0697)

0.2165***
(0.0703)

0.0837***
(0.0262)

Party (1=Republican)

0.1443**
(0.0573)

0.1473***
(0.0011)

0.2212***
(0.0801)

Gender (1=Female)

-0.0950*
(0.0535)

-0.09472***
(0.001)

-0.0685
(0.0761)

Chair (1=Yes)

0.4006***
(0.0967)

0.3959***
(0.0020)

0.4759***
(0.1321)

Seniority

-0.0154***
(0.0034)

-0.0153***
(0.00001)

-0.0169***
(0.0047)

Margin of Victory

-0.8972***
(0.0885)

-0.8959***
(0.0019)

-0.7793***
(0.1202)

Per capita Income

0.0061**
(0.0025)

0.0062***
(0.00004)

0.0067*
(0.0035)

DW_ideology

-1.0774***
(0.1241)

-1.0817***
(0.0031)

-1.1171***
(0.1670)

Relevant Committee
(1=Yes)

0.1037**
(0.0413)

0.0998***
(0.0007)

0.1135**
(0.0575)

Joint Committee (1=Yes)

0.1694**
(0.0861)

0.1669***
(0.0016)

0.0810
(0.1128)

Top 10 university
(1=Yes)

0.0581
(0.0809)

0.0579***
(0.0011)

0.0790
(0.0900)

-0.1132***
(0.0016)

Unobservables (ψ)
Intercept
Time dummies

1.3019***
(0.1072)
Yes

1.2949***
(0.0629)

1.2895***
(0.1330)

Yes

Yes

2,128
2,128
1,166
N. obs.
Notes: ML estimated coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are reported. In column (2)
standard errors are bootstrapped with 1000 replications. A precise definition of control variables
can be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
levels.

TABLE 3. Model comparisons

No network effects

No network effects

OLS

Committee
network
MLE

OLS

Alumni
network
MLE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.2165***
(0.0703)

Φ

0.0837***
(0.0262)

Party (1=Republican)

0.1568***
(0.0576)

0.1473***
(0.0011)

0.2157***
(0.081)

0.2212***
(0.0801)

Gender (1=Female)

-0.0944*
(0.054)

-0.09472***
(0.001)

-0.0672
(0.0771)

-0.0685
(0.0761)

Chair (1=Yes)

0.3667***
(0.097)

0.3959***
(0.0020)

0.482***
(0.1336)

0.4759***
(0.1321)

Seniority

-0.0143***
(0.0034)

-0.0153***
(0.00001)

-0.0178***
(0.0048)

-0.0169***
(0.0047)

Margin of Victory

-0.9233***
(0.0893)

-0.8959***
(0.0019)

-0.7757***
(0.1217)

-0.7793***
(0.1202)

Per capita Income

0.0059**
(0.0026)

0.0062***
(0.00004)

0.0066*
(0.0036)

0.0067*
(0.0035)

DW_ideology

-1.0948***
(0.1251)

-1.0817***
(0.0031)

-1.1011***
(0.169)

-1.1171***
(0.1670)

Relevant Committee
(1=Yes)

0.1143***
(0.0415)

0.0998***
(0.0007)

0.1085*
(0.0582)

0.1135**
(0.0575)

Joint Committee
(1=Yes)

0.1704*
(0.087)

0.1669***
(0.0016)

0.07
(0.1142)

0.0810
(0.1128)

Top 10 university
(1=Yes)

0.0559
(0.0818)

0.0579***
(0.0011)

0.1037
(0.0907)

0.0790
(0.0900)

1.3531***
(0.1329)

1.2895***
(0.1330)

-0.1132***
(0.0016)

Unobservables (ψ)
1.4642***
(0.0948)

Intercept
Time dummies
AIC

1.2949***
(0.0629)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

5686.323

5679.196

3201.537

3193.922

Lik-ratio test (ϕ=0)
11.127 ***
9.615***
p-value
[0.003]
[0.001]
2,128
1,166
N. obs.
2,128
1,166
Notes: OLS estimated coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are reported in column (1) and (3). ML
estimated coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are reported in columns (2) and (4). A precise definition
of control variables can be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
levels. Lik-ratio test ~𝜒1

TABLE 4. Explicative power of traditional network measures
Dep. Var.: PAC contributions ($mil)
Alumni network

Committee network
OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Centrality Measure:
0.0004
(0.0003)

Degree

-0.0018
(0.0053)
-4.9e-05*
(2.9e-05)

Between

-3.2e-05
(5e-05)

0.1568***
(0.0576)
-0.0944*
(0.054)
0.3667***
(0.097)
-0.0143***
(0.0034)
-0.9233***
(0.0893)
0.0059**
(0.0026)
-1.0948***
(0.1251)
0.1143***
(0.0415)
0.1704*
(0.087)
0.0559
(0.0818)
1.4642***
(0.0948)

0.1497***
(0.0578)
-0.0974*
(0.0541)
0.3904***
(0.0986)
-0.0153***
(0.0035)
-0.9146***
(0.0896)
0.0059**
(0.0026)
-1.0835***
(0.1253)
0.1364***
(0.0448)
0.179**
(0.0872)
0.0567
(0.0818)
1.4737***
(0.0949)

0.1582***
(0.0576)
-0.0925*
(0.054)
0.3555***
(0.0972)
-0.0136***
(0.0035)
-0.9231***
(0.0893)
0.0059**
(0.0026)
-1.0982***
(0.125)
0.1241***
(0.0419)
0.1677*
(0.0869)
0.0538
(0.0818)
1.1448***
(0.275)

0.5902
(0.4711)
0.1561***
(0.0576)
-0.0967*
(0.0541)
0.3789***
(0.0975)
-0.0149***
(0.0035)
-0.919***
(0.0894)
0.0059**
(0.0026)
-1.0943***
(0.125)
0.1402***
(0.0465)
0.1767**
(0.0871)
0.0591
(0.0818)
1.4642***
(0.0948)

Time dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R2

0.148

0.149

0.148

0.148

0.148

0.148

0.148

0.148

N. obs.

2,128

2,128

2,128

2,128

1,166

1,166

1,166

1,166

Closeness
Party (1=Republican)
Gender (1=Female)
Chair (1=Yes)
Seniority
Margin of Victory
Per capita Income
DW_ideology
Relevant Committee (1=Yes)
Joint Committee (1=Yes)
Top 10 University (1=Yes)
Intercept

0.2157***
(0.081)
-0.0672
(0.0771)
0.482***
(0.1336)
-0.0178***
(0.0048)
-0.7757***
(0.1217)
0.0066*
(0.0036)
-1.1011***
(0.169)
0.1085*
(0.0582)
0.07
(0.1142)
0.1037
(0.0907)
1.3531***
(0.1329)

0.2145***
(0.0811)
-0.065
(0.0773)
0.4799***
(0.1338)
-0.0177***
(0.0048)
-0.7783***
(0.1219)
0.0066*
(0.0036)
-1.0969***
(0.1695)
0.1095*
(0.0583)
0.0707
(0.1142)
0.1113
(0.0934)
1.3641***
(0.1367)

0.2148***
(0.0811)
-0.065
(0.0772)
0.4785***
(0.1338)
-0.0177***
(0.0048)
-0.7804***
(0.1219)
0.0067*
(0.0036)
-1.1012***
(0.1691)
0.1091*
(0.0582)
0.0706
(0.1142)
0.1154
(0.0926)
1.3587***
(0.1333)

0.5903
(0.4771)
0.1561***
(0.0576)
-0.0967*
(0.0541)
0.3789***
(0.0975)
-0.0149***
(0.0035)
-0.919***
(0.0894)
0.0059**
(0.0026)
-1.0943***
(0.125)
0.1402***
(0.0465)
0.1767**
(0.0871)
0.0591
(0.0818)
1.1448***
(0.275)

Notes: OLS Estimated coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are reported. A precise definition of control variables can be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.

TABLE 5. Robustness checks
Committee network weighted by
Political affiliation
Chairmanship
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Alumni network with graduation within
4 years
2 years
(5)
(6)

Φ

0.2486***
(0.0656)

0.2588***
(0.0755)

0.3575***
(0.0866)

0.2152***
(0.0745)

0.07700***
(0.0290)

0.06694**
(0.0306)

Party (1=Republican)

0.1387**
(0.0571)

0.1415***
(0.0015)

0.1513***
(0.0568)

0.1472***
(0.0011)

0.2894***
(0.103)

0.23436**
(0.1188)

Gender (1=Female)

-0.0928*
(0.0534)

-0.0930***
(0.0013)

-0.0919*
(0.0532)

-0.0948***
(0.0011)

-0.1291
(0.0918)

-0.18105*
(0.1023)

Chair (1=Yes)

0.3988***
(0.0963)

0.3933***
(0.002)

0.3736***
(0.0954)

0.3876***
(0.002)

0.4843***
(0.1684)

0.48828***
(0.1813)

Seniority

-0.0153***
(0.0034)

-0.0152***
(0.00004)

-0.0147***
(0.0034)

-0.0153***
(0.00004)

-0.0133**
(0.0057)

-0.01158*
(0.0064)

Margin of Victory

-0.8988***
(0.0883)

-0.8985***
(0.0021)

-0.8846***
(0.088)

-0.8959***
(0.0021)

-0.7064***
(0.148)

-0.63747***
(0.1687)

Per capita Income

0.0062**
(0.0025)

0.0062***
(1e-04)

0.0063**
(0.0025)

0.0062***
(0.0535)

0.0059
(0.0043)

0.00516
(0.0046)

DW_ideology

-1.0619***
(0.1239)

-1.0664***
(0.0037)

-1.0818***
(0.1233)

-1.0817***
(0.0029)

-1.1594***
(0.2159)

-1.02709***
(0.2484)

Relevant Committee (1=Yes)

0.1017**
(0.0412)

0.0970***
(0.00008)

-0.0992**
(0.0411)

0.0995***
(0.00009)

0.2207***
(0.0715)

0.24384***
(0.0801)

Joint Committee (1=Yes)

0.1664*
(0.0859)

0.1628***
(0.0019)

0.1609*
(0.0856)

0.1672***
(0.0022)

0.1665
(0.1412)

0.05271
(0.1627)

Top 10 university (1=Yes)

0.0592
(0.0808)

0.0585***
(0.0019)

0.0596
(0.0805)

0.0581***
(0.0014)

0.1427
(0.0993)

0.17826*
(0.1068)

1.1913***
(0.1674)
Yes

1.11578***
(0.185)
Yes

-0.1242***
(0.0020)

Unobservables (ψ)
Intercept

1.26805***
(0.1062)

Time dummies

Yes

1.2608***
(0.0679)
Yes

-0.1158***
(0.0019)
0.2055***
(0.0624)

1.2966***
(0.0672)

Yes

Yes

2,128
767
597
2,128
2,128
2,128
N. obs.
Notes: ML estimated coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are reported. In columns (2) and (4) standard errors are bootstrapped with 1000 replications. A
precise definition of control variables can be found in Table A.1. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.

