NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NECESSITY AS THE MOTHER OF INVENTION:
MONETARY POLICY AFTER THE CRISIS
Alan S. Blinder
Michael Ehrmann
Jakob de Haan
David-Jan Jansen
Working Paper 22735
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22735

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016

Prepared for the 64th Panel Meeting of Economic Policy in Florence, 14-15 October 2016. The paper
presents results from a survey among heads of central banks and academic economists. We are very
grateful for all their contributions. We also thank the editors, our referees, Ben Bernanke, Chris Sims,
Christiaan Pattipeilohy, Gabriele Galati, Jan Willem van den End, Klaus Adam, Marcel Fratzscher,
Mark Watson, Mervyn King, and Richhild Moessner as well as seminar and conference participants
at the Bank of Canada, de Nederlandsche Bank, the European Central Bank, the 48th MMF Group
Annual Conference, Brunel University and the University of Lisbon for thoughtful comments. We
thank Henk van Kerkhoff and Mario Cannella for statistical assistance. This paper was written before
the second author joined the European Central Bank. Views expressed in this paper do not necessarily
coincide with those of the European Central Bank, de Nederlandsche Bank, the Eurosystem, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The Managing Editor in charge of this paper is Refet Gürkaynak.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Alan S. Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Jakob de Haan, and David-Jan Jansen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Necessity as the Mother of Invention: Monetary Policy after the Crisis
Alan S. Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Jakob de Haan, and David-Jan Jansen
NBER Working Paper No. 22735
October 2016
JEL No. E52,E58
ABSTRACT
We ask whether recent changes in monetary policy due to the financial crisis will be temporary or
permanent. We present evidence from two surveys—one of central bank governors, the other of
academic specialists. We find that central banks in crisis countries are more likely to have
resorted to new policies, to have had discussions about mandates, and to have communicated
more. But the thinking has changed more broadly—for instance, central banks in non-crisis
countries also report having implemented macro-prudential measures. Overall, we expect central
banks in the future to have broader mandates, use macro-prudential tools more widely, and
communicate more actively than before the crisis. While there is no consensus yet about the
usefulness of unconventional monetary policies, we expect most of them will remain in central
banks’ toolkits, as governors who gain experience with a particular tool are more likely to assess
that tool positively. Finally, the relationship between central banks and their governments might
well have changed, with central banks “crossing the line” more often than in the past.
Alan S. Blinder
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
blinder@princeton.edu
Michael Ehrmann
European Central Bank
D-60640 Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
michael.ehrmann@ecb.int

Jakob de Haan
De Nederlandsche Bank
Westeinde 1
PO Box 98
1000 AB Amsterdam
The Netherlands
and University of Groningen, The Netherlands
and CESifo, Munich, Germany
jakob.de.haan@rug.nl
David-Jan Jansen
De Nederlandsche Bank
Westeinde 1
PO Box 98
1000 AB Amsterdam
The Netherlands
d.jansen@dnb.nl

1. INTRODUCTION
The global financial crisis has had a profound impact on the practice of monetary policy in a
range of countries. Due to the speed and force of developments in financial markets and of the
economy more broadly, monetary policymakers rarely had the luxury of performing extensive
ex ante analyses of prospective changes in their responsibilities, instruments, or
communications. Necessity was often the mother of invention.
The key question today is to what extent these changes will prove to be temporary, primarily
motivated by the financial crisis, or whether we are seeing permanent changes in the practice
of monetary policy. These are not easy questions to answer in 2016 because the crisis is still
recent—indeed, it is arguable that it continues in some countries—and since few, if any,
central banks have completed their “exit” from the extraordinary policies induced by the
crisis.
In this paper, we aim to shed light on this question primarily via two new (and almost
identical) surveys of opinion—one of governors of central banks, the other of academic
specialists. 1 We concentrate on what, to us, seem to be the four main sub-questions: Have
there been important, and lasting, changes in central bank mandates, monetary policy
instruments, central bank communications, and the place of the central bank within the
government? In addition to the survey data, we take stock of the findings of the academic
literature and, here and there, add our own opinions.
To collect the views of central bank governors and academics, we conducted two surveys
between February and May 2016. In the first survey, we contacted the heads of 95 central
banks via e-mail with a questionnaire consisting of 13 questions. 2 In all, 55 questionnaires
were returned to us, for a gratifying (these days) response rate of 58%. Concerning
1

In related survey work, Siklos (2016) reports results for 39 central banks, while Carré et al. (2013) report results for 15
central bankers and 31 (mainly European) economists. Siklos (2016) examines to what extent central banks have changed
their communication strategy since 2007. He concludes that while differences between inflation targeting and non-inflation
targeting central banks persist, these differences have become smaller. He also finds that inflation targeters put more
emphasis on communicating about macro-prudential policies than non-inflation targeters. This result is in line with our
finding that inflation targeters are more likely to adopt macro-prudential policies than non-inflation targeters. Carré et al.
(2013) analyse to what extent the pre-crisis consensus on monetary policy making has changed since the crisis. In line with
our findings, they report that central bankers are generally less eager than academics to permanently adopt changes in
monetary policy introduced in response to the financial crisis.
2
The questionnaires are available in an appendix. We did not contact the heads of National Central Banks from the euro area,
nor the Presidents of the regional Federal Reserve Banks.

1

backgrounds, 16 of the completed questionnaires came from governors of banks in advanced
economies (AE), 32 from BIS members, 20 from institutions that used inflation targeting prior
to the financial crisis and 12 from countries that were hit by the financial crisis according to
the database of Laeven and Valencia (2013) (Table 1). 3
For the second survey, we sent a similar questionnaire to 401 academic economists from the
relevant research programs of the NBER and the CEPR. 4 We received 159 questionnaires,
which corresponds to a disappointing response rate of just below 40%. Of the responding
academics, 101 currently reside in the U.S. (though many of those are not native Americans),
while 31 are located in the euro area, 14 are in the U.K., and 13 are in a range of other (mainly
European) countries. It is worth emphasizing that while the academic sample is dominated by
respondents from the U.S., the euro area, and the U.K., the central bank sample is not. For this
reason, we sometimes report tabulations that try to “match” the geographies better. We also
tracked the backgrounds of our responding academics. Most have been trained in the United
States: 84% hold a U.S. PhD. Around a quarter have previously worked in a central bank. In
contrast to the central bank governors, most academic respondents (82%) are residents and
citizens in countries that were hit by the financial crisis.
Two methodological points about surveying in general, and surveying central bank
governors in particular, bear emphasis—as we know from questions we have received from
readers and seminar participants. The first is that survey instruments must be brief and the
questions easy for respondents to answer else the response rate will be extremely low. Our
academics’ questionnaire could be completed easily in five minutes, maybe in three, and yet
the response rate didn’t reach 40%. Second, you cannot ask central bank heads sensitive
questions, even if you guarantee confidentiality (which we did). They are a tight-lipped group
that knows how to keep secrets. So we restricted ourselves to questions that, we imagined,
central bankers would probably be willing to answer in public. 5
With that in mind, here are our key findings: Necessity has indeed been the trigger for many
central bank inventions—central banks in crisis countries are much more likely to have
resorted to new policies, to have had discussions about their mandates, to have communicated
3

These subgroups overlap, of course.
We include three NBER Programs: Economic Fluctuations and Growth, International Finance and Macroeconomics, and
Monetary Economics. We also include three CEPR Programme Areas: International Macroeconomics and Finance, Monetary
Economics and Fluctuations, and Macroeconomics and Growth.
5
We think we succeeded. We didn’t get many blanks.
4

2

more and to have received criticism. But the thinking has changed more broadly—for
instance, central banks in non-crisis countries are also likely to have reconsidered their
mandate or to have implemented macro-prudential measures. Based on the surveys, we
hypothesize that central banks in the future will have broader mandates, use macro-prudential
tools more widely, and communicate more than before the crisis. Even though there is not yet
an agreement about the future use of unconventional monetary policy tools, we think that
most of them will remain in central banks’ toolkits, in particular because central bank
governors who gained experience with a particular tool are considerably more likely to assess
that tool positively. Finally, the relationship between the central banks and their governments
might well have changed, with central banks “crossing the line” more routinely in the future.
But this is conjecture; only the future will tell.
Table 1. Details on survey response
Governors
Africa
Americas
Asia and Oceania
Europe
Advanced economy a
BIS member
Inflation targeter b
Country affected by crisis c
Academics d
Euro area
United Kingdom
United States
Other countries
Female
U.S. PhD
Central bank experience e
Monetary economist f
EME background g
Full crisis exposure h

Received
55

159

8
11
18
18
16
32
20
12
31
14
101
13
18
134
41
81
17
131

Response rate
57.9%

39.7%

Notes: a Based on IMF WEO classification. b Countries that introduced inflation targeting before 2007. Based
on Hammond (2012). c According to the Systemic Banking Crisis database by Laeven and Valencia (2013). d
Country classification refers to place of main residence. e Prior work experience in central banks, at least at the
Economist level, not including research visits or consultancies. f Member of NBER program Monetary
Economics or CEPR program Monetary Economics and Fluctuations. g Residence or citizenship in an emerging
market economy. h Residence and citizenship in countries that were affected by the crisis. Source: Authors’
calculations based on survey conducted in 2016.
3

Having said that, it is important to recognize that the world of central banking—which
stretches far beyond the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of
England, and the Bank of Japan—did not change nearly as much as many academic
discussions (which concentrate on these four) might lead you to believe. In particular, in
many countries, unconventional monetary policies were not considered, and central banks
have not been under extensive scrutiny and criticism. On the other hand, those four central
banks cover almost half of the world’s GDP (World Bank, 2015), making them especially
interesting “special cases.”
Finally, our results suggest that there are some important differences between the views of
academics and central bank heads. First, while many scholars typically support keeping most
of the unconventional policies in central banks’ toolkits, central bank governors are
considerably more skeptical, often saying that it is “too early to judge.” While those central
bank governors who have gained hands-on experience with unconventional tools tend to
assess these tools more positively, the cautious tone of many central bank governors about the
future use of unconventional tools suggests that they still perceive a lot of uncertainty about
their costs and benefits. Second, although governors and academics agree that central bank
communication has become more frequent since the crisis, and that these changes are here to
stay, or might even go further, there are differences on the usefulness of forward guidance as
a policy and a communication tool. Academics have a strong preference for data-based
forward guidance, whereas the most popular form of forward guidance among central bank
governors is purely qualitative. Third, whereas central governors feel that they did not receive
a lot of criticism for acting politically or crossing the line into the political realm during the
crisis, most academic respondents think that central banks were criticized for crossing the line
into politics.
2. CENTRAL BANK GOALS
The global financial crisis challenged important elements of the pre-existing consensus that
monetary policy should be aimed at price stability and should use just one instrument: a shortterm policy interest rate. But no new consensus has yet been reached. In our view, several
elements of the pre-crisis consensus, such as central bank independence and the focus on

4

long-term price stability, remain valid today. Other elements, however, may have to be
rethought.

Figure 1. Discussions about the central bank mandate outside of the central bank

Notes: The left-hand chart shows whether, according to central bank governors, a discussion took place outside
the central bank about changing the mandate. The right-hand side chart shows the changes that were discussed
(in % of the respondents who answered “Yes”). The explanations provided in the survey indicate that when
governors answer “other”, they mostly refer to discussions on adding financial stability. Source: Authors’
calculations based on a survey conducted in 2016.

To assess central bankers’ view on whether their mandates had changed, we asked two
questions in our survey. The first pertained to external opinions and influences: “Did the
world financial crisis of 2007-2009 and/or its aftermath create discussions in your country
but outside your central bank about whether it would be desirable to modify the bank’s
mandate in any way? If “Yes,” were those discussions about: (please check as many as
apply)”. As the left-hand chart in Figure 1 shows, the answers to the “yes or no” question
literally comprised a bottle half full and half empty. Exactly half the governors answered
“yes,” which surprised us a bit on the low side.
We asked the same two questions about discussions within central banks: “Did the world
financial crisis of 2007-2009 and/or its aftermath create discussions inside your central bank
about whether it would be desirable to modify the bank’s mandate in any way? (please check
one)” and “If “Yes,” were those discussions about: (please check as many as apply).” (See
Figure 2.) Here we found—again, perhaps surprisingly—a bit more interest in changing the
mandate within than outside the central bank. (Aren’t central bankers stodgy about change?)

5

Answers from academics were broadly similar to a question that asked, “Did the world
financial crisis of 2007-2009 and/or its aftermath lead you to think that it would be desirable
to modify the mandate of your country’s central bank in any way? (please check one)” and “If
“Yes,” would these modifications apply to: (please check as many as apply).” Notice that the
question here is about desirability—a somewhat sterner test than just having discussions. The
academics were a bit less enamored of changing their central banks’ mandate (54%); see
Table A1 in the Appendix for details. 6

Figure 2. Discussions about the central bank mandate inside the central bank

Notes: The left-hand chart shows whether, according to central bank governors, a discussion took place inside
the central bank about changing the mandate. The right-hand side chart shows the changes that were discussed
(in % of the respondents who answered “Yes”). The explanations provided in the survey indicate that when
governors answer “other”, they mostly refer to discussions on adding financial stability. Source: Authors’
calculations based on a survey conducted in 2016.

To dig a bit deeper, we tried to explain the answers of the governors (where we have
substantial cross-country variation) based on country and central bank characteristics, and
those of the academics (where we only have little cross-country variation) based on individual
characteristics. We created dummy variables equal to one if there has been a discussion
inside/outside the central bank about its mandate, and if the academic finds it desirable to
modify the mandate, and modeled each as a probit.
For the governors’ answers, we considered the following explanatory variables:
•

A dummy indicating advanced economies, according to the IMF classification;
6

We used the possibly-ambiguous wording “your country” without telling the academics whether that meant their country of
residence or their country of origin. But the questionnaire did instruct them, “If your country of residence is in the euro area,
please interpret this phrase as referring to the European Central Bank.” So we imagine most used their country of residence.

6

•

Trade openness, measured as the ratio of exports and imports to GDP (Source: World Bank);

•

A dummy indicating countries hit by the financial crisis, according to the database of Laeven
and Valencia (2013);

•

A dummy indicating inflation targeters, based on Hammond (2012);

•

A dummy for countries with flexible exchange rates, according to the IMF Annual Report on
Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions;

•

The level of central bank independence in 2010, according to Bodea and Hicks, (2015); and

•

The change in their measure of central bank independence between 1995-2007 and 20082010. 7
Limited as we are by the small sample size, we first run univariate regressions (reported in
Table A2 in the Appendix). Based on these results, we select a small set of regressors to
include in multivariate regressions. Table 2 reports marginal effects from two probits using
three regressors. We find a 38 percentage point higher likelihood that there had been external
discussions about the central bank mandate in countries that were hit by the crisis. That is not
surprising, but there is no significant effect on internal discussions (the marginal effect is
about half as large and not statistically significant). Likewise, the marginal effects of being an
advanced economy or an inflation targeter are insignificant for either external or internal
discussions.
Table 2. Determinants of discussions about central bank mandates
Mandate discussions
Mandate discussions
outside the central bank
inside the central bank
Advanced economy
0.151
-0.069
(0.140)
(0.147)
Hit by crisis
0.384***
0.207
(0.148)
(0.158)
Inflation targeting
-0.058
-0.179
(0.133)
(0.130)
Observations
55
55
2
Pseudo R
0.119
0.042

Notes: The table reports marginal effects of a probit model that explains governors’ responses as to whether or
not there has been a discussion about the central bank mandate. Numbers in parentheses denote robust standard
errors. *** identifies statistical significance at the 1% level. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey
among central bank governors conducted in 2016.

7

The number of observations in regressions using central bank independence variables drops due to missing data for some
countries.

7

With the academics’ responses, we have a much larger sample size, and so run only
multivariate regressions, including the following (mostly sourced from respondents’ CVs as
provided on their websites):
•

Female (dummy variable for female respondents)

•

Year of PhD, a proxy for age

•

Dummy for a PhD from a U.S. university, to proxy for the type of education

•

Central bank experience: A dummy for respondents who, at some point in their career, have
worked in a regular position in a central bank, at the Economist level or above

•

Monetary economist: A dummy variable for members of the NBER or CEPR monetary
program

•

Emerging market background: A dummy equal to one if the respondent resides in an EME, or
has EME citizenship 8

•

Full crisis exposure: A dummy equal to one if the respondent both resides in and is a citizen
of a country hit by the crisis 9

•

“Country” fixed effects for the United States (benchmark category), the UK, the euro area,
and other countries
To save space, and because there are only few significant variables, the results for
academics are reported in Table A3 in the Appendix. Having had central bank experience
makes respondents 18 percentage points more likely to have reconsidered the central bank’s
mandate. Residents of the euro area or the United Kingdom are 28 and 44 percentage points
more likely than their U.S. counterparts to answer affirmatively.
Discussing the mandate is one thing, but what changes are governors and academics
thinking about? Looking at the second part of our questions to the governors (the right-hand
panels of Figures 1 and 2), the change most frequently discussed, both internally and
externally, is adding a financial stability objective to the mandate. 10 Changing the inflation
target was also mentioned by a number of governors. (Academic respondents were a bit more
enamored of changing (presumably raising) the inflation target than central bankers; see Table
8

We collect EME residence and EME citizenship in one variable, as there is only 1 respondent who resides in an EME. By
adding the citizenship criterion we identify another 16 respondents with some EME background.
9
As with the EME background variable, we combine a residence and citizenship criterion in one variable to get more
observations. There are only 5 respondents who reside in a country that was not hit by the crisis. By adding the citizenship
criterion we identify another 23 respondents who were not fully exposed to the crisis, as their country of citizenship was not
hit by the crisis.
10
One respondent mentioned adding economic growth and two referred to nominal income targeting.

8

A1 in the Appendix.) That these two answers showed up most prominently is hardly
surprising. After all, there has been considerable academic and policy debate over each—
which we now briefly summarize.

2.1. Increase the inflation target?
Price stability remains the primary objective of most central banks, and our survey results
show that this consensus was untouched by the crisis. Price stability is most often defined as
an inflation rate around 2 per cent, but a discussion on the optimal level has been triggered by
suggestions that central banks raise their inflation targets (see, for example, Blanchard et al.,
2010; Ball, 2014).
There is general consensus that central banks should aim for a low but positive inflation rate
for several reasons. First, a little inflation may make it easier for firms to reduce real wages in
the face of declining demand and sticky nominal wages (Akerlof et al., 1996).
Second, a low rate of inflation provides some insurance against deflation, which is generally
regarded as a more serious problem than inflation. Deflation raises the real cost of servicing
debt, perhaps forcing debtors to sell assets or default on their loans. It can therefore create a
vicious cycle of rising real debt burdens and financial distress, which in turn may cause more
downward pressure on prices.
Third, there are upward biases in most official estimates of inflation. Mis-measurement may
result from, e.g., inadequate adjustments for quality improvement, difficulties in incorporating
new goods into the indexes, changes in consumers’ shopping patterns that may favor discount
retailers, and the classic substitution bias (Billi and Kahn, 2008).
Finally, at very low levels of inflation, nominal interest rates will also be very low, limiting
a central bank’s ability to ease monetary policy in response to economic weakness. Once the
policy rate reaches the lower bound, which may be below zero, conventional monetary easing
becomes impossible.
This last point is the focus of the current discussion. Before the financial crisis, it was
widely believed that 2 per cent inflation was sufficient to minimize the probability that the
lower bound would be a constraint and that, if it occurred, the likely damage would be small.
The aftermath of the crisis has changed those views. Whether central banks should raise their
inflation targets to account for the risk of hitting the lower bound hinges on 1) how serious
9

this risk is; 2) how high the lower bound is; 3) the welfare costs of hitting the bound; and 4)
the costs (including loss of credibility) of transitioning to a higher inflation target.
Furthermore, it is important to distinguish between two different concerns: avoiding the
effective lower bound in the first place, and boosting the economy once the bound is binding.
We take these up in turn.
Several papers quantify the risks of hitting the lower bound by simulating New Keynesian
models of the economy. Generally, they find that the problem is not serious enough to justify
a higher rate of inflation. (One well-known example is Reifschneider and Williams, 2000.)
One reason is that the welfare costs of such episodes are low (Coibion et al., 2012). But
proponents of raising the inflation target argue that the risks are greater than these models
suggest—because, for example, inflation and both nominal and real interest rates were much
higher in the simulation periods than they are likely to be going forward (Ball, 2014;
Krugman, 2014). So smaller shocks will suffice to push the policy rate to its lower bound.
Despite its theoretical importance to this and other issues, recent empirical studies have not
come up with a uniform empirical definition of the natural rate of interest. Well-known
estimates by Laubach and Williams (2015) suggest that the natural rate in the U.S. fluctuates
over time but exhibits a downward trend, reaching about 2 per cent in 2007 and plummeting
to zero (where it remains) by 2010. Hamilton et al. (2015), however, emphasize the large
uncertainty around such estimates.
When Blanchard et al. (2010) proposed to raise the inflation target, the lower bound was
thought to be no lower than zero. Now, we think it is negative, which leaves central bankers
more room to operate. Furthermore, the crisis has shown that the central bank still has viable
tools once the lower bound on nominal interest rates is hit—including forward guidance,
large-scale purchases of securities, and exchange rate interventions. If such unconventional
tools are highly effective, the benefits of raising the inflation target would be much lower.
Having said that, what are the costs of raising the inflation target? Two types of costs are
discussed in the literature, namely the costs of higher inflation per se and the loss of central
bank credibility from raising the inflation target. Since the first is well-trodden territory (cf.,
Mishkin, 2011), we’ll concentrate on the second—which is the one relevant to post-crisis
changes.

10

In particular, raising the inflation objective may threaten a central bank’s credibility, which
is widely believed to be among central banks’ most important assets. For example, a survey
by Blinder (2000) some years ago found that a large majority of central bankers viewed their
credibility as “of the utmost importance” (the highest possible ranking) Why? Because (in
order of importance) credibility helps a central bank (a) keep inflation low, (b) change tactics
when necessary, and (c) retain support for independence. Perhaps more central banks would
opt for higher inflation targets if they were starting from scratch today. But they are not.
Raising the inflation target may generate expectations that it will be raised again. This worry,
we believe, is a major reason why most central bankers do not wish to raise their inflation
objectives.
Another important open issue is how changing the inflation target would influence inflation
expectations. The experience of New Zealand (which has raised its inflation target a couple of
times) may shed some light on this issue. Lewis and McDermott (2015) apply the NelsonSiegel (1987) model to inflation expectations data in New Zealand to generate inflation
expectations curves fitted over various time horizons. Such curves suggest that changes to the
inflation target change inflation expectations significantly. One striking example: Inflation
expectations rose an estimated 0.45 percentage point when the target midpoint was increased
0.5 percentage points in 2002. However, Kumar et al. (2015) find that inflation expectations
of New Zealand business managers are not at all well anchored despite twenty-five years of
inflation targeting. As Blinder (2015, p. 209) put it in discussing their paper, “it reminds us
that most people are not obsessed about the central bank.”
To summarize, the crisis has shown that central banks have instruments at their disposal
even at the lower bound—which, by the way, is lower than previously thought. Both of these
“new facts” weaken the case for raising the inflation target. Add credibility concerns, which
are paramount with many central bankers, and it becomes clear why discussions of raising
inflation targets have remained mostly academic. As we saw in Figure 2, few central banks
have considered the idea.

2.2. What role for financial stability?
While central bankers’ attitudes toward the inflation mandate seem to have changed little
post-crisis, attitudes toward bringing financial stability into the mandate have changed a lot.
11

One thing we have surely learned—and should have learned from Japan decades earlier—is
that sustained price stability is no guarantee of financial stability. Dangerous financial
imbalances can build up under the calm surface of price stability. In fact, several authors have
argued that monetary policy played an important role in creating the crisis by keeping interest
rates too low for too long (cf. Taylor, 2009), which fueled an asset price boom and spurred
financial intermediaries to increase leverage and take on excessive risks (Borio and Zhu,
2008).
Before the financial crisis, many central banks, especially the inflation targeters, thought
they should take financial stability into account only if it affected the medium term outlook
for price stability. (Some still believe this.) For example, the central bank should respond to
asset price declines only after a bubble had burst (Cukierman, 2013; Cecchetti, 2016). But
several authors (e.g., Cecchetti et al., 2000 and Borio and White, 2004) argued, even before
the crisis, that monetary policy should “lean against the wind” because it interacts with
important drivers of financial imbalances. That meant, in particular, being willing to raise
interest rates to prevent asset-price bubbles.
Nowadays, in stark contrast, many central bankers see financial stability as an important
objective in its own right because the costs of financial crises are large and their consequences
are problematic for both price stability and monetary transmission (Laeven, 2016). Our survey
results on mandates show this concern quite clearly.
Early in the crisis period, Mishkin (2008) and Blinder (2008) took a more nuanced position,
arguing that not all asset price bubbles are alike. In their view, credit-driven bubbles centered
on banks can be highly dangerous. When loans go sour, balance sheets of financial
institutions deteriorate, and lenders cut back on credit supply, thereby depressing business and
household spending. In contrast, equity bubbles—driven by overly optimistic expectations,
but not by leverage—pose much less risk to the financial system. A prime example is the
dot.com bubble of the late 1990s, which left barely a mark on the real economy. Mishkin
(2011) argues that it is much easier to identify credit bubbles than to identify asset-price
bubbles—the latter being a standard objection to using interest-rate policy to “lean against the
(bubble) wind.”

12

Likewise, Borio (2014) argues empirically that policymakers should be able to identify the
build-up of financial imbalances in real time with a sufficient lead, even out of sample.11
These findings imply that credit bubbles might be taken as leading indicator of a crisis. Borio
(2014) also notes that taking financial imbalances into account calls for extending the policy
horizon of monetary policymaking beyond the typical two years because the build-up of
systemic risks often takes longer than that.
But it would be incorrect to conclude—from our survey results or anything else—that there
is a new consensus that monetary policy should play a key role in maintaining financial
stability. Opponents of leaning against the wind raise three main objections.
First, many doubt that, Borio notwithstanding, financial imbalances can be identified with
reasonable confidence in time to respond pre-emptively with monetary policy. To cite just one
such example, Klomp (2010) concludes that while high credit growth, negative GDP growth,
and high real interest rates are important leading indicators of a banking crisis, none of them
has a significant impact in more than 60 per cent of banking crises.
Second, is monetary policy really the proper instrument to deal with financial imbalances?
Svensson (2016), for example, argues that the effect of leaning against the wind on credit
growth may be small and could be of either sign. One reason is that the stock of nominal debt
has considerable inertia—only a fraction of the stock of mortgages turns over each year.
Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy rate slows down the rate of growth of nominal
debt (the numerator), it also slows down the rate of growth of nominal GDP (the
denominator). So the debt-to-GDP ratio might even rise (see, for instance, Robstad, 2014). In
addition, the evidence suggests that interest rates would have to be raised substantially to curb
risk taking (Laeven, 2016).
Third, and finally, Svensson (2016) argues that the full costs of a crisis could be higher
under a policy of leaning against wind. Why? Because leaning against the wind will make the
economy weaker before the crisis. Svensson shows that this result is quite robust and holds
for a variety of alternative assumptions. In addition, of course, the diagnosis could be wrong
and no crisis occurs.
11

Some BIS studies suggest that the best indicators of financial imbalances and financial cycles are deviations of credit and
asset prices (especially property prices) from historical trends (cf. Drehmann et al. 2011). Also some research outside the BIS
suggests that credit is a reasonably good leading indicator. For instance, Jorda et al. (2011), who examine the behaviour of
the ratio between bank credit and GDP during 200 recessions and the preceding expansions in 14 advanced economies going
back to 1870, conclude that a stronger increase in this ratio during the boom tends to lead to a deeper subsequent downturn.

13

Clearly, opinions differ widely over whether and how central banks should be responsible
for financial stability. Some central banks, or perhaps their governments, believe the bank
should be in charge of both macro-prudential policy and monetary policy so the two policies
can be coordinated more efficiently. Figure 3 shows the extent to which central banks are, in
fact, in charge of macro-prudential instruments according to Claessens et al. (2016). Most
central banks are either fully in charge of all macro-prudential policies or not involved at all.
Among advanced countries, the latter is more common than the former.

All 107 Sampled Countries
Emerging/Developing Economies
Advanced Economies

0%

=0

25%

>0,
≤ 1/2

50%

>1/2,
<1

75%

=1

100%

Figure 3. Central bank responsibility for macro-prudential policy

Notes: The graph shows the frequency distribution of the share of macro-prudential instruments for which
central banks are responsible (zero, half or less but more than zero, more than half but less than one, and one).
Source: Claessens et al. (2016)

According to Fed Chair Janet Yellen (2014), “macro-prudential policies, such as regulatory
limits on leverage and short-term funding, as well as stronger underwriting standards,
represent far more direct and likely more effective methods to address these vulnerabilities”
than monetary policy. 12 In other words, yes, we’re ultimately responsible for financial
stability, but not by using monetary policy.
Our survey results (displayed in Table 3 below) show that almost 80% of governors report
that their institution used some form of macro-prudential policy in recent years. What are
these “other” (than interest rates) macro-prudential instruments? Figure 4 shows the five
12

The most extensive study to date on the effectiveness of macro-prudential policies is by Claessens et al. (2016). Using a
newly compiled database for a large number of countries over the 2000-13 period, with information on 12 macro-prudential
instruments, they report that policies such as limits on leverage and dynamic provisioning are effective restraints, especially
when growth rates of credit are very high. But they provide less supportive impact in busts.

14

instruments that were most actively used in 2013, according to the database of Cerutti et al.
(2015).

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

Loan-to-Value Ratio
Caps

Debt-to-Income
Ratio

All Countries

Limits on Interbank Concentration Limits
Levy/Tax on
Exposures
Financial Institutions

Emerging/Developing Economies

Figure 4. Most actively used macro-prudential instruments

Advanced Economies

Source: Cerutti et al. (2015)

If we were to suggest, or imagine, a future consensus on financial stability, it might be this:
Central banks should pay more attention to the build-up of financial imbalances, notably
credit bubbles. But macro-prudential policies, not monetary policy, should be the first line of
defense. In normal situations, conventional monetary policy should focus on price stability,
while macro-prudential instruments are used to lean against excessive credit expansion.
This leaves open the issue of “who”—whether the central bank should be given a macroprudential mandate, or whether this is best done by a separate body, restricting the central
bank to conduct monetary policy. There is consensus that separate tools are required for the
different tasks, but it is also important to consider the strategic interactions between different
policy makers when assigning a role to the central bank, an issue discussed in Davig and
Gürkaynak (2015).

15

3. THE EXPANDING TOOLKIT OF MONTARY POLICY
3.1. Leaving the “old normal” behind
As the financial crisis deepened, the first reactions of central banks were conventional and in
line with the standard textbook prescription: Interest rates were cut, perhaps at first slowly,
but in the end, decisively. For instance, in a coordinated action intended to grab financial
markets’ attention, the world’s leading monetary policy authorities reduced policy rates by 50
basis points in early October 2008. By 2009, many of the world’s larger economies were
getting close to the (apparent) lower bound on nominal interest rates. It was time to leave the
“old normal”.
One solution, adopted by some, was to decide that the lower bound was not zero (more on
this below). But changes in the monetary policy toolkit did not stop at the interest rate paid on
bank reserves. Our survey inquired about three other novel measures: quantitative easing
(QE), forward guidance, and the macro-prudential measures just discussed. 13 As shown in
Table 3, forward guidance has been used by more than 50% of the central banks that
responded to our survey. Quantitative easing—either using government debt or a broader
class of assets—has been used less frequently, although some of the responding governors
have given it thought.
We now discuss (negative) policy rates, QE, and macro-prudential tools in more detail,
leaving forward guidance for Section 4.
Table 3. Unconventional policies and instruments in reaction to the crisis
Adopted
Considered
but rejected
Policy rate(s) near zero (N=49)
28.6
0.0
Negative interest rates (N=50)
12.0
10.0
QE using government debt (N=49)
20.4
6.1
QE using other assets (N=48)
12.5
14.6
Forward guidance (N=47)
51.1
10.6
Macro-prudential policy (N=47)
78.7
2.1

Not
considered
71.4
78.0
73.5
72.9
38.3
19.2

Notes: Figures denote percentage of the number (N) of responding central bank governors. Source: Authors’
calculations based on survey among central bank governors conducted in 2016.

13

Although our questionnaire did not include helicopter money as an instrument, some respondents do mention it as a
potential instrument. A further point, which we could barely do justice here in a discussion focused on monetary policy, is the
role of the central bank in micro-prudential supervision, which is also alluded to by some respondents.

16

3.2. One day, the bottom did drop out: negative policy rates
Prior to the crisis, a zero lower bound on nominal interest rates seemed almost axiomatic:
Cash, yielding a zero return, would dominate any short-term financial asset with a negative
rate, thereby constraining any nominal interest rate to be positive. After decades during which
rates were nowhere near zero, interest in (and worries regarding) the lower bound resurfaced
in the 1990s, as Japan continued to struggle with low growth and deflation. Presciently, Paul
Krugman (1998) asked: “could a liquidity trap happen to the European Monetary Union?”
Ten years later, this question was no longer hypothetical. Since then many central banks have
approached, and several have breached, the “zero lower bound.”
How comfortable have central bankers become with policy rates near or even below zero?
Our survey shows there is still some hesitance. For the full list of unconventional instruments,
we asked:
Once conditions return to normal, do you think each of the following should remain a
potential instrument of monetary policy, remain an instrument but in modified form, be
discontinued, or that it is too early to judge?
Regarding policy rates near or below zero, the results are shown in Table 4.
Table 4. Policy rates in the new normal
Governors
All
AEs
Policy rate(s) near zero (NG=32, NA=157)
Remain potential instrument
43.8
69.2
Remain, but in modified form
3.1
0.0
Be discontinued
9.4
0.0
Too early to judge
43.8
30.8
Negative rates (NG=32, NA=156)
Remain potential instrument
21.9
38.5
Remain, but in modified form
0.0
0.0
Be discontinued
25.0
7.7
Too early to judge
53.1
53.9

Academics
73.3
2.6
18.5
5.8
52.6
2.6
31.4
13.5

vs. all
36.3***

Chi-sq.
vs. AEs
12.6***

27.1***

14.9***

Notes: Figures denote percentage of respondents (either central bank governors or academic economists). ***
denotes significance at the 1% level, calculated using Chi-square tests for the independence of the responses of
governors and academics. NG and NA denote the number of responding governors and academics. Source:
Authors’ calculations based on survey conducted in 2016.

17

When asked about the potential future use of policy rates near zero, more than 40% of the
governors say it is “too early to judge.” This finding is somewhat surprising, and may suggest
that some still see zero as very much a lower bound. In fact, in response to the question on
negative rates, only 22% would still use them should circumstances arise. Only around 22%
of the responding governors have considered negatives rates in recent years, while 10%
decided not to implement them (see Table 3). The academics are, perhaps naturally, less
cautious. More than 70% think rates near zero should be used again, and more than 50% feel
negative rates should be in the tool-kit (Table 4). These differences between governors and
academics are among the starkest that we find in the survey responses, no matter whether we
focus on all governors in the sample or on those from advanced economies (which provide a
closer comparator group to our sample of academics), as the χ2 statistics in the table attest.
Digging a bit deeper, initially many central banks seemed uncomfortable with going all the
way to zero in 2008-2009. The Federal Reserve stopped its rate cutting in a range between
zero and 0.25%. When the Bank of Canada reduced its overnight rate target to 0.25% in April
2009, it stated that “the Bank judged [this] to be the effective lower bound for that rate.”
Around the same time, there was discussion of whether the ECB would be comfortable with
policy rates even going below 1%. However, as conditions continued to deteriorate, further
cuts were deemed necessary, and policy rates near zero became the norm rather than the
exception in crisis-stricken economies.
For some, zero was not low enough. In July 2009, Sveriges Riksbank lowered its repo rate
to 0.25%, which pushed the deposit rate for banks below zero. As of fall 2016, there is a short
list of countries that also pay (in some shape or form) negative rates on central bank lending
facilities. These negative rates are generally not used in isolation, but constitute part of a
larger set of unconventional instruments designed to stimulate growth and return inflation to
target.
Most prominently, the ECB has posted a negative deposit rate since mid-2014 and currently
charges banks 0.4% on excess reserves. In January 2016, the Bank of Japan started applying a
rate of -0.1% on current accounts held at the central bank. The lowest rates so far have been in
Denmark and Switzerland, where deposit rates reached minus 0.75%.
How low could rates go? We now understand that nominal rates can go negative because
cash must be transported, stored, secured, and insured. These costs are non-negligible,
18

especially for large-scale payments, but neither are they infinite. So far, cash demand has not
increased dramatically in countries with negative rates, most likely because retail deposit rates
are still positive. However, at some point, further lowering of rates may induce people to
undertake the switch, especially if interest rates are expected to remain below zero for
prolonged periods. According to Swiss National Bank Governor Thomas Jordan (2015, pp.
236-7), “the effective lower bound is below minus 75 basis points, but it’s very difficult to say
exactly where it is.”

3.3. Mixed views on QE
When the crisis erupted in 2007, there was little experience with using the central bank
balance sheet as a policy instrument. The exception was Japan, where the Bank of Japan had
purchased government bonds on a regular basis between 2001 and 2006 in order to increase
the level of bank reserves. However, the literature on this particular QE program remained far
from conclusive on its effectiveness (Spiegel, 2006).
Nevertheless, and although the timing and details differed, four of the world’s largest central
banks used QE-type policies in response to the financial crisis. 14 The Fed and the Bank of
Japan both launched their initial programs in late 2008, while the Bank of England announced
its in January 2009. The Fed would eventually initiate three different QE programs between
2008 and 2012 (four if you include “Operation Twist”). The Bank of Japan also modified its
approach along the way, most recently by introducing a quality dimension to its purchases—
the so-called QQE approach. The Bank of England has perhaps been most constant in its
approach. Throughout the crisis it has continued to work within the framework of its Asset
Purchase Facility which, among other features, puts any risk of loss squarely on HM
Treasury. The ECB was the laggard; it waited until January 2015 before starting a full-scale
QE program. 15
What do our survey results say about QE? Most academics would keep QE as a potential
instrument for monetary policy (see Table 5). Some 68% say QE using government debt
should remain an instrument, while around 11% would retain it in modified form. There is
14

We use the term QE in a broad sense. Central banks have at times used a different terminology to describe their policies.
For instance, Ben Bernanke (2009) described what came to be called “QE1” as “credit easing” rather than quantitative easing.
The Securities Market Program (SMP), designed to address dysfunctional markets in 2010, resembled QE; but its
purchases were sterilized.

15

19

less enthusiasm for QE using assets other than government debt, but still roughly half of the
academics think it should remain in the toolkit. 16
Table 5. Should QE still be in the toolkit after the crisis?
Governors Academics
Chi-sq.
All AEs
vs. all vs. AEs
42.1*** 27.9***
QE using government debt (NG=34, NA=157)
Remain potential instrument
35.3 53.9
68.2
Remain, but in modified form
5.9
0.0
10.8
Be discontinued
20.6 7.7
17.8
Too early to judge
38.2 38.5
3.2
QE using other assets (NG=31, NA=155)
Remain potential instrument
29.0 40.0
52.9
32.7*** 32.1***
Remain, but in modified form
0.0
0.0
11.0
Be discontinued
29.0 0.0
29.7
Too early to judge
41.9 60.0
6.5
Notes: Figures denotes percentage of respondents (either central bank governors or academic economists). ***
denotes significance at the 1% level, calculated using Chi-square tests for the independence of the responses of
governors and academics. NG/NA denotes number of responding governors/academics. Source: Authors’
calculations based on survey conducted in 2016.

The central bank heads in our survey are far more cautious in their interests in QE going
forward. Only 41% think QE in government debt should remain an instrument, while 21%
think it should not, and 38% reserve judgment for now. Note, however, that governors of
central banks in advanced economies are considerably more positive in their assessment.
Some 54% feel QE should remain in the toolkit, while less than 8% think it should not. The
sentiment for QE in assets other than government debt is a bit weaker, but not by much. The
χ2 statistics in Table 5 show that this is another area where central bank and academic beliefs
differ significantly (regardless of whether we compare the academics to the full sample of
governors, or to the restricted set of those from advanced economies).
Thus QE has both supporters and detractors. Many critics, both outside and inside the
central banking community, have pointed to a list of potential side effects. The lower interest
rates associated with QE could lead investors to “reach for yield,” thereby increasing risk
taking and impairing financial stability. Lower yields on government bonds also reduce
pressure on governments to reduce budget deficits. Inequality rises along with rising asset
values. There is also the question of whether QE pushes central banks across the line into the
16
Work on future forms of QE is underway. Reis (2015), for instance, argues that managing the central bank’s balance sheet
can help stabilize inflation and economic activity during a future fiscal crisis, though there are still limits to what QE can
achieve.

20

political sphere. (More on this in Section 5.) One difficulty in making judgments about these
downsides now is that such potential side effects may take time to materialize. Another is that
we have yet to experience the full exit from QE anywhere. So the overall judgment on QE
must be deferred.
The academic literature initially focused on the direct effects of QE on financial markets,
especially on interest rates. Here, the evidence is mostly positive: Many papers find evidence
for declining yields in response to (announcements of) purchase programs. At times, the
estimated effects are sizeable, especially concerning the initial programs in the U.S. and the
U.K. For instance, Gagnon et al. (2011) conclude that U.S. longer-term rates dropped by up to
150 basis points around QE1 announcements, while Joyce et al. (2011) conclude that
announcements of gilt purchases by the Bank of England in 2009 and 2010 reduced U.K.
yields by 100 basis points. Most of the later papers find somewhat smaller (but still nontrivial) effects for QE1 and especially for QE2 (D’Amico and King, 2013, Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011). Williams (2014) rescales the various estimates to a purchase of
$600 billion and reports effects ranging between 10 and 100 basis points, a very wide range
with, in addition, wide confidence intervals. For the ECB’s SMP program, Eser and Schwaab
(2016) find large announcement effects on yields of the five targeted euro area countries. For
actual purchases, there are still significant effects, as yields decline by around 3 basis points
for purchases equal to 1/1000 of the outstanding debt. Altavilla et al. (2015) report that the
ECB’s QE has significantly lowered yields for a broad set of market segments, with effects
that generally rise with maturity and riskiness of assets. For instance, long-term sovereign
bonds yields declined by about 30-50 basis points at the 10-year maturity and by roughly
twice as much in higher-yield member countries such as Italy and Spain. Andrade et al.
(2016) find that the announcement of the ECB’s purchases program reduced sovereign yields
on long-term bonds while also raising share prices of banks that held more sovereign bonds in
their portfolio.
More recently, the debate has shifted to the transmission of QE from financial markets to the
real economy. For example, several Fed policymakers have noted that the transmission
channels of QE to the real economy are not well understood (cf. Rosengren, 2015; Williams,
2014). In a recent review essay, Williamson (2015) bemoans a lack of research that
“establishes a link from QE to the ultimate goals of the Fed” and notes that “casual evidence
21

suggests that QE has been ineffective in increasing inflation.” More academic work is clearly
needed.
That said, there is increasing evidence that asset purchase programs have modest but not
negligible effects beyond financial markets—on quantities like GDP and inflation. 17 For
instance, Engen et al. (2015) find a peak effect on inflation of 0.5% and a peak effect of
unemployment of 1.25 percentage points in the Fed’s macroeconomic FRB/US model. Chung
et al. (2012) find slightly larger effects, and emphasize that QE prevented the U.S. economy
from falling into deflation. Using simulation from a large Bayesian VAR-model, Churm et al.
(2015) conclude that the second round of purchases by the Bank of England increased GDP
by between 0.5% and 0.8%, while inflation was affected by at most 0.6 percentage points.
Using a similar methodology, Weale and Wieladek (2016) estimate that announcing
purchases of 1% of GDP affects U.S. GDP by 0.58%, while the effects for the U.K. are only
0.25%. In a follow-up study, Wieladek and Pascual (2016) examine the real effects of the
ECB’s QE and conclude that in absence of the first round of QE, real GDP and core CPI in
the euro area would have been 1.3%-points and 0.9%-points lower, respectively. The effect is
roughly 2/3 times smaller than those of asset purchase programs in the UK and the US. These
are substantial effects.
But the effects of QE almost certainly depend on the context. As one prominent example,
the Fed’s purchases of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) under QE1 took place in a
distressed—indeed almost moribund—MBS market. But subsequent QE programs did not.
Hence we should expect stronger effects from QE1 than from QE2, QE3, etc. Analogously,
Goodhart and Ashworth (2012) argue that more recent asset purchases by the Bank of
England were subject to diminishing returns, given that gilt yields had already fallen to very
low levels. A similar point was raised when the ECB started its full-fledged QE program in
2015, as various euro area government bonds were then trading at record low yields. More
broadly, how can one disentangle the effects of, say, QE and forward guidance when the two
are promulgated together? As a further complication, communication on future rates is often
accompanied by guidance on future QE.

17

See also IMF (2013), in particular Table 3 of the Appendix, and de Haan and Sturm (2016) for overviews of recent studies.

22

3.4. Macro-prudential instruments: here to stay, but in what form?
Given that most of our survey respondents have considered broadening the central bank’s
mandate to include financial stability, it should come as no surprise that many see a
continuing role for macro-prudential instruments. Roughly three-quarters of the respondents,
academics as well as governors, believe the macro-prudential element will remain a
permanent feature in the new normal. Only a small percentage of respondents think the use of
these instruments should be discontinued (Table 6). Some in this latter group find it puzzling
that a question on macro-prudential instruments is included in our survey, as they do not think
it should be a responsibility of the central bank, while others find the concept too vague to
begin with. Strikingly, as the paltry χ2 statistic shows, the views of academics and governors
on this issue are statistically indistinguishable.
Underneath this agreement, however, there is probably less agreement over what forms
macro-prudential policy should take—which is hardly surprising at this early stage. One
instrument that is mentioned relatively often are restrictions on consumer lending, such as
loan-to-value ratios or debt-to-income ratios. But apart from that, there are many diverse
opinions. Indeed, some central bank governors indicate that measures that were initially
considered have been discontinued, suggesting that a consensus on the precise nature of
macro-prudential instruments has not yet been reached.
Table 6. What role would macro-prudential policy continue to play?
Governors Academics
Chi-sq.
All AEs
vs. all vs. AEs
1.1
1.3
Macro-prudential policy (NG=47, NA=144)
Remain potential instrument
76.6 71.4
71.5
Remain, but in modified form
8.5 14.3
8.3
Be discontinued
2.1
0.0
5.6
Too early to judge
12.8 14.3
14.6
Notes: Figures denotes percentage of respondents (either central bank governors or academic economists). NG/NA
denotes number of responding governors/academics. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey conducted in
2016.

3.5. Relevant factors in the adoption and evaluation of central bank policies
The survey has shown that central banks differ a lot when it comes to adopting and evaluating
unconventional monetary policies. As in the previous section, we estimated some probit
23

models to understand these differences. We constructed a set of dichotomous left-hand
variables for the adoption of instrument i (where i is: interest rates near zero, negative rates,
QE with government debt, QE with other assets, forward guidance, macro-prudential policies,
and “other”). 18 To explain these seven choice variables, we use the same country and central
bank characteristics as in the previous section—once again starting with univariate
regressions (see Table A2 in the Appendix), which we use as a guide for parsimonious
multivariate regressions. Results are in Table 7.
We find that advanced economies, countries that were hit hard by the crisis, and countries
with an inflation targeting strategy are more likely to have adopted the various instruments—but with some exceptions. For instance, it is quite remarkable that countries that were not hit
by the financial crisis are as likely to have introduced macro-prudential policies as countries
that were. Perhaps the view that macro-prudential policies are needed to maintain financial
stability is widely shared. Or perhaps some central banks introduced macro-prudential
measures early and efficiently, thereby managing to avoid a severe crisis.
Table 7. Determinants of instrument adoption
Adopted
Adopted
Adopted
Adopted
Adopted
Adopted
Adopted
rates near
negative
QE with
QE other
forward
macro
other tools
zero
rates
govt debt
assets
guidance
prudential
0.300***
0.193***
0.201**
0.076
-0.052
0.099
0.042
Advanced
(0.076)
(0.058)
(0.087)
(0.097)
(0.148)
(0.135)
(0.161)
Economy
0.122
0.092*
0.200**
0.102
0.416***
-0.142
0.107
Hit by crisis
(0.097)
(0.056)
(0.083)
(0.087)
(0.127)
(0.148)
(0.170)
0.125
-0.157*
-0.015
-0.102
0.338***
0.260**
-0.088
Inflation
(0.102)
(0.080)
(0.101)
(0.105)
(0.105)
(0.126)
(0.144)
Targeting
55
55
55
55
55
55
55
Observations
0.285
0.400
0.262
0.114
0.181
0.083
0.014
Pseudo R2
Notes: The table reports marginal effects of a probit model that explains governors’ responses as to whether or
not a certain policy instrument has been adopted. Numbers in brackets denote robust standard errors. */**/***
identifies statistical significance at the 10%/5%/1% level. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey among
central bank governors conducted in 2016.

Table 8 relates the evaluation of a particular instrument to its introduction: Is the truth closer
to “try it, and you’ll like it” or the reverse? The dependent variable in these seven probit
models is a dummy equal to one if the central bank intends to keep instrument i in its toolkit
(“remain” an instrument or “remain, but in modified form”) but zero if the governor indicates
that the instrument will be discontinued or that is too early to judge. The results are not only
18

The alternative is either that the central bank considered introducing the instrument but rejected it or did not even consider
it. We grouped these together.

24

clear—having used a certain instrument leads to a more positive assessment of it 19—but also
large. For instance, having implemented QE using government debt makes a positive
evaluation 25 percentage points more likely; having used forward guidance raises the
likelihood of a positive assessment by 43 percentage points.
Table 8. Determinants of instrument evaluation
Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation
Evaluation
Evaluation Evaluation
of rates
of neg.
of QE govt
of QE oth.
of forward
of macro
of other
near zero
rates
debt
assets
guidance
prudential
tools
0.411***
0.166
0.254**
0.153
0.434***
0.403***
0.352***
Adopted respective tool
(0.057)
(0.114)
(0.124)
(0.136)
(0.067)
(0.029)
(0.069)
Observations
55
55
55
55
55
55
55
Pseudo R2
0.268
0.0476
0.0561
0.0243
0.188
0.429
0.286
Notes: The table reports marginal effects of a probit model that explains governors’ responses as to whether or
not they think a certain policy instrument should remain, or remain in modified form in the central bank toolkit.
Numbers in brackets denote robust standard errors. **/*** identifies statistical significance at the 5%/1% level.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey among central bank governors conducted in 2016.

We have also run multivariate regressions, which also include whether or not other
instruments have been adopted (see Table A4 in the Appendix). The results suggest that, in
most cases, only the “own effect” is significant (that is, adoption of a particular instrument
makes a positive assessment of this instrument more likely). But there are some exceptions.
One notable example is that adopting interest rates near zero makes a positive assessment of
negative rates more likely. Another example: Adopting QE with government debt makes a
positive assessment of QE using other assets more likely. In both cases, having gone part of
the way makes it more likely that an additional step is viewed positively.
Looking at the academics (see Table A3 in the Appendix), our regressions once again
identify only a few significant regressors. Respondents who have previously worked in a
central bank tend to evaluate QE using other assets more positively and forward guidance
more negatively; those with an EME background look less favorably on forward guidance and
macro-prudential tools. Even the country patterns are not very pronounced, with the exception
of near-zero or even negative rates, which are less favorably assessed by euro area
respondents. One interesting contrast to the governors’ results is that, among academics,
having implemented negative rates makes a positive assessment of them less likely.
19

Although the general conclusion remains, some of these coefficients and their significance are sensitive to how we treat
non-respondents (non-respondents are set to zero both for the regressor and the regressand; results of alternative treatments
are available on request).

25

4. CENTRAL BANK COMMUNICATION
4.1. On the frequency of central bank communication
When we wrote our earlier survey of the literature on central bank communication (Blinder et
al., 2008), none of us expected that, only few years later, the practice of central bank
communication would be subject to some of the profound changes we have seen since the
global financial crisis. We emphasized then that central bank communication can be a
powerful monetary policy tool—a point that would be dramatically demonstrated during and
after the crisis by a number of examples in which central bank talk had substantial effects,
even without being accompanied by central bank action.
We asked our survey respondents: “In your view, did the crisis induce the central bank to
communicate with the public more or less than it did prior to the crisis?”. Similarly, we asked
our academics: “In your view, did your country’s central bank communicate with the public
more or less during and after the crisis than it had before?” An overwhelming majority of
both groups (more than 80% of governors (and more than 90% of those from advanced
economies) and more than 90% of academics) feel that communication intensified (Table 9).
No central bank governor reports to have communicated less during and after the crisis. In
brief, greater communication seems to be an established fact.
Table 9. The role of central bank communication during the crisis
Governors
Academics
All
AEs
CB has communicated with the public... (NG=55, NA=159)
Much less
0.0
0.0
3.1
Somewhat less
0.0
0.0
0.6
No change
14.6
6.3
3.1
Somewhat more
34.6
37.5
52.8
Much more
49.1
56.3
39.0
Difficult to say
1.8
0.0
1.3

Chi-sq.
vs. all
vs. AEs
14.8**
2.9

Notes: Figures denotes percentage of respondents. ** denotes significance at the 5% level, calculated using Chisquare tests for the independence of the responses of governors and academics. NG/NA denotes number of
responding governors/academics. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey conducted in 2016.

26

4.2. Some extreme examples of communication
In July 2012, ECB President Mario Draghi’s famous “whatever it takes” remarks in London
changed the financial world. Prior to those words, markets had started pricing currency
convertibility risk into the government bonds of several stressed euro area countries. Traders
and others started wondering out loud whether these bonds would eventually be repaid in
euros or in re-introduced national currencies. Mr. Draghi’s strong statement (“Within our
mandate, the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro. And believe me, it
will be enough.” 20) and the subsequent announcement of the ECB’s Outright Monetary
Transactions (OMT) Program were sufficient to calm markets without a single euro being
spent under this program (see Figure 5).
7
6
5
4

Spain
France
Italy

3
2
1
0
-1

Figure 5. Government bond spreads

Notes: The figure shows 10-year government bond spreads relative to Germany (in percentage points); the bold
vertical line denotes the day of Draghi’s “whatever it takes” speech. Source: ECB

Another example became known as the “taper tantrum”. In spring 2013, Fed Chairman Ben
Bernanke’s first statements about a likely deceleration in QE asset purchases (“tapering”) led
to (presumably unintended and undesired) strong reactions in financial markets, not only in
the United States but globally, with stock markets declining and sovereign yields increasing in
20

See https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html.

27

several advanced economies, and emerging markets experiencing a reversal of capital flows
and currency depreciations. Yet the Federal Reserve did not actually begin tapering its asset
purchases until January 2014.
These two examples are extreme, but they illustrate the potential potency of central bank
communications—which at times apparently are effective even without supporting action. In
general, however, we think that, in order to be credible, communication needs to be backed up
by actions—or at least by the ability of the central bank to act if required (Blinder et al.,
2008).

4.3. Profound changes in central bank communications
As central banks resorted to unconventional monetary policies, they entered unfamiliar and
highly complex terrain, with concomitant needs to explain their novel policies more fully than
ever before. This is a prime example of what we mean by necessity being the mother of
invention. Indeed, one of these unconventional tools, forward guidance, relies entirely on
communication. But more communication was also required regarding other policies.
The crisis, the deployment of unconventional monetary policies, and the broader (sometimes
tacit) mandates made discussions surrounding the actions of monetary policy committees
more controversial than ever. And that, in turn, affected the way central banks communicated.
The need for more and better communication was exacerbated by the increasingly public
debate over such controversial areas as the possible distributional effects of UMP, or the role
of the central bank in bailing out financial institutions—or, in the case of the euro area, entire
governments. For all these reasons and others, there have been many changes in central bank
communication practices since the crisis. To list only a few of the most important ones:
•

Both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan introduced a formal inflation objective in
early 2012. Historically, inflation objectives had been introduced following periods of high
and volatile inflation in an attempt to stabilize inflation at lower levels and to anchor inflation
expectations. In contrast, the inflation objectives in the United States and Japan were
introduced following periods of low inflation (Ehrmann, 2015).

•

The Fed has expanded its communication toolkit in various other ways: Since April 2011, the
FOMC chair holds regular press conferences, and since 2012, the Summary of Economic
Projections contains a forecast for the Fed’s policy rate, in the form of a “dot plot” that
28

collects the judgements of the individual FOMC members of the appropriate level of the
policy rate over three calendar years and the longer run.
•

The Bank of England now releases the minutes of its policy meetings and the Inflation
Reports at the same time as its policy decisions.

•

A number of central banks have aired substantially more internal disagreement since the
crisis. The most prominent such example may be the ECB, which saw its earlier principle of
one-voice communication seriously challenged in light of the considerable disagreement
among its Governing Council members, and started releasing regular accounts of monetary
policy discussions as of January 2015.
All of these changes go in the same direction—towards more transparency—a trend which
is in line with the evolution we had already observed in our 2008 article and with the survey
results summarized in Table 9 above.
Having seen such profound changes in the practice of central bank communication, it seems
natural to ask to what extent these changes are here to stay. Or will they be scaled back once
normalcy is restored? Our take is that many of the more structural changes are here to stay. It
will be close to impossible, and most likely also undesirable, to stop holding press
conferences or publishing minutes. In a similar vein, we would not expect the Federal Reserve
or the Bank of Japan to abolish their inflation objectives, though their levels might possibly be
adjusted (see Section 2).
This belief is supported by the results of our survey (see Table 10). We asked both
governors and academics: “If you answered anything other than “no change” or “difficult to
say” [… to the question on whether there have been changes to communication since the
crisis], do you think these changes in communication should remain, be reversed, or be taken
even further once conditions return to normal?” Only a minority of our respondents—both
governors and academics—sees much chance that the changes in central bank
communications will be taken back. In fact, a somewhat larger minority (about 20%, but only
7% for governors in advanced economies) expect further changes towards more
communications. Differences in responses between governors and academics are small and
statistically insignificant.

29

Table 10. The role of central bank communication after the crisis
Governors
All
AEs
The crisis-related changes in central bank communication
will... (NG=45, NA=114)
Revert back completely
2.2
0.0
Revert back somewhat
11.1
20.0
Remain
51.1
53.3
Go even further
20.0
6.7
Too early to judge
15.6
20.0

Academics

Chi-sq.
vs. all vs. AEs
6.2

7.1

1.8
16.7
55.3
21.9
4.4

Notes: Figures denotes percentage of respondents. NG/NA denotes number of responding governors/academics.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey conducted in 2016.

Table 11 provides the results of our regression analysis of the governors’ responses
(univariate regression results are again reported in the Appendix, Table A5). Due to the nature
of the underlying variable, we ran ordered probit regressions in this case, and report the
marginal effects for the highest response category (the central bank has communicated “much
more”; the changes will “go even further”) in Table 11. Central banks that have had internal
discussions about their mandate seem to also have increased their external communication
efforts, as did those banks that adopted macro-prudential tools or were hit by the crisis.
Surprisingly, the adoption of forward guidance has not affected the extent to which
communication activities have been expanding. 21
Table 11. Determinants of changes in central bank communication
Communicated more Will communicate more
Had internal mandate discussions
Adopted macro-prudential tools
Hit by crisis
Observations
Pseudo R2

0.215*
(0.119)
0.265**
(0.133)
0.220*
(0.131)
54
0.123

-0.005
-0.118
-0.067
-0.696
-0.059
(0.612)
38
0.005

Notes: The table reports marginal effects of an ordered probit model that explains governors’ responses as to the
change in central bank communication during the crisis and the expected future developments. Coefficients are
for the highest category (i.e., “much more” and “go even further”). Numbers in brackets denote robust standard
errors. */** identifies statistical significance at the 10%/5% level. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey
among central bank governors conducted in 2016.

21

We could not identify statistically significant determinants for the forward-looking assessment. Nor was the regression
analysis for the academics (see Table A3 in the Appendix) informative.

30

4.4. Forward guidance
The most prominent change in central bank communications has been the more widespread
use of forward guidance (FG), especially when interest rates are constrained at their
(perceived) lower bound. Under FG, the central bank communicates not only about the
current setting of monetary policy, but makes explicit statements about the future path of
policy. While FG predates the crisis, most prominently in New Zealand, it has become much
more common since. The reason is straightforward. Monetary policy works not only through
the current setting of policy instruments, but also through expectations about the future course
of policy, which affects, among other things, the yield curve. Management of these
expectations can therefore be a powerful tool once the central bank has already lowered shortterm rates as much as it can (or wants to).
Academic theories often translate FG into true commitment on behalf of the central bank (cf.
Eggertsson and Woodford, 2003). In the terminology of Campbell et al. (2012), FG is
“Odyssean.” In practice, however, FG does not commit the central bank to anything
(Moessner et al., 2016). Rather, it falls under Campbell et al. (2012)’s classification as
“Delphic,” that is, FG merely forecasts the central bank’s future behavior, with at most a
conditional commitment that depends on macroeconomic developments. Of course,
conveying that conditionality to markets has proven challenging.
Following Filardo and Hofmann (2014), FG can be classified into three different categories
•

Qualitative FG does not provide exact indications as to when or under what conditions the
central bank would change its policy rate. For example, in July 2013, the ECB stated that,
“The Governing Council expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower
levels for an extended period of time”. [italics added]

•

Calendar-based FG expresses the likely future path of policy rates as a function of calendar
time. For example, the Bank of Canada used calendar-based guidance in 2009 and 2010, when
it stated that “conditional on the inflation outlook,” it will “hold the current policy rate until
the end of the second quarter of 2010.” The Federal Reserve made similar calendar-based
statements intermittently over the years 2011-2015.

•

Data-based FG states how future changes to policy rates depend on specific new economic
information. For example, at one point the Fed maintained that its low policy rates were
appropriate “as least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 per cent, inflation
31

between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point
above the Committee’s 2 per cent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations
continue to be well anchored.”
As we saw earlier in Table 3, forward guidance of some type was adopted by roughly half of
the central banks in our sample. It was considered but eventually rejected by another ten
percent of the responding central bank heads. We asked the governors this follow-up
question: “Forward guidance is often classified as being either calendar based (or “time
contingent”), data based (or “state contingent”), or purely qualitative (that is, providing
neither a time frame nor economic conditions). Which type(s) of forward guidance has your
bank employed?”
Roughly speaking, the three broad types were (almost) equally common (see Figure 6). The
frequencies add up to 150% because the question allowed for multiple answers, and several
central banks switched among various types of guidance. This monetary policy tool is still in
its early, experimental phase; to come to a view about the future of forward guidance in the
central bank toolkit, we need to understand how it has worked in practice.
Several studies have assessed the effectiveness of FG, in three different dimensions (Filardo
and Hofmann, 2014). The first is whether FG lowered expectations about the future path of
policy rates—its most obvious intention. Here the evidence, while mixed, is mostly favorable.
For the United States, the intended effect is confirmed by Campbell et al. (2012), Moessner
(2013; 2015) and Woodford (2013)—but less so by Filardo and Hofmann (2014). For Canada,
Woodford (2013) finds supportive, but overall weak evidence in favor, whereas the results in
Chehal and Trehan (2009) suggest that the effects were not long lasting. 22 For Sweden,
Woodford (2013) shows meager effects on longer-term rates, perhaps because of a weaker
commitment than in Canada.

22

This need not be read as evidence against the effectiveness of FG, given that the Bank of Canada always stressed the
conditionality of its FG.

32

Figure 6. Types of forward guidance used in recent years (Vertical axis denotes % of
responding central bank heads).

Notes: Based on replies of 24 governors whose central bank used forward guidance. Multiple answers were
possible, and a total of 35 answers were received. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey conducted in
2016.

A second issue is whether FG changed how markets respond to macro news. Under
calendar-based FG, markets should give less emphasis to the flow of macroeconomic news
than otherwise. In line with this notion, Swanson and Williams (2014) and Feroli et al. (2016)
find that the responses of medium- and long-term yields to macroeconomic announcements
were muted once the Federal Reserve’s FG was in place.
To summarize, there seems to be more evidence pointing to FG being effective than not.
However, it is important to note that the various empirical studies are subject to substantial
identification problems. Even event studies are contaminated by the fact that FG was typically
used in conjunction with other UMPs. Furthermore, even if we conclude that FG has been
effective, it was not without problems. Notably, FG had to be adapted over time in most
circumstances, e.g. by moving from calendar-based to data-based FG, or by broadening the
data-based criteria. It is therefore important to assess the pros and cons of the different types
of forward guidance.

33

Feroli et al. (2016) provide a critical discussion of calendar-based FG. While the muted
market responsiveness to news under calendar-based FG suggests that FG was credible, it also
implies that market conditions did not ease in response to negative news, which hampered the
accommodation of negative shocks. However, by the same token, positive macro news would
not lead to premature and unwarranted tightening. More generally, calendar-based FG can put
a central bank in a quandary when economic developments change in an unexpected manner.
In such cases, the bank must choose between sticking with its earlier guidance, which may no
longer be appropriate, or changing course, with possibly adverse consequences on its
credibility. Yes, strong conditionality is “the answer,” but as previously noted, it may be hard
to get markets thinking that way.
A different trade-off arises under data-based FG. If the central bank provides a relatively
simple state contingency that is easy to communicate, its message might turn out to be too
simple in the end, requiring the bank to “renege.” On the other hand, if it lists a multitude of
indicators to be considered when making its judgement, accurate and intelligible
communication of the contingency might prove impossible. Either sort of error can damage a
central bank’s credibility.
These problems are not entirely hypothetical. The Federal Reserve’s initial data-based FG,
emphasizing the unemployment rate, proved problematic. While the FOMC had said it would
not even consider raising rates until unemployment fell to 6.5%, the markets came to
(mistakenly) view 6.5% as a trigger for rate hikes. Then, when unemployment did drop below
6.5%, it did so partly for the wrong reason—an unexpectedly large decrease in labor force
participation. So the Fed judged that lift-off was not yet advisable. Eventually, the FOMC
removed the unemployment threshold from its FG.
Similarly, when the Bank of England achieved its unemployment threshold more quickly
than anticipated, the Monetary Policy Committee adjusted its FG to include a much broader
set of conditions. Andrew Sentence, a former member of the committee, remarked in that
context that “The concept of forward guidance has not delivered. It seems to have been used
to support the view that interest rates will not rise, rather than preparing the public and
business for inevitable hikes.” 23

23

http://www.cityam.com/1407961668/sorry-tale-forward-guidance

34

As with other UMPs, the jury is still out on the effectiveness of FG, especially since we
have little experience to date with exit from FG. Bank of Canada Governor Poloz (2014)
stresses that FG creates a one-way bet for investors, whose market positions can make it more
challenging to exit from FG. Especially if one-way FG has been in place for a long time, a
large unwinding of market positions may be required. In a related vein, San Francisco Fed
President John Williams has argued that markets lost their “muscle memory” for responding
to Fed statements during the extended period of extraordinary easing and FG by the Federal
Reserve, 24 suggesting that some financial market volatility is to be expected when exiting.
Still, strong majorities of both governors and academics judge that forward guidance is here
to stay (Table 12). As with other instruments, a substantial share of governors, especially
those from advanced economies, finds it too early judge (in contrast to the academic
respondents, who don’t). But it is interesting that not a single governor stated that forward
guidance should be discontinued.
Table 12. The role of forward guidance after the crisis
Governors Academics
Chi-sq.
All AEs
vs. all vs. AEs
26.0*** 30.3***
Forward guidance (NG=39, NA=156)
Remain potential instrument 59.0 50.0
75.6
Remain, but in modified form 12.8 7.0
11.5
Be discontinued
0.0 0.0
9.0
Too early to judge
28.2 42.9
3.9
Notes: Figures denotes percentage of respondents. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, calculated using
Chi-square tests for the independence of the responses of governors and academics. NG/NA denotes number of
responding governors/academics. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey conducted in 2016.

While a consensus about the overall merits of forward guidance seems to be emerging, there
is far less agreement about the specific type of FG that should be pursued (see Table 13). Our
survey asked governors and academics alike: “In the future, which type(s) of forward
guidance do you believe would be most effective for your central bank?” 25

24

http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-fed-williams-liftoffidUSKCN0SX03U20151108?mod=related&channelName=ousivMolt.
25
Given that academics had not yet been introduced to the different types of forward guidance, we started this question along
the same lines as the previous question for central bank governors.

35

Table 13. Preferred types of forward guidance in the future
Governors
Academics
Chi-sq.
All
AEs
vs. all vs. AEs
Forward guidance in the future (NG=52, NA=158)
Calendar based
13.5
25.0
10.8
0.3
2.8*
Data based
26.9
25.0
68.4
27.6*** 11.9***
Purely qualitative
38.5
43.8
22.2
5.4**
3.7*
None
11.5
12.5
4.4
3.4*
1,9
Other
15.4
25.0
3.8
8.4*** 12.1***
Too early to judge
21.2
25.0
4.4
13.9*** 10.4***
Notes: Figures denotes percentage of respondents. */**/*** denotes significance at the 10%/5%/1% level,
calculated using using Chi-square tests for the independence of the responses of governors and academics.
NG/NA denotes number of responding governors/academics. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey
conducted in 2016.

Feroli et al. (2016) express a preference for data-based FG, reserving time-dependent FG for
unusual circumstances. This view is in line with the opinions of our academics, two-thirds of
whom favor data-based FG. But the central bank governors in our survey feel quite
differently: Only about a quarter of them favor data-based FG. More favor purely qualitative
FG. Repeating the exercise of Section 3, we once again find that governors who gained some
experience with a certain type of FG also assess it more positively (see Table 14).
Table 14. Determinants of evaluation of types of forward guidance
Evaluation of
Evaluation of dataEvaluation of
Evaluation of other
calendar-based FG
based FG
qualitat. FG
FG
0.254***
0.391***
0.495***
0.318***
Adopted respective
FG type
(0.064)
(0.032)
(0.048)
(0.088)
Observations
55
55
55
55
2
Pseudo R
0.279
0.419
0.368
0.225
Notes: The table reports marginal effects of a probit model that explains governors’ responses as to whether or
not they think a certain type of forward guidance is effective. Numbers in parentheses denote robust standard
errors. */**/*** identifies statistical significance at the 10%/5%/1% level. Source: Authors’ calculations based
on survey among central bank governors conducted in 2016.

5. CENTRAL BANKS’ PROPER PLACE IN GOVERNMENT
5.1. In the government or out?
Word choices can be revelatory. In many countries, a verbal distinction is made between
“the government” and the central bank—as if the central bank is not part of the government.
Sometimes this separation is even interpreted as a hallmark of central bank independence
36

(CBI). But CBI has become the international norm only in recent decades. Prior to the 1980s,
it was hard to find an independent central bank other than in the United States, (West)
Germany, and Switzerland. 26 For example, few European central banks other than the
Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank were independent before the Maastricht Treaty
required it of prospective members of the monetary union.
At some level, language suggesting that the central bank is outside the government is
curious. Congressman Wright Patman, who was chairman of the banking committee of the
U.S. House of Representatives back in the 1960s, correctly observed that, “A slight
acquaintance with American constitutional theory and practice demonstrates that,
constitutionally, the Federal Reserve is a pretty queer duck.” 27 It remains true today. 28 The
American system of government is famous for its multiple layers of “checks and balances,”
yet the Fed’s monetary policy decisions stand out as notably unchecked and unbalanced by
any legislative, executive, or judicial authority. 29 The case of the ECB is even more
extreme—at least on paper. Other than regular hearings at the European Parliament, the ECB
essentially has no government “above” it. Furthermore, since the ECB’s structure and powers
are delineated in a treaty, which is nearly impossible to amend, no government has the ability
to change either aspect of ECB governance. 30 This situation contrasts sharply with that of the
Fed, where the U.S. Congress can change the central bank’s governing statutes any day it
chooses.
Traditionally, the issue of whether the central bank is or is not part of the government has
been elided by appealing to the doctrine of central bank independence in monetary policy. At
least in principle, a sharp line separates monetary policy from a long list of functions
collectively called fiscal policy. 31 According to an unwritten (in most countries) truce, the
central bank is granted control over monetary policy while the elected government retains full
control over fiscal policy. Importantly, each player tacitly or explicitly agrees not to poach
into the other’s territory.

26
27
28
29

See, for example, Cukierman et al. (1992) and Crowe and Meade (2008).
Quoted in Greider (1987), pp. 49-50.
Cf. Levin (2016) and Conti-Brown (2015).
However, when it comes to other central bank functions, notably bank supervision and regulation, the Fed is both
“checked” and “balanced” by several other authorities.
30
There is, of course, always the possibility—in any democracy—that the central bank’s policies lose popular support, and
that weakened support undermines the central bank’s independence.
31
That list extends well beyond macroeconomic stabilization policy.

37

There are good reasons for this division of labor. For example, Alesina and Tabellini (2008)
argue that delegation of decision-making authority to non-elected bureaucrats with career
concerns (as opposed to politicians) is especially beneficial when the tasks are technical in
nature and monitoring quality is difficult. That sounds like monetary policy. Another
important consideration is the extent to which the policy is redistributive, and thus relies on
value judgments and political legitimacy more than on technical expertise. 32

5.2. The crisis and “the line”
The “line” between fiscal and monetary policy seemed at least modestly clear until the
financial crisis. Then central banks around the world were either called upon, or felt
compelled, to take many actions they had never (or rarely) taken before. Think, for example,
about lending to banks on a massive scale (not entirely unprecedented, but very rare) against
collateral that didn’t quite meet Bagehot standards—an action which can easily slide into a
“bailout” of an imperiled bank. Or lending to nonbank financial institutions. Or purchasing
non-traditional assets such as mortgage-backed securities (the Fed), peripheral country debt
(the ECB), and a wide variety of financial instruments (the Bank of Japan)—just the sorts of
“unconventional” monetary policy instruments we discussed in Section 3.
Each of these unusual activities shares one attribute in common: There is a non-trivial
chance that the central bank, and thus indirectly the country’s taxpayers, will suffer a loss. 33
For this reason, they are often called quasi-fiscal policies, a term that suggests that such
actions constitute a kind of government spending, which they do in an actuarial sense. Public
spending by the central bank crosses the traditional line between monetary and fiscal policy,
suggesting to some that the central bank has strayed into the fiscal domain. A number of
writers view this as either an inappropriate or a dangerous position for the central bank to be
in. 34
During the crisis in the U.S., politicians and the public were surprised to learn how much
power the Fed actually had. In a famous incident regarding the rescue of insurance giant AIG
in 2008, Congressman Barney Frank, who then chaired the House Financial Services
32
See Blinder (1997). This view should perhaps be tempered by recognizing that monetary policies have more redistributive
consequences than are normally acknowledged.
33
As an example of an extreme version of suffering losses, Hall and Reis (2015) discuss the implications of possible
(technical) insolvency of the central bank.
34
See, for example, Buiter (2014).

38

Committee, asked Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke, “Do you have $80 billion?” Bernanke’s
answer—“Well, we have $800 billion,” an apparent reference to the size of the Fed’s balance
sheet at the time—startled Frank. He recalled, “... that’s when many of us, for the first time,
understood the full scope of this statute.” 35 Frank was referring to the then-obscure but sincefamous Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, which gave the Fed virtually unlimited
lending powers under “unusual and exigent circumstances.” Tellingly, when the Dodd-Frank
Act passed in 2010, Congress limited that power.
These sorts of actions led to some withering criticisms of the Fed. Consider these words,
written in 2010 (while the crisis still raged) by Allan Meltzer, the eminent historian of the
Fed:
Never before had [the Federal Reserve] taken responsibility as lender-of-last-resort to the
entire financial system, never before had it expanded its balance sheet by hundreds of billions
of dollars or more over a short period, and never had it willingly purchased so many illiquid
assets that it must hope will become liquid assets as the economy improves. Chairman Ben
Bernanke seemed willing to sacrifice much of the independence that Paul Volcker restored in
the 1980s. He worked closely with the Treasury and yielded to pressures from the chairs of
the House and Senate Banking Committee and others in Congress. 36
In Europe, you didn’t have to look far to find stern critics of, e.g., the ECB’s Securities
Market Program—which bought sovereign debt securities of periphery countries, thereby
exposing itself to possible losses. For instance, it was widely reported that then-Bundesbank
President Axel Weber, the heir apparent to the ECB presidency in 2011, took himself out of
the running for that post over just this issue. 37 Former top Bundesbank/ECB officials such as
Otmar Issing and Juergen Stark raised similar objections publicly, with Issing calling the
bond-buying program “something very dangerous.” 38
Thus, at least a number of astute observers believe that several central banks “crossed the
line” into fiscal policy during and after the crisis.
How do today’s central bankers and academic economists see it? Our survey asked them,
“In its crisis-fighting efforts, how much criticism did your [country’s] central bank get for
35
36
37

The quotations are from Wessel (2009), pp.197-198.
From Meltzer (2010), p. 1243.
Among many news reports that could be cited, see http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/merkel-ecb-candidategerman-central-bank-head-axel-weber-resigns-a-745083.html
38
See, for example, http://www.express.co.uk/news/world/349354/Ex-ECB-chiefs-criticise-bond-buying

39

acting politically or crossing the line into the political realm?” 39 This turned out to be one of
the areas of greatest disagreement between the two groups.
As Table 15 shows, almost half of the central bankers answered “none,” a view shared by
merely 6% of the academics. At the other end of the spectrum, 72% of the academics, but
only 31% of the central bank governors, thought that central banks received either “a lot” or
“a moderate amount” of criticism for crossing the line into politics. The two groups might
have very different concepts of what constitutes “criticism.” Another explanation could be
geographical differences. Our central bank heads come from all over the world, but the
academics are heavily concentrated in advanced economies. However, as Table 15 shows,
when we restrict the sample to the advanced economies’ governors, the differences between
academics and governors, though smaller, are still large and statistically significant.
Table 15. How much criticism did the central bank receive?
Governors
Academics
Chi-sq.
All
AEs
vs. all vs. AEs
59.8*** 16.0***
CB has received ______ criticism (NG=55, NA=159)
None
49.1
31.3
5.7
A little
12.7
25.0
18.9
A moderate amount
14.6
25.0
30.2
A lot
16.4
12.5
42.1
Difficult to say
7.3
6.3
3.1
Notes: Figures denotes percentage of respondents. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, calculated using
Chi-square tests for the independence of the responses of governors and academics. NG/NA denotes number of
responding governors/academics. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey conducted in 2016.

A look at Table 16 shows that the likelihood to have been criticized “a lot” is substantially
larger in crisis-hit countries—hardly a surprise. The adoption of unconventional monetary
policy tools also matters. Our initial hypothesis was that embarking on QE would likely lead
to more criticism, but this is only the case with other (than government debt) assets. The only
other instrument that we find to provoke criticism is the adoption of forward guidance.
Among the academics, the only relevant determinants of criticism are the “country” fixed
effects, with academics in the euro area having a 20 percentage point higher propensity to
answer that their central bank has received a lot of criticism than their U.S. peers, and
academics in the “other” countries a 33 percentage point lower propensity (see Table A3).
39

The bracketed word appeared in the academics’ question, but not in the central bankers’ question.

40

Table 16. Determinants of criticism
Adopted QE using government debt
Adopted QE using other assets
Adopted forward guidance
Hit by crisis
Observations
Pseudo R2

Criticism received
-0.078
(0.071)
0.203**
(0.081)
0.192***
(0.073)
0.156**
(0.079)
51
0.144

Notes: The table reports marginal effects of an ordered probit model that explains governors’ responses as to the
amount of criticism that the central bank has received. Coefficients are for the highest category (i.e., “a lot”).
Numbers in brackets denote robust standard errors. **/*** identifies statistical significance at the 5%/1% level.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey among central bank governors conducted in 2016.

5.3. Was central bank independence compromised?
Crossing the line in one direction invites reciprocal crossings in the opposite direction, to
wit, political interference with monetary policy. Such interference is hard to measure—
indeed, it is probably not even an objective phenomena. (What is interference to a central
banker might not be interference to a politician.) And complaining about monetary policy
decisions is nothing new; both politicians and citizens have been doing it for centuries. Yet
any serious reduction in central bank independence would be a cause for concern because
much evidence indicates that macroeconomic performance is better in countries with more
independent central banks. 40 So was CBI really compromised?
Table 17. Central bank independence during the crisis
Governors
Academics
Chi-sq.
All
AEs
vs. all vs. AEs
CB independence was ______ during the crisis (NG=54, NA=158) 34.8*** 15.0***
Gained
13.0
0.0
5.1
Neither gained nor lost
79.6
93.8
43.0
Lost a little
1.9
6.3
40.5
Lost a lot
1.9
0.0
4.4
Difficult to say
3.7
0.0
7.0
Notes: Percentages of number of responding governors or academics. *** denotes significance at the 1% level,
calculated using Chi-squared tests for the independence of responses of governors and academics. NG/NA
denotes number of responding governors/academics. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey among
central bank governors conducted in 2016.
40

See Klomp and de Haan (2010) and de Haan and Eijffinger (2016).

41

We asked the same exact question of our central bankers and our economists: How much
independence do you believe your central bank either relinquished, saw taken away from it,
or gained during the crisis? Table 17 shows the results.
Despite the high χ2 statistics, there is more agreement here than meets the eye. Specifically,
the share of respondents who believe that central bank independence either did not change or
was reduced only “a little” was more than 90% among central bank governors and more than
80% among academics. Thus the clear answer to the question was: Little or none.
These subjective opinions are corroborated by de Haan and Eijffinger (2016) using
“objective” data provided by Bodea and Hicks (2015). These authors expanded the
Cukierman et al. (1992) index of legal central bank independence for 78 countries from the
end of the Bretton Woods system until 2010, thereby creating an original data set that codes
CBI annually and—importantly for current purposes—covers changes in the last twenty-five
years. Table 18 shows the average level of legal CBI before and after the start of the financial
crisis for several groups of countries (based on IMF classifications). While the index
remained stable for the Fed, the ECB and the Bank of England, the data suggest that, if
anything, CBI increased after 2007.
Table 18. Legal CBI before and after the Global Financial Crisis
Advanced economies
Emerging and developing economies

1995-2007

2008-2010

0.63
0.59

0.69
0.67

Source: de Haan and Eijffinger (2016) using data from Bodea and Hicks (2015), which are available at:
http://www.princeton.edu/~rhicks/data.html. The classification of countries follows the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook.

5.4. Back to the status quo ante?
If the crisis moved the line between the realms of fiscal and monetary policy, perhaps
inevitably, was the status quo ante restored thereafter? Could it be? Should it be? The answer
to the first question, at least, varies by country. One reason is that the degree to which the
crisis is “over” also varies from country to country.
In the U.S., the financial storm clouds started lifting already in the spring of 2009, after the
highly successful stress tests. By late 2010, the crisis could truly be said to be over: Risk
42

spreads had returned to normal, Federal Reserve lending was back down to pre-Lehman
levels, and TARP funds outstanding under the Capital Purchase Program (“the bank bailout”)
were down about 85% from peak levels. Today, apart from its huge balance sheet, which still
includes over $1.7 trillion of MBS and agency debt, the Fed has stepped back from all of its
unusual activities: the massive lending, the lending to nonbanks, the bailouts, etc. It is now
seeking to normalize monetary policy by raising the federal funds rate gradually. Shrinking
the balance sheet, the FOMC has decided, can wait.
On the government’s side, the Dodd-Frank Act (2010) clipped the Fed’s wings a bit by
reducing its emergency lending powers. But other than that, Dodd-Frank mostly gave the Fed
more power, especially as a regulator. Furthermore, most Americans assume that
policymakers will look to monetary policy, not fiscal policy, the next time the U.S. economy
slumps. As a broad generalization then, the monetary-fiscal policy “line” is almost back to
where it was before Lehman Brothers failed.
Things are quite different, however, at the Bank of Japan and the ECB, neither of which is
yet “exiting,” Nor is the Bank of England, which in response to the outcome of the Brexit
referendum decided it had to “re-enter.” For these central banks, it is hence far too early to
guess whether the old line between monetary and fiscal policy will be restored.
In particular, just as the ECB seemed to be putting the chaos stemming from the world
financial crisis behind it, the European sovereign debt crisis erupted in the spring of 2010. The
ECB’s participation in the troika for Greece, along with the European Commission (EC) and
the IMF, added an entirely new dimension. The ECB was invited to join the troika in order to
advise the EC on matters where it has specific expertise (Cœuré, 2014). While it is, in contrast
to the EC and the IMF, not a signatory of the agreements with governments, all three
institutions should speak with a single voice in order to bargain effectively with the Greek
government. Indeed, several observers have raised questions about the political independence
of the ECB in light of this unusual agreement 41 and especially following the ECB’s decision
not to increase the ceiling of the Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) to Greek banks in the

41

ECB president Draghi, in his press conference on 7 March 2013, mentions that the organisational setup of the troika “has
raised questions about the political independence of the ECB.”

43

summer of 2015, after negotiations between the troika and the Greek government broke
down. 42
It is impossible to predict the long-run consequences of these developments at the current
juncture.

5.5. Is central bank independence under threat?
In the last Japanese election (2012), we saw the leadership and policies of the Bank of Japan
emerge as major political issues. In the United States, there are now a variety of bills in the
congressional hopper that would change the structure, powers, and/or operations of the
Federal Reserve—several of which would undermine its independence. In Europe, support for
populist parties that generally do not favour central bank independence and want to exit EMU
and return to national currencies, or even to follow the UK and exit the EU, is rising.
Table 19. Central bank independence in the near future
Governors
Academics
Chi-sq.
All
AEs
vs. all
vs. AEs
75.4*** 25.4***
CB independence is threatened ______ (NG=55, NA=159)
None
61.8
50.0
13.2
A little
10.9
12.5
46.5
A moderate amount
7.3
18.8
27.7
A lot
1.8
0.0
9.4
Too early to judge
18.2
18.8
3.1
Notes: Percentages of number of responding governors or academics. *** denotes significance at the 1% level,
calculated using Chi-squared tests for the independence of responses of governors and academics. NG/NA
denotes number of responding governors/academics. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey among
central bank governors conducted in 2016.

We asked our central bankers and economists virtually the same question: How much is your
central bank’s independence threatened now or in the near-term future? The answers,
tabulated in Table 19, are slightly surprising. On an a priori basis, one might think that central
bank governors would be hyper-sensitive to encroachments on their independence. Yet we see
far more concern on the part of academics. About 37% of them believe that CBI is threatened
either “a lot” or “a moderate amount,” whereas only 9% of central bankers see things that

42

See, e.g., Wyplosz (2015) or “ECB ensnared in politics as it faces vote on Bank of Greece loans, Financial Times, 19 May
2015.

44

way. At the other end of the worry spectrum, more than 60% of central bankers (50% in
advanced economies), but only 13% of academics, see no threat at all. 43
Can we say more about the determinants of past or expected changes to independence?
Table 20 reports the marginal effects for the lowest category of our dependent variable (i.e.
central bank independence was “gained” during the crisis; independence is “not” threatened)
from an ordered probit model. One interesting question is whether the amount of criticism that
the central bank has received has a bearing on threats to its independence. For parsimony, we
transform the corresponding variable into a dummy variable equal to one when the governor
has responded that the central bank has received “a lot” of criticism.
Hardly any of our variables help explain past changes in independence; having adopted QE
using other assets is the only one that has some impact. In contrast, looking forward, we have
strong evidence that the likelihood that a governor sees no threat to independence is
considerably smaller in countries where there was a discussion outside the central bank about
its mandate, and in countries where the central bank has received a lot of criticism. For the
academics, we cannot identify any patterns in our data (see Table A3).
Table 20. Determinants of changes to central bank independence
Change in independence
Expected change in
independence
Adopted QE using other assets
-0.234*
0.090
(0.134)
(0.133)
Had external mandate discussions
0.005
-0.253**
(0.073)
(0.101)
Received a lot of criticism
-0.059
-0.309**
(0.153)
(0.151)
Observations
49
42
Pseudo R2
0.0696
0.140
Notes: The table reports marginal effects of an ordered probit model that explains governors’ responses as to the
changes in independence that have occurred during the crisis, or are expected. Coefficients are for the lowest
category (i.e., “gained” and “none”). Numbers in brackets denote robust standard errors. */** identifies statistical
significance at the 10%/5% level. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey among central bank governors
conducted in 2016.

43
We remind readers, once again, that a majority of our academics come from the geographical areas of only three central
banks: The Fed, the ECB, and the Bank of England.

45

5.6. Conclusions on governance
Perhaps inevitably, the financial crisis pushed many central banks over the traditional
dividing line between fiscal and monetary policy. Was that costly to the central banks?
According to our survey results, that depends on whom you ask. Central bank governors do
not believe they took a lot of criticism for “crossing the line” into the realm of politics, and
most do not feel their independence has been or is now threatened. On the contrary, a strong
majority of central bankers (almost 93%) believe their independence was either increased or
did not change. Academics see considerably more potential crossing of the line in the future,
and are more worried about threats to CBI.
This sharp discrepancy of views was both surprising and reassuring to us. The central
bankers are, after all, on the “front lines.” While geography may be playing some role here,
the discrepancies remain stark even if we restrict the comparison to advanced economy
governors, who provide a better comparator group to our advanced economy academics.
6. SUMMING UP: WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?
After reviewing the literature, and documenting the views of central bank governors and
academic economists, what do we conclude? To what extent has the crisis changed the face of
monetary policy?
In quite a few countries, the crisis seems not to have affected the basic approach to monetary
policy in a drastic way. This is most apparent from noting that 70% of central bank governors
did not consider using interest rates near zero, negative rates, or QE in any form. In that sense,
the world of central banking has not changed nearly as much as concentrating on the Fed, the
ECB, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan, or, for that matter, on the academic
literature, might indicate.
However, this may well change. In particular, it is striking that many governors and
academics have reconsidered their central bank’s mandate since the crisis, mostly with a view
to adding financial stability to the mandate. In some cases, the mandate has already been
modified, or preparations are being undertaken in that direction. Given the stability in central
bank mandates over the years prior to the crisis, this constitutes a notable shift. At the same
time, however, there is continuity, as many governors and academics would not consider
changing the target level of inflation.
46

One big change that was already apparent before 2007, but which was sped up by the crisis,
is the more active use of communication by central banks. Here we find the strongest
agreement between governors and academics—that central banks have communicated much
more during the crisis, should certainly continue to do so, and should perhaps go even further.
These views are corroborated by the large body of evidence that shows the benefits of
communication to monetary policy.
The largest unknown is the precise shape and form of the instrument set. First, much is still
unknown about the costs and benefits of recent unconventional policies—an uncertainty
reflected in the cautious tone of many central bank governors. More research on forward
guidance, QE, and negative rates is therefore needed, especially once we can assess how
central banks managed their “exits.” Second, although many people see macro-prudential
policy as the wave of the future (or even of the present), there is no broad agreement on what
forms macro-prudential policy would actually take—which is hardly surprising at this early
stage. As our central bankers frequently said, it is too early to judge.
Overall, it seems conceivable that monetary policy in the near future will work with a
broadened mandate, which it seeks to fulfil using an extended set of instruments, whilst
communicating more actively. Whether this combination leads to “crossing the line” with the
government more often remains to be seen—and is important.

47

REFERENCES
Andrade, P., J. Breckenfelder, F. De Fiore, P. Karadi and O. Tristani (2016), “The ECB’s
asset purchase programme: an early assessment,” ECB Working Paper 1956.
Akerlof, G., W. Dickens and G. Perry (1996), “The macroeconomics of low inflation,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No 1, 1–76.
Alesina, A. and G. Tabellini (2008), “Bureaucrats or politicians? Part II: multiple policy
tasks,” Journal of Public Economics, 92, 426–447.
Altavilla, C., G. Carboni and R. Motto (2015), “Asset purchase programmes and financial
markets: lessons from the euro area,” ECB Working Paper 1864.
Ball, L. (2014), “A case for a long-run inflation target of four percent,” IMF Working Paper
14/92.
Bernanke, B. (2009), “The crisis and the policy response,” Stamp Lecture at the London
School of Econmics, 13 January 2009.
Billi, R.M. and G. A. Kahn (2008), “What is the optimal inflation rate?,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, second quarter, 5–28.
Blanchard, O., G. Dell’Ariccia and P. Mauro (2010), “Rethinking macroeconomic policy,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 42 (Supplement), 199–215.
Blinder, A.S. (1997), “Is government too political?,” Foreign Affairs, 76(6), 115–126.
Blinder, A.S. (2000), “Central bank credibility: Why do we care? How do we build it?,”
American Economic Review, 90 (5), 1421–1431.
Blinder, A.S. (2008), “Two bubbles, two paths,” The New York Times, June 15, 2008.
Blinder, A.S. (2015), Comments on Kumar et al., “Inflation targeting does not anchor
inflation expectations: Evidence from firms in New Zealand.”
Blinder, A.S., M. Ehrmann, M. Fratzscher, J. de Haan and D. Jansen (2008), “Central bank
communication and monetary policy: A survey of theory and evidence,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 46, 910-45.
Bodea, C. and R. Hicks (2015), “Price stability and central bank independence: Discipline,
credibility and democratic institutions,” International Organization, 69(1), 35–61.
Born, B., Ehrmann, M. and Fratzscher, M. (2012), “Communicating about macroprudential
supervision – A new challenge for central banks,” International Finance, 15, 179–203.
Borio, C. (2014), “Monetary policy and financial stability: What role in prevention and
recovery?,” BIS Working Paper 440.
Borio, C. and H. Zhu (2008), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing
link in the transmission mechanism?,” BIS Working Paper 268.
Borio, C. and W.R. White (2004), “Whither monetary and financial stability? The
implications of evolving policy regimes,” BIS Working Paper 147.
Buiter, W. (2014), “Central banks: powerful, political and unaccountable?,” Journal of the
British Academy, 2, 269–303, 19 December 2014.
Campbell, J., C. Evans, J. Fisher and A. Justiniano, A. (2012), “Macroeconomic effects of
FOMC forward guidance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 1–54.
Carré, E., J. Couppey-Soubeyran, D. Plihon and M. Pourroy (2013), “Central banking after
the crisis: Brave New World or Back to the Future? Replies to a questionnaire sent to central
bankers and economists,” CES Working Paper 2013.73.

48

Cecchetti, S.G. (2016), “On the separation of monetary and prudential policy: How much of
the pre-crisis consensus remains?,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
forthcoming.
Cecchetti, S.G., H. Genberg, J. Lipsky and S. Wadhwani (2000), “Asset prices and central
bank policy,” Geneva Reports on the World Economy 2, International Center for Monetary
and Banking Studies and Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Cerutti, E., R. Correa, E. Fiorentino and E. Segalla (2015), “Changes in prudential policy
instruments–A new cross country database,” Mimeo.
Chehal, P. and B. Trehan (2009), “Talking about tomorrow’s monetary policy today,” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter No. 2009-35.
Chung, H, J. Laforte, D. Reifschneider and J. C. Williams (2012), “Have we underestimated
the likelihood and severity of zero lower bound events?,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 44 (supplement), 47–82.
Churm, R., M. Joyce, G. Kapetanios and K. Theodoridis (2015), “Unconventional monetary
policies and the macroeconomy: The impact of the United Kingdom’s QE2 and Funding for
Lending Scheme,” Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 542.
Claessens, S., L. Laeven and E. Cerutti (2016), “The use and effectiveness of macroprudential
policies,” Journal of Financial Stability, forthcoming.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko and J. Wieland (2012), “The optimal inflation rate in New
Keynesian models: Should central banks raise their inflation targets in light of the zero
lower bound?,” Review of Economic Studies, 79(4), 1371–1406.
Conti-Brown, P. (2015), “The Twelve Federal Reserve Banks: Governance and
Accountability in the 21st Century,” Rock Center for Corporate Governance at Stanford
University Working Paper 203.
Crowe, C. and E. Meade (2008), “Central bank independence and transparency: Evolution
and effectiveness,” European Journal of Political Economy, 24, 763–777.
Cukierman, A. (2013), “Monetary policy and institutions before, during, and after the global
financial crisis,” Journal of Financial Stability, 9, 373–384.
Cukierman, A., S.B. Webb and B. Neyapti, B. (1992), “Measuring the independence of
central banks and its effects on policy outcomes,” The World Bank Economic Review, 6,
353–398.
Davig, T. and R. S. Gürkaynak (2015), “Is optimal monetary policy always optimal?,”
International Journal of Central Banking, 11, 353–384.
de Haan, J. and S.C.W. Eijffinger (2016), “The political economy of central bank
independence,” forthcoming in: R. Congleton, B. Grofman and S. Voigt (eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Public Choice, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Haan, J. and J. Sturm (2016), “Central bank communication: How to manage
expectations?,” forthcoming in: Mayes, D., P. Siklos and J-E. Sturm (eds.) Handbook on the
Economics of Central Banking, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drehmann, M., C. Borio and K. Tsatsaronis (2011), “Anchoring countercyclical capital
buffers: the role of credit aggregates,” International Journal of Central Banking, 7 (4), 89–
239.
Eggertsson, G. and M. Woodford (2003), “The zero bound on interest rates and optimal
monetary policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 193–233.
Ehrmann, M. (2015), “Targeting inflation from below: How do inflation expectations
behave?,” International Journal of Central Banking, 11, 213–249.
49

Ehrmann, M., S.C.W. Eijffinger and M. Fratzscher (2012), “The role of central bank
transparency for guiding private sector forecasts,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
114(3), 1018–1052.
Engen, E.M., T. Laubach and D. Reifschneider (2015), “The macroeconomic effects of the
Federal Reserve’s unconventional monetary policies,” Finance and Economics Discussion
Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.005.
Eser, F. and B. Schwaab (2016), “Evaluating the impact of unconventional monetary policy
measures: Empirical evidence from the ECB’s Securities Markets Programme,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 119(1), 147–167.
Feroli, M., D. Greenlaw, P. Hooper, F. Mishkin and A. Sufi (2016), “Language after liftoff:
Fed
communication
away
from
the
zero
lower
bound,”
https://research.chicagobooth.edu/igm/usmpf/2016.aspx
Filardo, A. and B. Hofmann (2014), “Forward guidance at the zero lower bound,” BIS
Quarterly Review, March, 37–53.
Gagnon, J., M. Raskin, J. Remache and B. Sack (2011), “Large-scale asset purchases by the
Federal Reserve: Did they work?,” International Journal of Central Banking, 7, 3–44.
Goodhart, C.A.E. and J.P. Ashworth (2012), “QE: a successful start may be running into
diminishing returns,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 28(4), 640–670.
Greider, William (1987), Secrets of the Temple: How the Federal Reserve Runs the Country,
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Hall, R.E. and R. Reis (2015), “Maintaining central-bank financial stability under new-style
central banking,” NBER Working Paper 21173.
Hamilton, J.D., E.S. Harris, J. Hatzius and K.D. West (2015), “The equilibrium real funds
rate: Past, present and future,” NBER Working Paper 21476.
Hammond, G. (2012), “State of the art of inflation-targeting,” Centre for Central Banking
Studies, Handbook No. 29.
Jordá, O., M. Schularick and A. Taylor (2011), “When credit bites back: Leverage, business
cycles and crises,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 45, 3–28.
Jordan, T. (2015), “The impact of international spillovers on inflation dynamics and
independent monetary policy: the Swiss experience,” in: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy.
Joyce, M.A.S., A. Lasaosa, I. Stevens, and M. Tong (2011), “The financial market impact of
quantitative easing,” International Journal of Central Banking, 7(3), 113–161.
Klomp, J. (2010), “Causes of banking crises revisited,” North American Journal of
Economics and Finance, 21, 72–87.
Klomp, J. and J. de Haan (2010), “Inflation and central bank independence: A meta regression
analysis,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 24 (4), 593–621
Krishnamurthy, A., A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), “The effects of quantitative easing on
interest rates: Channels and implications for policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Fall 2011, 214–265.
Krugman, P. (1998), “It’s baaack: Japan’s slump and the return of the liquidity trap,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 137–205.
Krugman, P. (2014), “Inflation targets reconsidered,” Paper presented at the ECB Sintra
Conference, May 2014.
Kumar, S., H. Afrouzi, O. Coibion and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015), “Inflation targeting does
50

not anchor inflation expectations: Evidence from firms in New Zealand,” BPEA Conference
Draft, September 10–11, 2015.
Laeven, L. (2016), Speech at the SUERF Colloquium and Deutsche Bundesbank conference
The SSM at 1, Frankfurt, 3 February 2016.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia (2013), “Systemic banking crises database,” IMF Economic
Review, 61, 225-270.
Laubach, T. and J. C. Williams (2015), “Measuring the natural rate of interest redux,” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2015–16.
Levin, A. (2016), “Reforming the Federal Reserve to ensure accountability, transparency, and
good governance,” at:
https://populardemocracy.org/sites/default/files/Federal%20Reserve%20Reform%20Propos
al%2008apr2016.pdf (last time assessed: 17 September 2016).
Lewis, M. and C.J. McDermott (2016), “New Zealand's experience with changing its inflation
target and the impact on inflation expectations,” New Zealand Economic Papers,
forthcoming.
Meltzer, A.H. (2010), A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 2, 1970–1986, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Mishkin, F.S. (2008), “How should we respond to asset price bubbles?,” Speech at the
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, May15, 2008.
Mishkin, F. S. (2011), “Monetary policy strategy: Lessons from the crisis,” NBER Working
Paper 16755.
Moessner, R. (2013), “Effects of explicit FOMC policy rate guidance on interest rate
expectations,” Economics Letters, 121(2), 170–173.
Moessner, R. (2015), “Reactions of real yields and inflation expectations to forward guidance
in the United States,” Applied Economics, 47(26), 2671–2682.
Moessner, R., D. Jansen and J. de Haan (2016), Update of “Communication about future
policy rates in theory and practice: A survey,” Journal of Economic Surveys, forthcoming.
Nelson, C.R. and A.F., Siegel (1987), “Parsimonious modeling of yield curves,” Journal of
Business, 60(4), 473–489.
Poloz, S.S. (2014), “Integrating uncertainty and monetary policy-making: A practitioner’s
perspective,” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper No. 2014-6
Reifschneider, D. and J.C. Williams (2000), “Three lessons for monetary policy in a lowinflation era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 32 (November, Part 2), 936–966.
Reis, R. (2015), “QE in the future: the central bank’s balance sheet in a fiscal crisis,”
Unpublished manuscript.
Robstad, Ø. (2014), “House prices, credit and the effect of monetary policy in Norway:
Evidence from structural VAR Models,” Norges Bank Working Paper 05-2015.
Rosengren, E. (2015), “Lesson from the U.S. experience with Quantitative Easing,” Speech at
The Peterson Institute for International Economics and Moody’s Investors Service’s 8th Joint
Event on Sovereign Risk and Macroeconomics. Frankfurt am Main. 5 February 2015.
Siklos, P. (2016), “Has monetary policy changed? How the crisis shifted the ground under
central banks,” Unpublished mansucript.
Spiegel, M. (2006), “Did Quantitative Easing by the Bank of Japan ‘work’?,” Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2006-28.
Svensson, L.E.O. (2016), “A simple cost-benefit analysis of using monetary policy for
financial-stability purposes,” in: Blanchard, O.J., R. Rajan, K.S. Rogoff and L.H. Summers
51

(eds.), Progress and Confusion: The State of Macroeconomic Policy, MIT Press,
forthcoming.
Swanson, E. and J. Williams (2014), “Measuring the effect of the zero lower bound on
medium- and longer-term interest rates,” American Economic Review, 104(10), 3154–3185.
Taylor, J.B. (2009), Getting Off Track: How Government Actions and Interventions Caused,
Prolonged, and Worsened the Financial Crisis, Hoover Press.
Weale, M. and T. Wieladek (2016), “What are the macroeconomic effects of asset
purchases?,” Journal or Monetary Economics, 79, 81–93.
Wessel, D. (2009), “In Fed We Trust: Ben Bernanke’s War on the Great Panic,” New York:
Crown/Random House.
Wieladek, T. and A. Garcia Pascual (2016), “The European Central Bank’s QE: a new hope,”
CESifo Working Paper 5946.
Williams, J. C. (2014), “Monetary policy at the zero lower bound: Putting theory into
practice,” Paper presented at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at
Brookings.
Williamson, S.D. (2015), “Current Federal Reserve policy under the lens of economic history:
A review essay,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2015-015A.
World
Bank
(2015),
World
Development
Indicators
Available
at
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/GDP-ranking-table.
Woodford, M. (2013), “Forward guidance by inflation-targeting central banks,” Sveriges
Riksbank Economic Review , 3, 81–120.
Wyplosz, C. (2015), “Grexit: The staggering cost of central bank dependence,” VOXEU, 29
June 2015.
Yellen, J.L. (2014), “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability,” The 2014 Michel Camdessus
Central Banking Lecture, International Monetary Fund, June 2, 2014.

52

Appendix:
Table A1. Detailed results for changing the mandate of the central bank
Governors
All
Reconsidered the mandate? (NG=55, NA=159)
Yes
61.8
No
36.4
Difficult to say
1.8
If yes (NG=34, NA=86)
Change inflation target
20.6
Replace objective
5.9
Add objective
50.0
Other
55.9

Academics
AEs
62.5
37.5
0.0

54.1
39.6
6.3

50.0
0.0
40.0
50.0

31.4
5.8
60.5
24.4

Chi-sq.
vs. all
2.1

vs. AEs
1.2

1.4
0.0
1.1
10.9***

1.4
0.6
1.5
3.0*

Notes: Figures denote percentage of respondents (either central bank governors or academic economists). */*** denotes significance at the 10%/1% level, calculated using
Chi-square tests for the independence of the responses of governors and academics. NG and NA denote the number of responding governors and academics. Source: Authors’
calculations based on survey conducted in 2016.

53

Table A2. Determinants of mandate discussion and the adoption of unconventional monetary policies (univariate probit regressions)

Advanced economy
Crisis (LV dummy)
Inflation targeting
Openness
Flexible exchange rate
CB independence
Change in CB independence

Mandate
Mandate
discussions discussions
outside
inside
0.271**
0.010
(0.132)
(0.146)
0.438***
0.176
(0.136)
(0.161)
0.169
0.050
(0.134)
(0.137)
-0.002**
-0.002**
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.176
0.073
(0.137)
(0.141)
-0.362
-0.289
(0.447)
(0.464)
0.518
0.242
(1.253)
(1.346)

Adopted
rates near
zero
0.376***
(0.059)
0.265**
(0.112)
0.210**
(0.106)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.350***
(0.070)
-0.053
(0.433)
-0.828
(1.239)

Adopted Adopted QE Adopted QE
negative
with govt with other
rates
debt
assets
0.212***
0.275***
0.097
(0.073)
(0.077)
(0.085)
0.194***
0.287***
0.140
(0.075)
(0.079)
(0.085)
-0.105
0.028
-0.105
(0.099)
(0.108)
(0.099)
-0.000
-0.003**
-0.001
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.079
0.131
0.003
(0.085)
(0.102)
(0.090)
0.257
0.095
0.464
(0.352)
(0.376)
(0.381)
0.808
0.267
1.309*
(0.847)
(0.927)
(0.729)

Adopted
forward
guidance
0.174
(0.140)
0.381***
(0.131)
0.313***
(0.109)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.384***
(0.097)
0.334
(0.444)
0.317
(1.323)

Adopted
macro
prudential
0.112
(0.141)
-0.110
(0.148)
0.287**
(0.120)
0.001
(0.001)
0.161
(0.134)
0.035
(0.412)
1.368
(1.137)

Adopted
other tools
0.052
(0.145)
0.125
(0.156)
-0.079
(0.138)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.017
(0.142)
0.075
(0.463)
1.727
(1.241)

Adopted
calendarbased FG
0.163
(0.101)
0.234**
(0.095)
0.102
(0.103)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.253***
(0.083)
0.453
(0.380)
-0.485
(0.983)

Adopted
data-based
FG
0.090
(0.134)
0.377***
(0.100)
-0.094
(0.130)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.115
(0.128)
0.445
(0.400)
1.292
(1.025)

Adopted
qualitative
FG
1.466***
(0.477)
1.603***
(0.394)
0.607
(0.393)
-0.004*
(0.002)
1.243***
(0.444)
1.153
(1.307)
-5.476
(3.705)

Adopted
other FG
0.160**
(0.080)
0.066
(0.094)
0.061
(0.085)
0.001
(0.001)
0.003
(0.090)
0.139
(0.373)
-1.211
(1.089)

Notes: The table reports marginal effects of probit models that explain governors’ responses as to whether or not there has been a discussion about the central bank mandate (left panel) and
whether or not certain policy instruments have been adopted (middle and right panel). Each coefficient comes from a separate regression using the maximum number of observations for each
regressor-regressand pair. Numbers in brackets denote robust standard errors. */**/*** identifies statistical significance at the 10%/5%/1% level. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey
among central bank governors conducted in 2016.

54

Table A3. Determinants of academics’ responses
Mandate
Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation
reconsidered of rates near of negative of QE with of QE with of forward
govt debt other assets guidance
zero
rates
Female
0.040
0.090
0.210*
0.141
0.157
-0.049
(0.119)
(0.111)
(0.127)
(0.131)
(0.122)
(0.073)
Year of PhD
-0.000
0.009***
0.005
0.001
0.004
0.003
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.002)
U.S. PhD
0.113
-0.077
0.107
0.057
0.068
0.103
(0.134)
(0.107)
(0.124)
(0.110)
(0.119)
(0.076)
Central bank experience
0.177**
-0.103
-0.057
-0.075
0.177**
-0.213***
(0.088)
(0.071)
(0.089)
(0.080)
(0.087)
(0.052)
Monetary economist
0.057
-0.008
-0.041
0.003
0.059
0.009
(0.078)
(0.067)
(0.079)
(0.074)
(0.075)
(0.059)
EME background
-0.014
-0.056
-0.219
-0.001
-0.022
-0.229***
(0.169)
(0.147)
(0.176)
(0.143)
(0.179)
(0.079)
Full crisis exposure
-0.071
0.053
0.109
0.008
-0.223
-0.049
(0.139)
(0.108)
(0.142)
(0.118)
(0.145)
(0.079)
Euro area fixed effect
0.275***
-0.288***
-0.176*
-0.098
-0.078
-0.103
(0.103)
(0.076)
(0.105)
(0.091)
(0.101)
(0.075)
UK fixed effect
0.439**
0.187
0.037
0.262
-0.089
(0.174)
(0.168)
(0.157)
(0.174)
(0.085)
Other countries fixed effect
0.088
0.074
0.111
-0.073
-0.148
(0.146)
(0.131)
(0.160)
(0.127)
(0.154)
Observations
156
156
156
143
156
143
Pseudo R2
0.0740
0.135
0.0488
0.0307
0.0926
0.230

Evaluation
of macro
prudential
0.108
(0.108)
0.004
(0.003)
0.253**
(0.111)
-0.114
(0.076)
0.022
(0.069)
-0.417***
(0.151)
-0.220*
(0.122)
0.181*
(0.095)
0.315*
(0.182)
-0.089
(0.131)
156
0.0975

Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation
of other of calendarof datatools
based FG
based FG
0.103
-0.004
(0.070)
(0.121)
-0.003
0.003
-0.003
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
-0.066
0.005
0.216**
(0.075)
(0.085)
(0.105)
0.023
-0.108
-0.114
(0.048)
(0.069)
(0.081)
0.088*
0.115**
-0.044
(0.051)
(0.054)
(0.072)
0.104
-0.046
-0.069
(0.083)
(0.113)
(0.159)
0.016
-0.014
0.057
(0.061)
(0.104)
(0.130)
-0.006
0.006
-0.223**
(0.066)
(0.064)
(0.093)
-0.051
0.186
(0.092)
(0.145)
-0.039
0.021
(0.117)
(0.131)
126
143
156
0.0942
0.0998
0.0942

Evaluation Evaluation
of quali- of other FG
tative FG
0.067
(0.096)
0.002
0.003*
(0.003)
(0.002)
-0.040
-0.002
(0.093)
(0.055)
0.007
0.061
(0.075)
(0.039)
-0.078
0.085*
(0.066)
(0.050)
0.065
(0.148)
0.072
(0.115)
0.102
0.018
(0.083)
(0.069)
-0.198
0.033
(0.145)
(0.059)
-0.160
0.108*
(0.156)
(0.062)
156
115
0.0589
0.224

Change in Exp. change Criticism
communi- in communi- received
cation
cation
0.008
0.001
-0.000
(0.120)
(0.111)
(0.098)
0.005*
0.002
-0.001
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.002
0.006
0.089
(0.101)
(0.106)
(0.111)
-0.130*
-0.018
-0.000
(0.077)
(0.086)
(0.080)
0.054
0.110*
0.017
(0.070)
(0.066)
(0.071)
-0.222
-0.143
-0.235
(0.139)
(0.157)
(0.153)
-0.090
-0.069
-0.090
(0.107)
(0.109)
(0.134)
0.064
0.156
0.189**
(0.091)
(0.098)
(0.089)
-0.046
0.109
-0.135
(0.104)
(0.101)
(0.122)
-0.424***
0.057
-0.334**
(0.110)
(0.123)
(0.169)
154
108
151
0.0624
0.0371
0.0499

Change in Exp. change
indepen- in independence
dence
0.001
-0.026
(0.023)
(0.039)
-0.000
-0.002
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.028
-0.014
(0.037)
(0.060)
-0.017
-0.011
(0.021)
(0.035)
0.009
0.061*
(0.020)
(0.031)
-0.040
-0.110*
(0.036)
(0.067)
-0.036
-0.085
(0.034)
(0.056)
-0.030
0.008
(0.028)
(0.043)
-0.011
-0.099
(0.033)
(0.065)
-0.059
-0.144*
(0.040)
(0.077)
145
151
0.0260
0.0439

Notes: The table reports marginal effects of (ordered) probit models that explain academics’ responses. Numbers in brackets denote robust standard errors. */**/*** identifies statistical
significance at the 10%/5%/1% level. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey among academics conducted in 2016.

55

Table A4. Determinants of the evaluation of unconventional monetary policy tools (multivariate probit regressions)
Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation
of rates near of negative of QE with of QE with of forward
zero
rates
govt debt other assets guidance
Adopted rates near zero
0.463***
0.183*
0.038
0.137
-0.261**
(0.097)
(0.100)
(0.150)
(0.122)
(0.127)
Adopted negative rates
0.072
0.246
-0.308
--0.221
(0.136)
(0.162)
(0.237)
(0.229)
Adopted QE govt debt
-0.094
-0.137
0.492***
-1.143***
-0.143
(0.132)
(0.152)
(0.169)
(0.316)
(0.156)
Adopted QE other assets
-0.385**
--0.349
1.401***
0.054
(0.161)
(0.219)
(0.256)
(0.227)
Adopted forward guidance
0.079
0.091
-0.058
0.008
0.535***
(0.093)
(0.077)
(0.109)
(0.102)
(0.082)
Adopted macro prudential
-0.107
-0.108
0.054
-0.018
0.007
(0.098)
(0.098)
(0.114)
(0.115)
(0.107)
Adopted other tools
0.115
-0.034
-0.111
-0.054
-0.047
(0.092)
(0.091)
(0.114)
(0.112)
(0.108)
Adopted calendar-based FG
------

Evaluation
of macro
prudential
0.001
(0.082)
-0.050
(0.136)
0.014
(0.087)
0.126
(0.144)
0.046
(0.095)
0.387***
(0.037)
0.010
(0.072)
--

Adopted data-based FG

--

--

--

--

--

--

Adopted qualitative FG

--

--

--

--

--

--

Adopted other FG

--

--

--

--

--

--

55
0.358

49
0.240

55
0.150

49
0.162

55
0.329

55
0.449

Observations
Pseudo R2

Evaluation Evaluation Evaluation
of other of calendar- of datatools
based FG
based FG
0.248***
--(0.094)
-0.129
--(0.197)
-0.144
--(0.103)
0.180
--(0.135)
0.058
--(0.074)
0.009
--(0.081)
0.359***
--(0.069)
-0.216***
0.030
(0.081)
(0.097)
-0.073
0.381***
(0.089)
(0.062)
-0.008
-0.009
(0.097)
(0.110)
-0.048
-0.058
-(0.108)
(0.120)
55
55
55
0.423
0.298
0.423

Evaluation Evaluation
of quali- of other FG
tative FG
----

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

0.023
(0.144)
-0.099
(0.126)
0.460***
(0.044)
-0.148
(0.108)
55
0.389

0.074
(0.115)
0.030
(0.109)
-0.052
(0.101)
0.286***
(0.083)
55
0.264

Notes: The table reports marginal effects of probit models that explain governors’ responses as to whether or not they think a certain policy instrument should remain in the central bank toolkit,
or remain in modified form (left panel), or whether or not they think a certain type of forward guidance is effective (right panel). Numbers in brackets denote robust standard errors. */**/***
identifies statistical significance at the 10%/5%/1% level. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey among central bank governors conducted in 2016.

56

Table A5. Determinants of communication, criticism and central bank independence
(univariate ordered probit regressions)
Changes in
communication
Adopted rates near zero
Adopted negative rates
Adopted QE govt debt
Adopted QE other assets
Adopted forward guidance
Adopted macro prudential
Adopted other tools
Advanced economy
Crisis (LV dummy)
Inflation targeting
Openness
Flexible exchange rate
CB independence
Change in CB independence

0.251**
(0.117)
-0.129
(0.174)
0.103
(0.130)
0.238
(0.178)
0.364***
(0.081)
0.311***
(0.106)
0.128
(0.125)
0.130
(0.128)
0.230*
(0.131)
0.010
(0.127)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.223*
(0.125)
-0.766**
(0.310)
1.567
(1.097)

Expected
changes in
communication
-0.208*
(0.115)
-0.031
(0.190)
0.042
(0.130)
-0.181
(0.125)
-0.077
(0.120)
-0.079
(0.110)
0.227**
(0.103)
-0.173
(0.114)
-0.042
(0.123)
-0.009
(0.106)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.227**
(0.114)
-0.399
(0.314)
-1.330
(0.880)

Criticism
received

Change in CB
independence

Expected
change in CB
independence

0.092
(0.082)
0.034
(0.102)
0.109
(0.073)
0.224***
(0.063)
0.235***
(0.078)
0.033
(0.098)
0.092
(0.086)
0.086
(0.075)
0.247***
(0.069)
0.013
(0.083)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.062
(0.083)
0.712**
(0.280)
1.663***
(0.642)

-0.171*
(0.098)
0.373
(0.231)
0.017
(0.125)
0.082
(0.120)
-0.004
(0.081)
0.099
(0.087)
-0.006
(0.085)
-0.170*
(0.098)
0.008
(0.117)
0.016
(0.074)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.171*
(0.098)
0.403
(0.286)
1.525***
(0.506)

0.071
(0.152)
-0.127
(0.161)
-0.072
(0.141)
0.096
(0.181)
0.019
(0.138)
-0.076
(0.131)
0.002
(0.128)
-0.165
(0.119)
-0.086
(0.171)
-0.156
(0.115)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.141
(0.120)
-0.530
(0.348)
-0.818
(1.045)

Notes: The table reports marginal effects of ordered probit models that explain governors’ responses as to the (expected)
change in communications (left panel), the amount of criticism received (middle panel) and the (expected) change in central
bank independence (right panel). Coefficients are for the highest category for communication and criticism, and for the
lowest category for independence. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression using the maximum number of
observations for each regressor-regressand pair. Numbers in brackets denote robust standard errors. */**/*** identifies
statistical significance at the 10%/5%/1% level. Source: Authors’ calculations based on survey among central bank
governors conducted in 2016.

57

CENTRAL BANKERS’ QUESTIONNAIRE ON MONETARY POLICY

I.

CENTRAL BANK GOALS

1.
Did the world financial crisis of 2007-2009 and/or its aftermath create discussions
inside your central bank about whether it would be desirable to modify the bank’s mandate in
any way? (please check one)
Yes
No
Difficult to say
2.

If “Yes,” were those discussions about: (please check as many as apply)
changing the price stability or inflation target
replacing price stability or low inflation by some other objective
extending the mandate by adding some other objective to price stability or low inflation
other (please specify): ______________________________________________
____________________________________________________________

3.
Did the world financial crisis of 2007-2009 and/or its aftermath create discussions in
your country but outside your central bank about whether it would be desirable to modify the
bank’s mandate in any way? (please check one)
Yes
No
Difficult to say
4.

If “Yes,” were those discussions about: (please check as many as apply)

changing the price stability or inflation target
replacing price stability or low inflation by some other objective
extending the mandate by adding some other objective to price stability or low inflation
other (please specify): ______________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________

(continued)

58

II.

CENTRAL BANK INSTRUMENTS

5.
During and after the crisis, a number of central banks adopted or considered
unconventional policies and/or policy instruments they had not utilized before. Please check
below the policies your central bank either adopted, considered but rejected, or did not
consider at all:
Considered, Did not
Unconventional policy or instrument
Adopted
but
consider
rejected
(a)
Policy rate(s) near zero
(b)
Negative interest rates (e.g., the
policy rate or rate on deposits at the
central bank)
(c)
Quantitative
easing
using
government debt
(d)
Quantitative easing using assets
other than government debt
(e)
Forward guidance about future
monetary policy
(f)
Macro-prudential policy*
(g)

Other**

* If so, please specify: ________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
** If so, please specify: ______________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________

(continued)

59

6.
Once conditions return to normal, do you think each of the following should remain a
potential instrument of monetary policy, remain an instrument but in modified form, be
discontinued, or that it is too early to judge? (please check one box per policy/instrument)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Unconventional
policy
instrument:
(a) Policy rate(s) rate near zero

Remain an Remain, but Be
or instrument in modified discontinued
form

Too
early to
judge

(b) Negative interest rates (e.g., the
policy rate or rate on deposits at the
central bank)
(c) Quantitative easing using
government debt
(d) Quantitative easing using assets
other than government debt
(e) Forward guidance about future
monetary policy
(f) Macro-prudential policy*
(g) Other**
∗

If so, please specify: ____________________________________________

__________________________________________________________________
** If so, please specify: ___________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
III.

CENTRAL BANK COMMUNICATION

7.
In your view, did the crisis induce the central bank to communicate with the public
more or less than it did prior to the crisis? (please check one)
much less
somewhat less
no change
somewhat more
much more
difficult to say
(continued)

60

8.
If you answered anything other than “no change” or “difficult to say” just above, do
you think these changes in communication should remain, be reversed, or be taken even
further once conditions return to normal? (please check one)
revert back completely
revert back somewhat
remain
go even further
too early to judge
9.
Forward guidance is often classified as being either calendar based (or “time
contingent”), data based (or “state contingent”), or purely qualitative (that is, providing
neither a time frame nor economic conditions). Which type(s) of forward guidance has your
bank employed? (please check as many as apply):
Calendar based (time contingent)
Data based (state contingent)
Purely qualitative (neither time nor state contingent)
None
Other (please specify): _____________________________________________
Difficult to say
10.
In the future, which type(s) of forward guidance do you believe would be most
effective for your central bank? (please check as many as apply):
Calendar based (time contingent)
Data based (state contingent)
Purely qualitative (neither time nor state contingent)
None
Other (please specify): ______________________________________________
Too early to judge
IV.

CENTRAL BANKS AND THEIR GOVERNMENTS

11.
In its crisis-fighting efforts, how much criticism did your central bank get for acting
politically or crossing the line into the political realm? (please check one)
none
a little
a moderate amount
a lot
difficult to say
(continued)

61

12.
How much independence do you believe your central bank either relinquished, saw
taken away from it, or gained during the crisis? (please check one)
gained independence
neither gained nor lost
lost a little
lost a lot
difficult to say
13.
How much is your central bank’s independence threatened now or in the near-term
future? (please check one)
none
a little
a moderate amount
a lot
too early to judge
==================================================
Name:

_____________________________________________________

Institution:

____________________________________________________

Thank you very much for participating in this survey!
The completed questionnaire may be returned to any one of these three addresses:

E-mail

Hard copy
Fax
Please mark envelope ‘Personal & Confidential’
Dr. David-Jan Jansen Dr. David-Jan Jansen
Dr. David-Jan Jansen
De Nederlandsche Bank
De Nederlandsche Bank
d.jansen@dnb.nl
Economics and Research Division Economics & Research Division
PO Box 98
+31 – 20 524 2514
1000 AB Amsterdam
The Netherlands

62

ECONOMISTS’ QUESTIONNAIRE ON MONETARY POLICY
===============================================
This questionnaire refers many times to “your country’s central bank.” If your country
of residence is in the euro area, please interpret this phrase as referring to the European
Central Bank.

I.

CENTRAL BANK GOALS

1.
Did the world financial crisis of 2007-2009 and/or its aftermath lead you to think that
it would be desirable to modify the mandate of your country’s central bank in any way?
(please check one)
Yes
No
Difficult to say
Please specify your country of residence: ________________________________

2.

If “Yes,” would these modifications apply to: (please check as many as apply)
changing the price stability or inflation target
replacing price stability or low inflation by some other objective
extending the mandate by adding some other objective to price stability or low inflation
other (please specify): ______________________________________________

______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________

(continued)

63

II.

CENTRAL BANK INSTRUMENTS

3.
During and after the crisis, a number of central banks adopted or considered
unconventional policies and/or policy instruments they had not utilized before. Once
conditions return to normal, do you think each of the following should remain a potential
instrument of monetary policy, remain an instrument but in modified form, be discontinued,
or that it is too early to judge? (please check one box per policy/instrument)

Unconventional
policy
instrument:
(a) Policy rate(s) rate near zero

or

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Remain an
instrument

Remain, but
in modified
form

Be
discontinued

Too early
to judge

(b) Negative interest rates (e.g., the
policy rate or rate on deposits at
central bank)
(c) Quantitative easing using
government debt
(d) Quantitative easing using assets
other than government debt
(e) Forward guidance about future
monetary policy
(f) Macro-prudential policy*
(g) Other**

∗

If so, please specify: ____________________________________________

___________________________________________________________________

**

If so, please specify: _____________________________________________

________________________________________________________________
(continued)

64

III.

CENTRAL BANK COMMUNICATION

4.
In your view, did your country’s central bank communicate with the public more or
less during and after the crisis than it had before? (please check one)
much less
somewhat less
no change
somewhat more
much more
difficult to say

5.
If you answered anything other than “no change” or “difficult to say” just above, do
you think these changes in communication should remain, be reversed, or be taken even
further once conditions return to normal? (please check one)
revert back completely
revert back somewhat
remain
go even further
too early to judge

6.
Forward guidance is often classified as being either calendar based (or “time
contingent”), data based (or “state contingent”), or purely qualitative (that is, providing
neither a time frame nor economic conditions). Looking ahead, which type(s) of forward
guidance do you believe would be most effective for your country’s central bank? (please
check as many as apply):
Calendar based (time contingent)
Data based (state contingent)
Purely qualitative (neither time nor state contingent)
None
Other (please specify) ______________________________________________
Too early to judge

(continued)

65

IV.

CENTRAL BANKS AND THEIR GOVERNMENTS

7.
In its crisis-fighting efforts, how much criticism did your country’s central bank get
for acting politically or crossing the line into the political realm? (please check one)
none
a little
a moderate amount
a lot
difficult to say
8.
How much independence do you believe your country’s central bank either
relinquished, saw taken away from it, or gained during the crisis? (please check one)
gained independence
neither gained nor lost
lost a little
lost a lot
difficult to say
9.
How much is your country’s central bank’s independence threatened now or in the
near-term future? (please check one)
none
a little
a moderate amount
a lot
too early to judge
=============================================
Name:

____________________________________________

Institution:

____________________________________________

Thank you very much for participating in this survey!
The completed questionnaire may be returned to any one of these three addresses:
E-mail

Hard copy
Fax
Please mark envelope “Personal & Confidential”
Dr. David-Jan Jansen Dr. David-Jan Jansen
Dr. David-Jan Jansen
d.jansen@dnb.nl
De Nederlandsche Bank
De Nederlandsche Bank
Economics & Research Division
Economics & Research Division
PO Box 98
+31 – 20 524 2514
1000 AB Amsterdam
The Netherlands

66

