                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       CHANGES IN MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE AS DRIVERS OF EMPLOYMENT
                    AND RETIREMENT OF OLDER WOMEN

                                        Claudia Olivetti
                                         Dana E. Rotz

                                      Working Paper 22738
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22738


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2016




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
opinions of their respective institutions, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. This
paper was prepared for the Women Working Longer Conference hosted by the National Bureau
of Economic Research in Cambridge, MA on May 21-22, 2016. We thank Jesse Bruhn, Marco
Ghiani, Elias Sanchez-Eppler, and James Ledoux who provided expert research assistance. We
also thank Claudia Goldin, Larry Katz, Yue Li, Alessandra Voena and participants in the
“Women Working Longer” conference for valuable comments and suggestions. We gratefully
acknowledge the financial support of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation’s Working Longer program
under grant no. 2013-6-16, “Women Working Longer.”

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Claudia Olivetti and Dana E. Rotz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Changes in Marriage and Divorce as Drivers of Employment and Retirement of Older Women
Claudia Olivetti and Dana E. Rotz
NBER Working Paper No. 22738
October 2016
JEL No. J12,J21,J22

                                          ABSTRACT

We study associations among women’s current marital status, past marital history, and later-life
labor force participation. We first document these relationships using data from the 1986 to 2008
waves of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). We then exploit variation in
laws governing divorce across states and over time to quasi-experimentally identify how the
timing of an exogenous increase in divorce risk (that is, the introduction of unilateral divorce)
impacts employment and retirement outcomes for older women. The spread of unilateral divorce,
we find, was associated with cross-cohort differences in the probability of divorce over the
lifecycle. For women with a low risk of divorce, later exposure to unilateral divorce significantly
increases the probability of full-time employment later in life, and significantly decreases
retirement wealth. This finding suggests that ever-divorced women are working longer
remedially; when a woman unexpectedly divorces later in life, she is less likely to have engaged
in precautionary human capital investment and might have to work longer to increase her assets
prior to retirement. For women with a high risk of divorce, later exposure to increases in divorce
risk does not impact full-time employment after age 50 but is positively associated with
investment in education post marriage. These women invest more in their own human capital
within marriage, which might insure them against increases in exogenous divorce risk at later
ages.


Claudia Olivetti
Boston College
Department of Economics
Maloney Hall
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
claudia.olivetti@bc.edu

Dana E. Rotz
Mathematica Policy Research
955 Massachusetts Ave.,
Suite 801
Cambridge, MA 02139
drotz@mathematica-mpr.com
   I. Introduction

       Employment and marital history are both important determinants of labor force
participation and financial security at later ages. But these outcomes and their relationships vary
significantly by gender, education, and cohort. Understanding how employment and marital
history impact later life outcomes is particularly relevant for today’s older women who have
substantially higher labor force participation rates than past cohorts (cf. Goldin and Katz, this
volume, for evidence and discussion of determinants).

       Marital status and marital history both shape employment behavior at later ages. Current
marital status influences employment in the established way. But marital history is also
important, as past marriages and divorces shape previous economic decisions and the processes
of human and financial capital accumulation, and thus can have large impacts on a woman’s
budget set and choices at later ages. In a life-cycle perspective, the age at which a woman
experiences a divorce might matter because it could affect the probability of re-marriage and her
ability to invest in human and financial capital. Increased divorce risk might also impact the
work decisions of a married woman through changes in household bargaining power and
economic incentives throughout married life. In the face of higher divorce risk, which increases
the probability of being in a low consumption state in the future, married women have had an
increased incentive to enhance their own earning potential through labor market experience,
education, and/or occupational choice, as a kind of self-insurance (Greene and Quester, 1982;
Johnson and Skinner, 1986). Moreover, if divorce is more likely, women can anticipate spending
less of their adult life in marriage, thus reducing the returns from specializing in home
production (Stevenson, 2007). Increases in divorce risk might also affect married women’s
propensity to save and accumulate financial capital (Voena, 2015).

       The literature on retirement security has shown the importance of marital history in
determining later-life economic outcomes, focusing mostly on women in the 1930 to 1949 birth
cohorts (e.g., Couch et al., 2011; Holden and Fontes, 2009; Munnell, 2004; Tamborini, Iams, and
Ulker, 2009; Vespa and Painter, 2011; Whitman 2009; Wilmoth and Koso, 2002; Zagorsky,
2005; Zissimopoulus, Karney, and Rauer, 2015). The women in these cohorts had relatively low
labor force attachment. Thus, their financial positions at later ages are intimately linked to their
husbands’ income and savings behaviors. We argue that these cohorts of women were also likely

                                                                                                    -1-
to have been greatly disadvantaged by the (probably unexpected) shift from consent to unilateral
divorce that was associated with a large temporary increase in divorce rates (Friedberg, 1998;
Wolfers, 2006).

       Economists have previously used the shift to unilateral divorce to study the effects of
divorce laws on the welfare of children (Gruber, 2004), marital conflict (Stevenson and Wolfers,
2006), and women’s labor supply decisions (Fernández and Wong, 2014b; Grey, 1998; Peters,
1986; Stevenson, 2008). Unilateral divorce may also have important effects on household
savings and investments. Stevenson (2007) evaluates the impact of divorce on marriage-specific
investment such as the purchase of a house, showing that unilateral divorce tends to decrease
such investments. Voena (2015) estimates the empirical relationship between divorce, married
women’s labor force participation, and household savings. Both papers show that property-
division laws mediate the impact of unilateral divorce on the inter-temporal behavior of married
couples.

       Changes in exposure to divorce risk across cohorts have also been shown to impact
investments. In particular, Fernández and Wong (2014a) use a dynamic quantitative approach to
understand the differences in labor supply and household savings between the 1935 and 1955
cohorts, demonstrating that increases in divorce risk explain a substantial component of the
observed changes for both married and divorced women under the age of 60.

       This chapter contributes to our understanding of women’s later-life labor force
participation (and the impacts of unilateral divorce) by using the widespread changes in divorce
laws occurring from the late 1960s to the 1980s as a quasi-experiment to assess the importance
of marital history on women’s outcomes between ages 50 and 74. We first use data from the
1986 to 2008 waves of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to document the
relationships between current marital status, past marital history, and current employment and
retirement outcomes for women age 50 to 74, born 1911 to 1958. We then exploit variation in
laws governing divorce across states and over time to identify the causal relationship between the
age at divorce and employment and retirement outcomes for older women.

       We find that the spread of unilateral divorce was associated with cross-cohort differences
in the probability of divorce over the lifecycle. We also show that past divorce has long run


                                                                                                 -2-
consequences for older women’s marital, work, and retirement decisions, above and beyond the
impact of past divorce on current marital status. For ever-divorced women, age at divorce is also
an important determinant of these outcomes. Finally, we show that women who were exposed to
unilateral divorce at later ages tended to get divorced later in life (conditional on ever getting
divorced).

        In addition, women exposed to unilateral divorce laws at older ages exhibit patterns of
labor force participation and retirement later in life that differ by their ex ante probability of
divorce. We find that for women who were less likely to expect a divorce, exposure to unilateral
divorce at a later age significantly increases the probability of full-time employment later in life
and reduces the probability of having ever collected social security. For women with a low
likelihood of divorce, age of exposure to unilateral divorce does not affect full-time employment
but is associated with an increased probability of having collected social security or retired. The
pattern is stronger for white women and women with some college or less. For college-educated
women, exposure to unilateral divorce at a later age increases the probability of full-time
employment, irrespective of the divorce risk.

        In exploring the mechanisms for the observed patterns of labor force participation, we
find that, with the exception of women who were at low risk of divorce, later exposure to
unilateral divorce is associated with increases in women’s educational attainment after marriage.
Furthermore, for all women, later exposure to unilateral divorce is associated with significantly
lower level of retirement wealth but a significantly higher probability of having a 401k in one’s
own name. However, both effects are significantly larger for low divorce-risk women than for
high divorce-risk women.

        These findings are consistent with the literature suggesting that married women might
invest more in their human capital (job experience, education) as a precaution against divorce
when divorce risk increases. Women who were not likely to experience a divorce might have
invested less in their own human capital as a hedge against future divorce. When this group was
exposed to unilateral divorce later in life, and their divorce rate subsequently surged, they might
have had to work more post-divorce and later in life to make up for lower earlier levels of human
and financial capital accumulation.


                                                                                                     -3-
    II. Data

        We used the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to explore the
relationship between marital status and later-life labor force participation, drawing data from the
panels that began in 1986 to 1988, 1990 to 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008. These data
provide key demographic information; details on respondents’ current employment
situations and assets; and retrospective information about respondents’ educational
attainment (including the dates degrees were received), employment, and marriages
(including the year of marriage and the date and way a marriage ended, if applicable). 1

        Although many possible measures of labor force participation are of interest and
provided in the SIPP, we focus our analysis on a variable indicating whether a woman
reported working full-time at any point during her participation in the survey. We treat
women employed full- and part-time differently because part-time workers may be
partially retired or could have only a slight attachment to the labor force. Differently, we
chose a broader measure of full-time work (at any point in the SIPP panel, as opposed to a
single point in time) to capture all women who at any recent point had strong attachment
to the labor force. In any case, our results are largely robust to using different measures
of employment.

        In most of the analysis, we restrict the sample to ever-married women ages 50 to
74. We further consider only women who provided information allowing us to identify
their race, state of birth, age at marriage, marital status, employment status, urban
location, and education at the time of their first SIPP interview. We drop all observations
for which the status of a woman’s first marriage could not be identified. The final sample
contains 55,835 observations, including 38,313 never-divorced and 17,522 ever-divorced
women.

        Finally, while the sample sizes for all outcomes can vary due to item-specific non-
response and non-response to one or more of the interviews throughout a SIPP panel,
1
 Kennedy and Ruggles (2014) argue that an increase in reporting errors in the retrospective marital
history across SIPP surveys might lead to undercounting of divorces, thus overstating the decrease in
divorce rates over the past few decades. That is, some of the women in our sample might be incorrectly
classified as never divorced. This potential misclassification, if anything, might dampen the effect of
marital history on current employment.

                                                                                                          -4-
sample sizes also vary because of changes in the content of the SIPP across waves.
Summary statistics for the different samples are reported in Appendix Table 1.

    III. Changes in divorce rates by age and cohort

       Divorce rates were particularly low in the 1950s and early 1960s. They then rose sharply,
doubling between the mid-1960s and the mid-1970s and peaking in the early to mid-1980s.
Starting in 2005, the crude divorce rate has lingered around 3.6 divorces per thousand people—
the lowest divorce rate since 1970 (see Figure 1 and related discussion in Stevenson and Wolfers,
2007). Although the issue has been somewhat contentious, a consensus has emerged in the
economic literature that the shift from mutual consent divorce to unilateral divorce caused a short
run increase in the divorce rate (Friedberg, 1998; Wolfers, 2007).

       Figure 1 shows how women in our different cohorts experienced increases in divorce
rates at different points in the lifecycle, as suggested by the relative timing of unilateral divorce
legislation (to which we will return below). The figure describes the overall patterns in the share
of women ever divorced by age and cohort. The shares are computed as a percentage of all
women (panel A) and of ever-married women (panel B). The horizontal axis is age and different
lines correspond to different cohorts. The patterns are similar for all women and ever-married
women, with minor differences driven by the decline and postponement of marriage in the latest
two cohorts. The graphs show that women in later cohorts are more likely to have ever divorced
their spouses at any given age than women born in earlier cohorts. 2

       We also see that each cohort of interest exhibits a sharp increase in divorce at a different
age. For the 1950 to 1959 cohort, this surge in divorce occurs prior to age 40 and the share of
women ever divorced is essentially unchanged thereafter. For the next earliest cohort (women
born 1940 to 1949), we see a sharp increase in divorce between age 40 and 45. A similar increase
can be seen for women born between 1930 and 1939 around age 50 and a smaller, albeit notable,
increase in divorce can be found for the 1920 to 1929 cohort around age 60. Thus, the different
cohorts exhibited similar increases in divorce in calendar time, but the increase in divorce
occurred when the women were different ages.


2
 By definition, the share of women ever divorced should not decrease by age, and any small downward
changes in Figure 1 are the result of sampling error.

                                                                                                    -5-
       Differences in age at divorce are notable for several reasons. Most prominently, such
differences can affect women’s marital status at later ages, as shown in Figure 2. For example,
when observed in the SIPP between age 50 and 74, 55 percent of women who divorced before
age 30 were currently married and 29 percent were currently divorced. For women who divorced
in their forties, these proportions are reversed: 62 percent of these women were currently
divorced and only 32 percent were currently married. Differences in age at divorce could also
lead to changes in later-life employment and retirement choices, either because of differences in
current marital status or for other reasons. The next section explores this possibility.

   IV. The influence of current and past marital status on later-life outcomes
       A. Descriptive regressions

       We use regression analysis to explore how both marital status and marital history relate to
several employment outcomes for our sample of interest. Table 1 provides prima facie evidence
that changes in patterns of marriage and divorce over time may explain a small but non-trivial
share of the rise in later-life employment of women across birth cohorts.

       The first column of Table 1 contains coefficients from a regression predicting labor force
participation for women age 50 to 74 by birth cohort, including only age, state of birth, and
cohort fixed effects. Column (2) adds in controls for other demographic characteristics,
including education and race; columns (3) to (5) add in controls for marital history, including
current marital status, whether a woman was ever married, divorced, or widowed, and age at first
marriage and divorce for women who ever marry or ever divorce, respectively. When marital
history controls are added, the increasing trend in employment across cohorts flattens somewhat,
with coefficients falling by about 10 percent. The effect of marital history on employment is
stronger for the cohorts of women born between 1930 and 1939, especially when labor force
participation is measured at ages 50 to 59 or ages 60 to 64 (with coefficients dropping by about
20 percent and 15 percent, respectively, see results by age in Appendix Table A2). As shown in
Figure 1, these are cohorts that experienced a surge in divorce around age 50.

       In the remainder of this chapter, we focus on the impact of marital history and current
marital status on later life outcomes, conditional on having ever been married. Our main sample,
therefore, is restricted to ever-married women. Our baseline specification controls for birth year,


                                                                                                  -6-
state of birth, and age fixed effects; age at marriage; and race, education and urban location at the
time of interview.

       The results in Table 2 indicate that ignoring current marital status (column 1), ever-
divorced women are 7 percentage points more likely to have been employed full-time at some
point during their participation in the SIPP. Results are similar if one instead focuses on whether
a woman divorced prior to age 50 (column 3). Including indicators for both current and past
marital status in the regression (column 2) reveals that both variables matter, though a woman’s
current marital status is a stronger predictor of current behavior. In particular, women who have
ever divorced are 2 percentage points more likely than are other women to have worked during
their SIPP panel, conditional on current marital status. Women who were divorced at the time
they entered the SIPP panel were an additional 13 percentage points more likely to have worked
(in total, these women are 15 percentage points more likely to have worked than a never-
divorced, currently married woman). This relationship holds if we instead consider measures of
any employment (both part- and full-time, column 4), or full-time employment at a given point
in time during the SIPP panel (column 5).

       We additionally explored whether the relationship between employment and marital
status varied for women in different demographic groups. Focusing on full-time employment, we
found the relationship was relatively stable (see Table 3). Coefficients on both ever-divorce and
current marital status tend to be similar for both whites (column 1) and non-whites (column 2),
although the relationship between ever-divorce and employment is statistically significant only
among white women. The relationships between the key independent variables and employment
are also similar for women with a college education or more (column 3) and women with some
college or less education (column 4). The exception is the coefficient for being currently
separated, which is 8 percentage points higher for women with college or more education than
for women with some college or less education. We also see similar patterns in the sample of
women ages 60 to 69 (column 5) and ever-married women of a broader age range (50 to 74;
column 2, Table 1).

       We further examined whether marital status was associated with differences in two key,
outcomes closely related to employment: whether a woman classified herself as ever having


                                                                                                  -7-
retired from a job and whether a woman collected social security (both measured at any point in
the SIPP panel, see Table 4).

        Overall, women who were ever divorced were about 2 percentage points more likely to
have collected social security than never-divorced women (column 1). Considering both ever
having been through a divorce and current marital status further suggests that the former is more
important than the latter (column 2). The coefficient on the indicator for ever-divorce is
statistically significant, while that on the indicator for currently being divorced is not. This
pattern could result because many women who were ever divorced can collect social security
based on their ex-spouses earnings, making them more likely to collect social security overall.

        A different pattern emerges when one focuses on the sample of women who were older
than 62 years, and thus eligible to collect social security based on their own work history
(column 3). Within this group, the coefficient on ever-divorce is halved and current marital
status is significantly related to collection of social security. Specifically, conditional on past
marital status, currently divorced women are 3 percentage points less likely to have collected
social security than currently married women who had previously divorced. This suggests that
the relationship between marital status and social security receipt may differ within populations
with different social security eligibility. 3

        Past and present marital status appear to relate differently to the propensity to consider
oneself as having ever retired (columns 4 and 5). Ignoring the separate effect of current marital
status (column 4), women who have ever been through a divorce are about 1 percentage point
less likely to have ever retired than women who have not done so. But currently divorced
women drive this relationship. Indeed, conditional on past marital status, currently divorced
women are 8 percentage points less likely to have ever retired than other women.

        For ever-divorced women, the age at which a divorce occurred is also an important
predictor of later-life outcomes, even conditional on contemporaneous marital status. Table 5
reports regression results for our three outcomes within this sample. Women who divorced later

3
 See Maestas (this volume) for an analysis of social security eligibility on work and (joint) retirement of
older women. See Iam and Tamborini (2012) for a study of the change in marital history and women's
eligibility for Social Security marriage-based benefits at retirement across cohorts and its contribution to
racial inequality at older ages.

                                                                                                          -8-
are more likely to be employed full-time. In particular, when we include in our regression a
linear control for age at divorce, a 10-year increase in age at divorce is associated with a three
percentage points increase in the propensity of a woman to work full-time when observed
between ages 50 and 74 (column 1). However, about half of this effect can be explained by the
impact of age at divorce on current marital status (column 2).

       Further, including controls for age at divorce in ten-year bins (column 3), we find that,
compared to women who divorced before 30, women who divorced in their thirties are 4
percentage points more likely to be employed full-time and women who divorced in their forties
are 6 percentage points more likely to be employed full-time. Women who divorced in their
fifties are the most likely to be working full-time. These women are about 10 percentage points
more likely than women who divorced before 30 to work full-time when observed in the SIPP.
Women who divorced after age 59 are also about 6 percentage points more likely than those who
divorced before age 30 to work (however, our sample contains relatively few women who
divorced after age 59 so some caution should be taken in interpreting this result).

       Current marital status is an important factor for explaining these results (column 4).
When controls for current status are added to the regression, the coefficients for divorcing in
one’s thirties, forties, or fifties decrease by about one-quarter or one-half. The coefficient on
divorce at age 60 or older also decreases by an order of magnitude and becomes insignificant.
Conditional on current marital status, age at divorce is also negatively associated with the
probability a woman collects social security at any point in the panel, though the size of the
effect is relatively small (columns 3 and 4); however, once current marital status is accounted
for, age at marriage is not significantly related to the probability a woman has ever retired from a
job (column 5 and 6).

       B. Changes in divorce legislation

       The associations laid out in the previous section, no matter how interesting, cannot be
interpreted causally. To better understand how differences in marital history can cause
differences in later-life labor force participation, we examine the relationship between divorce
laws and our outcomes of interest. Changes in these laws over time and across states provide a



                                                                                                     -9-
quasi-experiment allowing us to measure plausibly exogenous variation in divorce risk across the
lifecycle.

        Divorce laws indicate the conditions under which a couple can divorce, each spouse's
property rights over household assets, and guidelines for alimony and child support. Prior to the
1960s, most states allowed divorce only under mutual consent. Fault-based divorce law implied
that divorce could be granted only under specific circumstances (for example, adultery, cruelty,
or mental illness) and only under the consent of the party proved innocent (Weitzman, 1985).
The late 1960s brought about the start of a shift in divorce laws from mutual consent to unilateral
consent and from fault to no-fault grounds. 4 Under no-fault divorce, a couple can simply agree
that they cannot stay married due to irreconcilable differences or “irretrievable breakdown”.
Though most states today have established no-fault, unilateral divorce laws, laws differ based on
separation requirements (which may range from none to a one-year requirement) and on whether
fault grounds shape the division of assets and spousal support. These variations have caused a
small amount of variation in the definition of unilateral divorce in the literature.

        We consider a state to have unilateral divorce if they allow no-fault marital dissolution
and do not have a separation requirement. Spousal support and property division can still be at-
fault under our definition. This classification is very similar to others used in the literature (e.g.
Gruber, 2004; Voena, 2015; Wolfers, 2006). 5 As a robustness check we use a second
classification that relaxes the no-separation requirement (that is, a state has unilateral divorce if
and only if no-fault divorce is allowed). Under the second definition, some states are classified as
allowing unilateral divorce at an earlier date and an additional eleven states are classified as ever
allowing unilateral divorce. 6 Our results are robust to using either of these definitions (but we
only report findings based on our preferred definition).

        We use a woman’s state of birth to determine access to unilateral divorce.
4
  The late 1970s and 1980s also saw a shift in divorce laws that establish each spouse's property rights
over household assets. It would also be interesting to investigate whether the changing property division
legislation had an independent impact on employment but this is beyond the scope of this paper.
5
  In some cases, there is a one-year discrepancy between our definition and others in the literature. This is
because we have chosen to classify a state as having unilateral divorce at the time the law becomes
effective (for example, in Arizona the law passed May 1973 but went into effect on January 1974). See
our Appendix for details.
6
  See Appendix Table 3. We also include a third definition that classifies a state as unilateral if
alimony/assets are also assigned on no-fault grounds. See our Appendix for details.

                                                                                                         -10-
Identification is thus necessarily limited to women born in states where there was a change
of legislation prior to the women’s SIPP interviews. Using our preferred definition of
unilateral divorce, the resulting sample contains 30,321 women (including 10,420 ever-
divorced and 19,901 never-divorced women). 7

        Our empirical strategy exploits cross-state, cross-cohort variation in access to unilateral
divorce to identify the (pseudo) causal relationship between age at divorce and older women’s
outcome. Two stylized facts support this strategy.

        First, as shown in Figure 3, exposure to unilateral divorce increased at different times
across cohorts. This figure plots the share of women in our sample who were exposed to
unilateral divorce at a given age, showing how the legal changes affected different cohorts at
different points over their lifecycle and complementing the evidence on divorce rates in Figure 1.
Less than 10 percent of women born between 1910 and 1919 were exposed to unilateral divorce
before age 50. But by age 60, 60 percent had been exposed. Women in the 1920 to 1929 cohort
experience minimal exposure until age 40. But by age 60, 80 percent of women in this cohort
would have had access to unilateral divorce in their birth state. Similarly, women in the 1930 to
1939 cohorts experience the shift in their thirties and early forties and those born from 1940 to
1949 did so in their mid-twenties to mid-thirties. Of those in the most recent cohorts (born 1950
to 1959) 60 percent were exposed to unilateral divorce at age 20.

        Second, as shown in Figure 4, there is a strong, positive correlation between the age at
which divorce became unilateral and age at divorce among ever-divorced women. Thus, different
cohorts exhibited similar increases in both divorce risk and divorce in calendar time, but this
increase occurred when these women were at very different ages. We exploit this variation to
study the relationship between the age divorce risk increased (that is, when unilateral divorce
became available) and later outcomes.

        C. A more causal empirical specification

        We use OLS to explore the relationships of interest. The general version of the
estimating equation is:

7
 Our alternative definition of unilateral divorce yields a sample of 49,806 women (16,174 ever-divorced
and 13,632 never-divorced).

                                                                                                    -11-
        𝑦𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑎 = 𝜑𝑠 + 𝜂𝑐 + 𝑑𝑎 + 𝛼 𝑍𝑖 + 𝛿𝐴𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑡 𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑐 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡𝑠                        (1)

where 𝑦𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑎 is the outcome of interest (e.g., age at divorce, full-time employment, social security,
or retirement) for person i, born in state s and in cohort c, and observed in the SIPP at age a. 𝜑𝑠
are state of birth dummies, ηc are year of birth dummies, 𝑑𝑎 are current age dummies, and 𝑍𝑖 are
individual-level covariates, including age at marriage or duration of marriage when unilateral
divorce was introduced in a woman’s birth state (depending on the specification), race (if
applicable), education at interview (if applicable) and urban location at interview. Women born
in states where unilateral divorce was never available are omitted from this analysis. 8

        The coefficient of greatest interest is that on the variable representing age when unilateral
divorce became available determined based on state of birth, 𝛿. This coefficient represents the
(pseudo) causal effect of having one’s risk of divorce increase one year later in life. An increase
in divorce risk later in life could lead to changes in outcomes for a number of reasons. The
change could affect age at divorce, current marital status, or choices during marriage. It could
also impact the process of marriage formation by altering the reservation quality of matching;
however, for 84 percent women in our sample, marriage occurred before the law change, likely
making this last mechanism less important.

        The age at which unilateral divorce became available is associated with a marginally
significant increase in the probability that a woman has ever been divorced, as shown in Table
6. 9 For the entirety of our sample, we find that a 10-year increase in age at the legalization of
unilateral divorce is associated with a 9 percentage point increase in the probability of ever
divorcing. 10 In column 2 we include controls for the age a woman gained access to unilateral
divorce in ten-year bins, instead of a single, linear control. This reveals the relationship is highly
non-linear and likely driven by the very early legalization of unilateral divorce in a small number
of states. People who were exposed to unilateral divorce in their thirties, forties, or fifties have a
3 percentage-point higher probability of having ever been divorced relative to people who were

8
  We also omit nine women who were born in a state where unilateral divorce became available but were
interviewed for the SIPP prior to that law change. These women lived in the small number of states that
allowed unilateral divorce starting in 1987.
9
  The overall pattern of these results is similar when the outcome of interest is an indicator for having
divorced by age 50 (see Appendix Table 4).
10
   The same results hold controlling for marriage duration, which is negatively correlated to the
probability of having ever-divorced.

                                                                                                      -12-
exposed to unilateral divorce before age 30, though only the difference including women
exposed in their thirties is significant. Women who were only exposed to unilateral divorce after
age 59 have a significant, 5 percentage-point higher probability of being ever divorced,
compared to women exposed before age 30.

       This finding may seem counterintuitive since people who were older when unilateral
divorce was introduced are exposed to the increased divorce risk for fewer years. But this
positive age effect is consistent with theoretical and empirical findings on the impact of
unilateral divorce. As discussed in the literature, the passage of unilateral divorce was associated
with a “pipeline” effect, causing marriages with the smallest surpluses to dissolve (Rasul, 2006;
Wolfers, 2007). Our findings are consistent with older couples being more likely to have
marriages characterized by very small surpluses because, for example, they are more likely to
have older children and reduced gains from specialization. It is also possible that the shock
introduced by the divorce revolution might have been larger or more salient for individuals who
were socialized and lived most of their adult life in a conservative society where marriages
should be saved at all costs and divorce was stigmatized.

       A similar relationship between age at exposure to unilateral divorce and the probability of
divorce holds for whites (column 3) and women age 60 to 69 (column 5) as that seen in the
sample as a whole. However, the relationship is not significant for non-whites and is negative for
women with some college or lower levels of educational attainment, which might be consistent
with stricter or slower moving societal norms for the lesser educated. Differently, for college-
educated women, age when unilateral divorce became available is strongly associated with a
higher probability of ever-divorce.

       Additionally, later exposure to unilateral divorce is associated with later age at divorce
for ever-divorced women (see Table 7). For all such women, a ten-year increase in age when
unilateral divorce was first allowed is associated with a 2.8 year delay in age at divorce (2.6
years controlling for age at marriage). Looking at subgroups, we find a stronger association
within samples of white women, women with some college or less education, and women aged
60 to 69. For these samples, a ten-year increase in the age at which unilateral divorce was
introduced is associated with a four- to five-year delay in age at divorce. Consistent with the


                                                                                                  -13-
results in the previous table, we also find that age when unilateral divorce was implemented does
not correlate with age at divorce for non-white women.

       Having established these associations, we investigate the impact of the age when
unilateral divorce was introduced on full-time employment later in life in Table 8. In addition to
the entire population we split the sample based on an indicator of divorce risk. Specifically, we
estimated a (probit) regression predicting whether a woman ever divorced using birth cohort, age
at first marriage, education, race, and urban status at interview. We then estimate each woman’s
probability of divorce. Low divorce-risk women are defined as those in the lower quartile of the
predicted probability distribution; high divorce-risk women are defined as those in the upper
quartile of the predicted probability distribution.

       We find that the association between later-life employment and the age unilateral divorce
was introduced varies substantially depending on the sample considered. For all ever-married
women together (the first panel of Table 8) and high divorce-risk women (third panel), full-time
employment in later life is not significantly affected by the age when unilateral divorce became
available. This pattern is consistent with a model in which women who face a higher divorce risk
respond by remaining employed during marriage as a precaution, thus insuring themselves
against a potential future loss of income due to divorce (Johnson and Skinner, 1986) and
allowing them to retire earlier. In this case, delays in the age of exposure to unilateral divorce
should have only small (or no) impacts on later life work decisions.

       The age when unilateral divorce became available has very different implications for low
divorce-risk women (the second panel). For this group, later exposure to unilateral divorce is
associated with higher full-time employment at age 50 to 74. This is consistent with low divorce-
risk women having to work remedially post-divorce and later in life if they are exposed to an
increase in divorce risk when they are older. In other words, women facing a low divorce risk are
less likely to have engaged in “precautionary working.”

       The size and significance of the coefficient is relatively consistent across specifications
and does not depend on whether we control for age at marriage or the duration of marriage when
unilateral divorce became available or whether we control for current marital status. The
estimates imply that a ten-year delay in unilateral divorce legislation would be associated with a


                                                                                                     -14-
decline in the probability of full-time employment by 10 percentage points. Given that the
fraction of women in our sample who were employed full time increased from 28 to 49 percent
between the 1930 to 1939 and 1940 to 1949 cohorts, this is a (possibly too) large effect.

       Endogeneity bias may be responsible for some of the magnitude of the effect. Although
the age unilateral divorce was introduced is plausibly exogenous, the variable also likely affects
some of the (endogenous) control variables – age at marriage, current marital status, education at
interview – that have been shown to be important in predicting divorce (Bac, 2015; Rotz,
forthcoming). Moreover, other factors discussed in this volume and elsewhere (for example,
financial literacy, see Lusardi and Mitchell, 2008 and this volume, and changes in the normal
retirement age and delay retirement credits, see Cribb et al., 2014 and Panis et al., 2002) are
obviously also important determinants and potentially correlated with both our key variables.

       Looking at other outcomes of interest (Table 9), we can see that for all ever married
women, being older when unilateral divorce was introduced is associated with a lower
probability of being employed (either full-time or part-time) at ages 50 to 74. Additionally, a
later age when unilateral divorce was introduced is associated with an increase in both the
probability of having ever collected social security or having ever retired at any point in the
panel. This relationship also holds for the high divorce-risk group. The results for low divorce-
risk, ever-married women (panel 2) show that being older at the introduction of unilateral
divorce is also associated with an increase in employment (full time or part time) and with a
lower probability of having collected social security within this sample.

       We further consider how our results for employment vary by education and race in Table
10. The patterns for white women and women with some college or less educational attainment
are similar to those in the overall sample of ever-married women with one exception. For less-
educated, high divorce-risk women, older age when unilateral divorce was introduced also
decreases the probability of being employed full-time. For non-white and more-educated women,
a ten-year increase in the age when unilateral divorce was introduced is associated with increases
in full-time employment of about 3 and 6 percentage points, respectively. For women ages 60 to
69, the coefficient on age when unilateral divorce was introduced is about 1 percentage point.




                                                                                                  -15-
       Finally, Table 11 investigates some of the potential mechanisms for the relationship
between age at exposure to unilateral divorce and labor force participation. In the sample of all
ever-married women, older age at the introduction of unilateral divorce is associated with an
increase in the probability of obtaining additional education after marriage and an increase in the
probability of having one’s own 401(k) or other retirement plan, but a decrease in the balance of
reported retirement accounts. The findings are roughly similar within the low and high divorce-
risk subsamples with one exception. For women with low divorce risk, later exposure to the
unilateral laws does not affect the probability of having obtained additional education after their
first marriage started. This suggests that some of the observed effects on labor force participation
may be explained by changes in education and savings; however, the pattern of results suggests
that other forces must also be at play.

   V. Conclusions

       Overall, we demonstrate that the spread of unilateral divorce was associated with cross-
cohort differences in the probability of divorce over the lifecycle. We also show that past divorce
has long run consequences for older women’s marital, work, and retirement decisions, above and
beyond the impact of past divorce on current marital status. For ever-divorced women, the age at
divorce is also an important determinant of these outcomes. Finally, we show that women who
were exposed to unilateral divorce at later ages tended to get divorced later in life (conditional on
ever getting divorced). They also exhibit different patterns of labor force participation and
retirement at older ages.

       For women with a low risk of divorce, an increase in divorce risk at a later age
significantly increases the probability of full-time employment later in life (and reduces the
probability of having ever collected social security). Additionally, later exposure to unilateral
divorce is associated with a significantly lower level of retirement wealth. These findings
suggest that ever-divorced women are working longer remedially. When they unexpectedly
divorce at later ages, they are less likely to have engaged in precautionary human capital
investment and have to work longer to increase their assets prior to retirement.

        For all other women, a later exposure to divorce risk does not impact full-time
employment after age 50 but is associated with investment in education post marriage. These


                                                                                                    -16-
women invest more in their own human capital within marriage, and seem to be insured against
increasing exogenous divorce risk at later ages.

        Our results suggest that changes in marital history and marital status, though not
unilateral divorce law, can explain a non-trivial fraction of the increase in women’s employment
later in life. Controlling for age, race, education, and urban location, we estimate that women
born in the early 1950s were about 19 percentage points more likely to be employed full-time at
ages 50 to 74, compared to women born in the 1920s. Changes in the share of women ever
married, ever divorced, or ever widowed explain about 11 percent of this difference. Likewise,
changes in marital history can explain 12 percent of the 4 percentage-point difference in later-life
employment between cohorts born in the 1920s and 1930s and 16 percent of the 14 percentage-
point difference between cohorts born in the 1920s and 1940s. However, we find no evidence
that the timing of the large-scale introduction of unilateral divorce, which represents a
substantial, one-time increase in divorce risk, plays a major role in understanding the increase in
women’s employment for the population as a whole. There is no statistically significant
relationship between the timing of unilateral divorce legislation and later-life employment, on
average. This null effect, however, masks substantial heterogeneity across women. We find that
women facing a relatively low risk of divorce, especially women with a college degree, were
more likely to work later in life if they were older when unilateral divorce laws were passed.
Conversely, women with less education were less likely to work at ages 50-74 if they gained
access to unilateral divorce later in life.




                                                                                                  -17-
                                         References

Bac, Mehmet. 2015. “On the Selection Effects Under Consent and Unilateral Divorce,”
    American Law and Economics Review 17 (1): 43-86.

Couch, Kenneth A., Christopher R. Tamborini, Gayle L. Reznik, and John W. R. Phillips. 2011.
   “Impact of Divorce on Women’s Earnings and Retirement Over the Life Course.” Paper
   presented at the Conference on Unexpected Lifecycle Events and Economic Well-Being:
   The Roles of Job Loss, Disability, and Changing Family Structure. Federal Reserve Bank of
   San Francisco, CA.

Cribb, Jonathan, Carl Emmerson, and Gemma Tetlow. 2014. “How Does Increasing the Early
    Retirement Age for Women Affect the Labour Supply of Women and Their Husbands?”
    Netspar Discussion Paper 01/2014-003.

Fernández, Raquel, and Joyce C. Wong. 2014a. “Divorce Risk and Working Wives: A
    Quantitative Life-cycle Analysis of Female Labor Force Participation.” Economic Journal
    124 (576): 319-58.

Fernández, Raquel and Joyce Wong. 2014b. “Unilateral Divorce, the Decreasing Gender Gap,
    and Married Women’s Labor Force Participation,” American Economic Review, 104(5):
    342-47.

Friedberg, Leora. 1998. “Did Unilateral Divorce Raise Divorce Rates? Evidence from Panel
    Data,” American Economic Review 88 (3): 608-27.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “Women Working Longer: Facts and Some
    Explanations.” NBER Working Paper No. 22607 (September).

Gray, Jeffrey. 1998. “Divorce-law Changes, Household Bargaining and Female Labor Supply,”
    American Economic Review 88 (3): 628-42.

Greene, W.H., and A.O. Quester. 1982. “Divorce Risk and Wives’ Labor Supply Behavior,”
    Social Science Quarterly 63 (1): 16-27.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2004. “Is Making Divorce Easier Bad for Children? The Long-run
    Implications of Unilateral Divorce,” Journal of Labor Economics 22 (4): 799-833.

Holden, Karen, and Fontes, Angela. 2009 “Economic Security in Retirement,” Journal of
    Women, Politics & Policy 30 (2): 173-97.



                                                                                           -18-
Iams, Howard M., and Christopher R. Tamborini. 2012. “The Implications of Marital History
    Change on Women's Eligibility for Social Security Wife and Widow Benefits, 1990–2009,”
    Social Security Bulletin 72 (2): 23-38.

Johnson W.R., and J. Skinner. 1986. “Labor Supply and Marital Separation,” American
    Economic Review 76 (3): 455-69.

Kennedy, Sheela and Steven Ruggles. 2014. “Breaking Up is Hard to Count: The Rise of
   Divorce in the United States, 1980-2010,” Demography 51(2): 587-98.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2016. “Older Women’s Labor Market Attachment,
    Retirement Planning, and Household Debt.” NBER Working Paper No. 22606, September.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2008. “Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do
    Women Fare?,” American Economic Review 98 (2): 413–17.

Maestas, Nicole. 2016. “The Return to Work and Women’s Employment Decisions.” Paper
   presented at the Women Working Longer Conference, Cambridge MA, May 21-22.

Munnell, Alicia. 2004. “Why Are So Many Older Women Poor?” Just the Facts on Retirement
   Issues (April) Just the Facts 10, Center for Retirement Research, Boston College.

Panis, Constantijn, Michael Hurd, David Loughran, Julie Zissimopoulos, Steven Haider, and
    Patricia St. Clair. 2002. “The Effects of Changing Social Security Administration’s Early
    Retirement Age and the Normal Retirement Age.” Santa Monica, CA: RAND.

Rasul, Imran. 2006. “Marriage Markets and Divorce Laws.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
    Organization 22 (1): 30-69.

Rotz, Dana. Forthcoming. “Why Have Divorce Rates Fallen? The Role of Women’s Age at
    Marriage,” Journal of Human Resources.

Stevenson, Betsey. 2007. “The Impact of Divorce Laws on Marriage-Specific Capital,” Journal
    of Labor Economics 25 (1): 75-94.

Stevenson, Betsey. 2008. “Divorce Law and Women’s Labor Supply,” Journal of Empirical
    Legal Studies 5 (4): 853-73.

Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2006. “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce
    Laws and Family Distress,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1): 267-88.


                                                                                            -19-
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2007. “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and Their
    Driving Forces,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2): 27-52.

Tamborini, Christopher R., Howard M. Iams, and Kevin Whitman. 2009. “Marital Histories,
   Race, and Social Security Spouse and Widow Benefit Eligibility in the United States,”
   Research on Aging 31 (5): 577-605.

Tamborini, Christopher R., and Kevin Whitman. 2007. “Women, Marriage, and Social Security
   Benefits: Revisited,” Social Security Bulletin 67 (4): 1-20.

Ulker, Aydogan. 2009. “Wealth Holdings and Portfolio Allocation of the Elderly: The Role of
    Marital History,” Journal of Family and Economic Issues 30 (1): 90-108.

Vespa, Jonathan, and Matthew A. Painter II. 2011. “Cohabitation History, Marriage, and Wealth
   Accumulation,” Demography 48 (3): 983-1004.

Voena, Alessandra. 2015. “Your, Mine and Ours: Do Divorce Laws Affect the Inter-temporal
   Behavior of Married Couples?,” American Economic Review 105 (8): 2295-332

Wilmoth, Janet, and Gregor Koso. 2002. “Does Marital History Matter? Marital Status and
   Wealth Outcomes Among Preretirement Adults.” Journal of Marriage and Family 64 (1):
   254-68.

Weitzman, Lenore. 1985. The Divorce Revolution. Free Press; Collier Macmillan.

Wolfers, Justin. 2007. “Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation and
   New Results,” American Economic Review 96 (5): 1802-1820.

Zagorsky, Jay L. 2005. “Marriage and Divorce’s Impact on Wealth,” Journal of Sociology 41
    (4): 406-24.

Zissimopoulos, Julie, Benjamin Karney, and Amy Rauer. 2008. “Marital Histories and Economic
     Well-Being.” Michigan Retirement Research Center Research Paper No. WP 180.




                                                                                            -20-
Appendix: Timing of divorce law reforms

Note that in the descriptions below, “fully unilateral” means meeting all criteria, including no-
fault alimony and having no separation requirement. “Unilateral” means that the state was not
no-fault for alimony and/or assets.

ALASKA
Alaska became a no-fault state in 1935. Its first unilateral law was passed in 1962 and went into
effect in 1963. The state became no-fault for alimony and asset division in 1974.

ALABAMA
Alabama became fully no-fault in 1971 (alimony and asset division included.)

ARKANSAS
Became no-fault in 1937 with a three-year mutually agreed upon separation requirement, and
unilateral divorce allowed in 1979. The unilateral law had an 18-month separation requirement,
and was no-fault for alimony/asset division.

ARIZONA
Arizona became fully no-fault (alimony included) with a law passed in 1973, which was
implemented beginning in 1974.

CALIFORNIA
California passed a fully unilateral law (alimony included) in 1969, which went into effect in
1970.

COLORADO
Colorado introduced fully unilateral divorce with a law passed in 1971, effective starting 1972.

CONNECTICUT
Unilateral law passed in 1973 with no separation requirement.

DELAWARE
Unilateral with six-month separation requirement in 1968, where couples also had to show that
the marriage had been irretrievably broken for two years prior to the divorce. Became no-fault
for alimony in 1979 (passed 1978) but still had a separation requirement.

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Unilateral law passed in 1977. There was a six-month separation requirement if mutually agreed
upon or a twelve-month separation requirement if contested.


                                                                                                 -21-
FLORIDA
Introduced unilateral divorce with no separation requirement in 1971. Went no-fault for alimony
in 1978.

GEORGIA
Introduced unilateral divorce with no separation requirement in 1973.

HAWAII
Introduced fully unilateral divorce in 1972.

IOWA
Iowa introduced unilateral divorce with no separation requirement in 1970, and without fault for
alimony in 1972.

IDAHO
Idaho introduced unilateral divorce with no separation requirement in 1971, and for alimony in
1990.

ILLINOIS
Illinois became no-fault in 1984, with a law initially passed in 1983. The state had a two-year
separation requirement and was no-fault for alimony.

INDIANA
Indiana introduced fully unilateral divorce in 1973.

KANSAS
Kansas introduced unilateral divorce in 1969 and no-fault for alimony in 1990.

KENTUCKY
Kentucky introduced unilateral divorce in 1972 and no-fault for alimony in 1987.

LOUISIANA
We are omitting Louisiana. There was little reliable and consistent information to be found on its
historical divorce laws. This state allows covenant marriages, which only allow mutual consent
or fault-based divorce. This is consistent with much of the literature.

MASSACHUSETTS
Massachusetts introduced unilateral divorce in 1975.




                                                                                                  -22-
MARYLAND
Allowed divorce after five-year separation in 1937, but was not unilateral. This was shortened to
three years in 1969. The state introduced unilateral divorce with a two-year separation
requirement in 1983.

MAINE
Introduced unilateral divorce in 1973, and added no-fault alimony in 1985.

MICHIGAN
Introduced unilateral divorce with no separation requirement in 1972.

MINNESOTA
Introduced fully unilateral divorce in 1974.

MISSOURI
Introduced unilateral divorce in 1973.

MISSISSIPPI
Mississippi added no-fault provisions to its grounds for divorce in 1976, but did not allow
unilateral divorce. This was expanded upon in 1978 by adding no-fault alimony, but the state
remains non-unilateral.

MONTANA
Montana added no-fault provisions to its allowed grounds for divorce in 1973. It introduced fully
unilateral divorce, no-fault alimony included, in 1975.

NORTH CAROLINA
We omit North Carolina. This state only allowed divorce on grounds of separation (originally 10
years, shortened to 1 year in 1965) and adultery, and not on other traditional grounds such as
cruelty, neglect to provide, and desertion.

NORTH DAKOTA
North Dakota introduced fully unilateral divorce in 1971.

NEBRASKA
Nebraska introduced fully unilateral divorce in 1972.

NEW HAMPSHIRE
New Hampshire introduced unilateral divorce in 1971.



                                                                                               -23-
NEW JERSEY
New Jersey introduced unilateral divorce in 1971 with an 18-month separation requirement.

NEW MEXICO
New Mexico became no-fault in 1933, and unilateral in 1973. The state then became no-fault for
alimony in 1976.

NEVADA
Nevada had loose divorce laws preceding the no-fault revolution but was not fully unilateral until
1973.

NEW YORK
New York is a fault state for divorce. Reforms in 1966 and 1967 only served to expand the list of
allowed fault grounds for divorce.

OHIO
Ohio introduced unilateral divorce with a one-year separation requirement in 1974.

OKLAHOMA
Oklahoma was a unilateral state as early as 1953, and became no-fault for alimony in 1975.

OREGON
Oregon introduced fully unilateral divorce in 1973.

PENNSYLVANIA
Pennsylvania introduced unilateral divorce with some noteworthy restrictions in 1980. There was
a three-year separation requirement, and if the divorce was contested, the court had to rule the
marriage was broken in order for the divorce to be completed immediately. If the court did not
rule that the marriage was broken, the judge had the authority to assign counseling before
effectively ending the marriage. In practice, this appears to have allowed unilateral divorce.

RHODE ISLAND
Rhode Island introduced unilateral divorce in 1976.

SOUTH CAROLINA
South Carolina introduced unilateral divorce with a three-year separation requirement in 1969.
This requirement was shortened to one year in 1979.

SOUTH DAKOTA
South Dakota introduced unilateral divorce in 1985.


                                                                                              -24-
TENNESSEE
Tennessee introduced unilateral divorce in 1977 with a separation requirement that varied upon
whether the couple had children (minimum two years).

TEXAS
Texas introduced unilateral divorce in 1970.

UTAH
Utah introduced unilateral divorce in 1987.

VIRGINIA
Virginia introduced unilateral divorce in 1960 with a varying separation requirement (minimum
six months).

VERMONT
Vermont introduced unilateral divorce in 1969 with a six-month separation requirement.

WASHINGTON
Washington introduced fully unilateral divorce in 1973.

WISCONSIN
Wisconsin introduced unilateral divorce with a one-year separation requirement in 1978.

WEST VIRGINIA
West Virginia introduced unilateral divorce with a two-year separation requirement in 1977,
which has since been reduced to one year.

WYOMING
Wyoming introduced unilateral divorce in 1977.




                                                                                              -25-
                                     Figure 1: Change in Incidence of Divorce, Age Profiles by Cohort




Source: Women ages 40 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.




                                                                                                        -26-
                               Figure 2: Age at Divorce and Current Marital Status (Ever-Divorced Women)

               80%



               70%                                          68%



               60%                                                                        58%



               50%                           47%                                                      46%



               40%

                                 32%
               30%                                                                                                  28%



               20%



               10%



                0%
                                       Currently divorced                                       Currently married

                                                                  Before 30   30s   40s


Source: Ever-divorced women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.




                                                                                                                          -27-
                           Figure 3: Exposure to Unilateral Divorce over the Life-cycle by Cohort (All Women)




Source: Women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.




                                                                                                                -28-
                         Figure 4: Age at Divorce and Age Unilateral Divorce Introduced (Ever-Divorced Women)




Source: Ever-divorced women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Age when unilateral divorce became available is determined based on state of birth. Average age at divorce
        is computed conditional on having ever divorced. Women born in states where unilateral divorce was
        never available are omitted from this analysis.




                                                                                                                    -29-
Table 1: Trends in Employment for Women Age 50-74 (All Marital Statuses)

                                                 Employed full time at any point in SIPP panel

Cohort (1920-1924 omitted)
1925-1929                           0.0176***        0.00573         0.00336        0.00228         0.00265
                                    (0.00511)      (0.00513)       (0.00514)      (0.00513)       (0.00516)
1930-1934                           0.0400***      0.0209***       0.0174***      0.0144***      0.0148***
                                    (0.00536)      (0.00539)       (0.00540)      (0.00539)       (0.00542)
1935-1939                           0.0990***      0.0589***       0.0499***      0.0457***      0.0466***
                                    (0.00575)      (0.00577)       (0.00579)      (0.00578)       (0.00581)
1940-1944                           0.169***        0.112***       0.0975***      0.0926***      0.0935***
                                    (0.00655)      (0.00677)       (0.00682)      (0.00681)       (0.00683)
1945-1949                           0.228***        0.159***        0.140***       0.134***        0.135***
                                    (0.00756)      (0.00793)       (0.00800)      (0.00799)       (0.00802)
1950-1954                           0.268***        0.192***        0.170***       0.164***        0.164***
                                    (0.00865)      (0.00909)       (0.00917)      (0.00917)       (0.00920)
Ever married                                                      -0.0787***        -0.0136         -0.0290
                                                                   (0.00895)       (0.0579)        (0.0599)
Ever divorced                                                      0.0758***      0.0190***       -0.0313**
                                                                   (0.00420)      (0.00510)        (0.0128)
Ever widowed                                                       0.0278***       -0.00890        0.000610
                                                                   (0.00447)      (0.00905)       (0.00983)
Currently married                                                                   -0.0717         -0.0878
                                                                                   (0.0577)        (0.0592)
Currently divorced                                                                   0.0628          0.0338
                                                                                   (0.0580)        (0.0595)
Currently separated                                                                 -0.0513         -0.0675
                                                                                   (0.0596)        (0.0611)
Currently widowed                                                                  -0.00699         -0.0303
                                                                                   (0.0583)        (0.0598)
Ever married × age at first                                                                      0.00135***
marriage                                                                                         (0.000342)
Ever divorced × age at first                                                                     0.00174***
divorce                                                                                          (0.000371)
Other demographic controls              No            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
Observations                          56,866         54,160          53,673         53,673           53,236
R-squared                              0.20           0.23            0.24           0.24             0.24

Source: Women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: All columns control for age fixed effects. Columns two to five additionally control for race
       (white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (less than high school, high school,
       some college, college or more), and urban location at interview. Omitted categories: never
       married, cohort born 1920-1924. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                       -30-
Table 2: Marital Status and Later-Life Employment – Ever-Married Women

                                                                                                 Employed at any        Employed full time
                                       Employed full time at any point in panel
                                                                                                  point in panel       in first panel month

Ever divorced                  0.0740***             0.0202***                                      0.0172***               0.0159***
                               (0.00406)             (0.00491)                                      (0.00502)               (0.00480)
Ever widowed                   0.0277***              -0.00590                                       -0.00826                -0.00479
                               (0.00419)             (0.00835)                                      (0.00909)               (0.00806)
Currently divorced                                    0.126***                                      0.0944***                0.134***
                                                     (0.00671)                                      (0.00653)               (0.00674)
Currently widowed                                    0.0586***                                      0.0586***               0.0548***
                                                     (0.00893)                                      (0.00988)               (0.00858)
Currently separated                                    0.00793                                      -0.0368**                 0.0162
                                                      (0.0166)                                       (0.0166)                (0.0161)
Divorced by 50                                                              0.0762***
                                                                             (0.00439)
Widowed by 50                                                               0.0474***
                                                                             (0.00701)
Age at marriage               0.00194***             0.00153***             0.00213***             0.000897***             0.000788***
                              (0.000315)             (0.000315)             (0.000352)              (0.000328)              (0.000305)
Observations                     55,835                55,835                 49,242                  55,835                  55,835
R-squared                        0.260                  0.266                  0.252                   0.289                   0.213

Source: Ever-married women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth, age fixed effects, race (white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (less
        than high school, high school, some college, college or more), and urban location at interview. Omitted category for marital status is
        currently married. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                                                                      -31-
Table 3: Marital Status and Later-Life Employment by Demographic Group (Ever-Married Women)

                                                              Employed full time at any point in panel
                                                                                              Some College or
                                       White              Non-White          College+                                      60-69
                                                                                                    Less

Ever divorced                       0.0206***                0.0129               0.0221           0.0202***             0.0172**
                                     (0.00567)             (0.00989)            (0.0135)            (0.00526)            (0.00739)
Ever widowed                          0.00428             -0.0428**              -0.0138            -0.00616              0.00587
                                     (0.00940)              (0.0180)            (0.0278)            (0.00874)             (0.0115)
Currently divorced                   0.141***             0.0903***             0.143***            0.121***             0.132***
                                     (0.00791)              (0.0128)            (0.0160)            (0.00745)             (0.0113)
Currently widowed                   0.0621***             0.0584***            0.0902***           0.0539***            0.0432***
                                      (0.0102)              (0.0187)            (0.0305)            (0.00932)             (0.0125)
Currently separated                    0.0204              0.000137             0.0854**             0.00173              0.0529*
                                      (0.0269)              (0.0212)            (0.0429)             (0.0178)             (0.0278)
Age at marriage                     0.00161***            0.00147**            -0.000724           0.00202***           0.00215***
                                    (0.000376)            (0.000577)           (0.000781)          (0.000344)           (0.000484)
Observations                           42,539                13,296                9,479              46,356               21,336
R-squared                               0.267                 0.272                0.275               0.248                0.124

Source: Ever-married women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth, age fixed effects, race if applicable (white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at
        interview if applicable (less than high school, high school, some college, college or more), and urban location at interview. Omitted
        category for marital status is currently married. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                                                                      -32-
Table 4: Marital Status, Social Security and Retirement (Ever-Married Women)

                                     Collected social security at any point in panel                Retired at any point in panel
                                      All ever-married women                 Aged 62+                 All ever-married women

Ever divorced                     0.0177***             0.0194***              0.00815*           -0.00767**             0.0267***
                                  (0.00304)              (0.00370)            (0.00419)            (0.00384)             (0.00476)
Ever widowed                      0.0504***             0.0224***             -0.000693             0.00106               0.0195**
                                  (0.00349)              (0.00678)            (0.00697)            (0.00448)             (0.00871)
Currently divorced                                        -0.00152           -0.0255***                                 -0.0807***
                                                         (0.00524)            (0.00650)                                  (0.00624)
Currently widowed                                       0.0359***               0.00218                                 -0.0346***
                                                         (0.00735)            (0.00724)                                  (0.00950)
Currently separated                                      0.0365**               -0.0270                                 -0.0698***
                                                          (0.0142)             (0.0179)                                   (0.0144)
Age at marriage                 -0.000790***          -0.000830***          -0.00108***          0.000833***            0.00111***
                                  (0.000252)            (0.000253)           (0.000289)           (0.000313)            (0.000313)
Observations                        55,835                 55,835                24,958             55,835                 55,835
R-squared                            0.623                  0.623                 0.086              0.358                  0.360

Source: Ever-married women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth, age fixed effects, race if applicable (white, black, Hispanic, other races), education at
        interview if applicable (less than high school, high school, some college, college or more), and urban location at interview. Omitted
        category for marital status is currently married. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                                                                      -33-
Table 5: Divorce Timing and Later-Life Outcomes—Ever-Divorced Women

                                                                                       Collected social security       Retired at any point in
                                 Employed full time at any point in panel
                                                                                        at any point in panel                  panel

Ever widowed               -0.0116        -0.0271         -0.0130        -0.0266        0.0354**       0.0356**         -0.0108        -0.0111
                          (0.00977)       (0.0196)       (0.00977)      (0.0196)         (0.0162)       (0.0162)        (0.0194)       (0.0194)
Currently divorced                       0.115***                       0.116***         0.00745        0.00710       -0.0799***     -0.0798***
                                         (0.00768)                     (0.00767)        (0.00598)      (0.00598)       (0.00708)      (0.00706)
Currently widowed                       0.0746***                      0.0738***        0.0428**       0.0428**         -0.0220        -0.0217
                                          (0.0211)                      (0.0211)         (0.0176)       (0.0176)        (0.0214)       (0.0214)
Currently separated                        0.0430                         0.0434        0.0511**       0.0511**        -0.0628**      -0.0629**
                                          (0.0307)                      (0.0307)         (0.0253)       (0.0253)        (0.0251)       (0.0251)
Age at divorce           0.00318***     0.00159***                                    -0.000723**                      -0.000289
                         (0.000375)     (0.000388)                                     (0.000304)                     (0.000372)
Divorced in 30s                                         0.0407***      0.0306***                       -0.00845                       -0.00791
                                                         (0.00828)      (0.00825)                      (0.00642)                      (0.00770)
Divorced in 40s                                         0.0642***      0.0347***                        -0.0108                       -0.00142
                                                         (0.00983)      (0.00995)                      (0.00766)                      (0.00923)
Divorced in 50s                                         0.0962***      0.0461***                      -0.0300***                       -0.0222
                                                          (0.0148)       (0.0151)                       (0.0115)                       (0.0147)
Divorced at age 60+                                      0.0635**        0.00602                       -0.00223                        0.00246
                                                          (0.0284)       (0.0288)                       (0.0226)                       (0.0309)
Age at marriage          0.00224***      0.00179**      0.00256***     0.00189**        -0.00102       -0.00111        0.00127         0.00132
                         (0.000853)      (0.000850)     (0.000843)     (0.000840)      (0.000681)     (0.000675)      (0.000815)     (0.000807)
Observations               17,054          17,054          17,054         17,054         17,054          17,054         17,054          17,054
R-squared                   0.247           0.258           0.247          0.258          0.556           0.556          0.350           0.350

Source: Ever-divorced women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth, age fixed effects, race (white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (less
        than high school, high school, some college, college or more) and urban location at interview. Omitted categories: currently married,
        divorced before age 30. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.



                                                                                                                                                      -34-
Table 6: Effect of Age When Unilateral Divorce Became Available on Divorce Probability – Ever-Married Women

                                                                 Indicator for Ever-Divorce
                                                                                        College or         Some college
                                 All women                  White        Non-white                                             60-69
                                                                                           more              or less

Age when                 0.00887*                          0.00945*         -0.0130        0.0687***        -0.0156***       0.0141***
unilateral divorce
introduced               (0.00452)                        (0.00487)         (0.0163)        (0.00937)       (0.00502)       (0.000894)
Unilateral divorce
introduced:
    30s                                   0.0254**
                                           (0.0111)
   40s                                      0.0307
                                           (0.0185)
   50s                                      0.0249
                                           (0.0220)
   60+                                     0.0500*
                                           (0.0295)
Age at marriage         -0.0141***       -0.0141***       -0.0147***      -0.0123***       -0.0144***       -0.0140***      -0.0121***
                        (0.000456)       (0.000457)       (0.000475)      (0.000631)        (0.00153)       (0.000471)      (0.000673)
Observations              30,321            30,321          23,001           7,320            5,050           25,271          11,357
R-squared                  0.086             0.086           0.093           0.081            0.084            0.091           0.076

Source: Ever-married women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if ever divorced and zero otherwise. Age when unilateral divorce became available is
        determined based on state of birth. Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth, age fixed effects, race (if applicable; white, black,
        Hispanic, other race), education at interview (if applicable; less than high school, high school, some college, college or more), and urban
        location at interview. Omitted category for age when unilateral divorce was introduced is before age 30. Women born in states where
        unilateral divorce was never available are omitted from this analysis. Standard errors clustered by state of birth are reported in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                                                                     -35-
Table 7: Effect of Age When Unilateral Divorce Became Available on Age at Divorce – Ever-Divorced Women

                                                                                    Age at Divorce
                                                                                                                              Some
                                         All ever-divorced women                  White       Non-white      College+                       60-69
                                                                                                                             college

Age when unilateral divorce
introduced                         0.281**        0.258**       0.790***       0.443***        0.00457         0.174        0.484***      0.537***
                                   (0.122)        (0.111)        (0.134)        (0.144)        (0.337)        (0.208)        (0.141)      (0.0566)
Age at marriage                                  0.967***                      0.987***       0.920***       0.847***       0.996***      0.991***
                                                 (0.0215)                      (0.0275)       (0.0235)       (0.0536)       (0.0237)      (0.0406)
Marriage duration when                                          0.694***
unilateral divorce introduced                                   (0.00995)
Observations                       10,133         10,133         10,133          7,457          2,676          1,672          8,461         3,370
R-squared                           0.074          0.228          0.560          0.229          0.264          0.296          0.210         0.215

Source: Ever divorced women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Age when unilateral divorce became available is determined based on state of birth. Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth,
       age fixed effects, race (if applicable; white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (if applicable; less than high school, high
       school, some college, college or more), and urban location at interview. Women born in states where unilateral divorce was never
       available are omitted from this analysis. Standard errors clustered by state of birth are reported in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                                                                    -36-
Table 8: Effect of Age When Unilateral Divorce Became Available on Later-Life Employment – Ever-
Married Women

                                                 Employed full time at any point in panel
                                                            All ever-married
Age when unilateral divorce          -0.00226           -0.00510             -0.00110       -0.00541
introduced                           (0.00428)         (0.00422)            (0.00412)       (0.00412)
Age at marriage                     0.000492*        0.000953***
                                    (0.000268)        (0.000286)
Marriage duration when                                                   -0.000765***       -0.000160
unilateral divorce introduced                                              (0.000153)       (0.000144)
Control for current marital
status                                  No                 Yes               No                Yes
Observations                          30,370             30,370            30,370            30,370
R-squared                             0.251               0.262             0.251             0.261
                                                            Low Divorce Risk
Age when unilateral divorce          0.106***           0.107***         0.108***           0.107***
introduced
                                     (0.0263)           (0.0264)            (0.0262)         (0.0263)
Age at marriage                      0.000172           0.000493
                                    (0.000679)         (0.000653)
Marriage duration when                                                   -0.000767***       -0.000217
unilateral divorce introduced                                              (0.000260)       (0.000242)
Control for current marital
status                                 No                  Yes                 No              Yes
Observations                          7,582               7,582              7,582            7,582
R-squared                             0.246               0.256              0.247            0.256
                                                           High Divorce Risk
Age when unilateral divorce          0.00223            -0.00142            0.00177         -0.00299
introduced                          (0.00488)          (0.00470)          (0.00506)         (0.00485)
Age at marriage                    0.00943***          0.0105***
                                    (0.00302)          (0.00289)
Marriage duration when                                                     -0.00118         -0.000251
unilateral divorce introduced                                            (0.000732)         (0.000775)
Control for current marital
status                                 No                  Yes                 No              Yes
Observations                          7,586               7,586               7,586           7,586
R-squared                             0.139               0.150               0.138           0.148

Source: Ever-married women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Age when unilateral divorce became available is determined based on state of birth. Regressions
       also control for birth year, state of birth, age fixed effects, race (white, black, Hispanic, other
       race), education at interview (less than high school, high school, some college, college or more),
       and urban location at interview. Women born in states where unilateral divorce was never
       available are omitted from this analysis. Standard errors clustered by state of birth are reported in
       parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.



                                                                                                         -37-
Table 9: Effect of Age When Unilateral Divorce Became Available on Later-Life Outcomes – Ever-Married Women

                                                         Employed at any point in          Collected social security at
                                                                                                                          Retired at any point in panel
                                                                 panel                         any point in panel
                                                                                                        All
Age when unilateral divorce introduced                         -0.00877**                           0.00820**                      0.0487***
                                                                 (0.00335)                          (0.00350)                       (0.00332)
Marriage duration when unilateral divorce                     -0.000715***                          -5.14e-05                    -0.000670***
introduced                                                      (0.000205)                         (0.000121)                      (0.000170)
Observations                                                      30,370                              30,370                         30,370
R-squared                                                          0.281                               0.621                          0.356
                                                                                               Low Divorce Risk
Age when unilateral divorce introduced                          0.0617***                          -0.0159***                       -0.00851
                                                                 (0.0156)                           (0.00514)                       (0.0162)
Marriage duration when unilateral divorce                      -0.00110***                           0.000114                     -0.00148***
introduced                                                      (0.000366)                         (0.000156)                      (0.000385)
Observations                                                       7,582                               7,582                          7,582
R-squared                                                          0.255                               0.641                          0.303
                                                                                               High Divorce Risk
Age when unilateral divorce introduced                           -0.00242                           0.00991**                     0.0475***
                                                                 (0.00471)                          (0.00464)                      (0.00473)
Marriage duration when unilateral divorce                        -9.11e-05                           0.000216                     0.00133**
introduced                                                      (0.000846)                         (0.000652)                     (0.000610)
Observations                                                       7,586                               7,586                         7,586
R-squared                                                          0.160                               0.427                         0.264

Source: Ever-married women ages 60 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Age when unilateral divorce became available is determined based on state of birth. Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth,
        age fixed effects, race (white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (less than high school, high school, some college and
        college or more), and urban location at interview. Women born in states where unilateral divorce was never available are omitted from this
        analysis. Standard errors clustered by state of birth are reported in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                                                                    -38-
Table 10: Effect of Age When Unilateral Divorce Became Available on Later-Life Employment – Subsamples of Ever-Married Women

                                                                             Employed full time during panel
                                                                                                          Some college or
                                             White                 Non-white           College+                                          60-69
                                                                                                                  less
                                                                                           All
Age when unilateral divorce                -0.0121**               0.0329***           0.0577***             -0.0276***                -0.0138***
introduced                                  (0.00509)               (0.0103)           (0.00897)              (0.00598)                (0.000941)
Marriage duration when                   -0.000812***              -0.000439          -0.00179**           -0.000683***               -0.00117***
unilateral divorce introduced              (0.000195)             (0.000277)          (0.000749)             (0.000151)                (0.000215)
Observations                                 23,047                   7,323               5,053                 25,317                   11,380
R-squared                                     0.251                   0.267               0.273                  0.233                    0.111
                                                                                   Low Divorce Risk
Age when unilateral divorce                 0.0688**                -0.00197           0.0572***               0.0778**                -0.0200***
                                            (0.0280)               (0.00614)            (0.0206)               (0.0380)                 (0.00298)
Marriage duration when                   -0.000806***             -0.00104**            -0.00174            -0.000654**                -0.000878*
                                           (0.000262)             (0.000507)           (0.00164)             (0.000265)                (0.000443)
Observations                                  5,747                   1,830               1,262                  6,317                    2,841
R-squared                                     0.249                   0.273               0.341                  0.218                    0.131
                                                                                  High Divorce Risk
Age when unilateral divorce                0.000621                 -0.0310*            0.0489**              -0.0128**                -0.0295***
                                           (0.00485)                (0.0182)            (0.0186)              (0.00501)                 (0.00249)
Marriage duration when                     -0.00117                 -0.00187           -0.00533*               -0.00115                -0.00185**
                                           (0.00104)               (0.00164)           (0.00279)             (0.000728)                (0.000725)
Observations                                 5,757                    1,830               1,264                  6,326                    2,841
R-squared                                    0.135                    0.192               0.182                  0.128                    0.118

Source: Ever-married women ages 60 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Age when unilateral divorce became available is determined based on state of birth. Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth,
       age fixed effects, race if applicable (white, black, other race), education at interview if applicable (less than high school, high school, some
       college), and urban location at interview. Omitted categories: Hispanic, College or more. Women born in states where unilateral divorce
       was never available are omitted from this analysis. Standard errors clustered by state of birth are reported in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.



                                                                                                                                                    -39-
Table 11: Potential Mechanisms – Ever-married Women

                                                                                                                        Total market value of all
                                                           Obtained additional                Have IRA, Keogh,
                                                                                                                       retirement accounts in own
                                                         education after marriage          401K,403b, or thrift plan
                                                                                                                                  name
                                                                                           All ever-married women
Age when unilateral divorce introduced                          0.0284***                         0.0244***                    -3,125***
                                                                (0.00175)                         (0.00409)                      (459.5)
Observations                                                      30,275                            21,830                       21,837
R-squared                                                          0.608                             0.230                        0.063
                                                                                              Low Divorce Risk
Age when unilateral divorce introduced                            0.00613                          0.103***                    -6,657**
                                                                 (0.00892)                         (0.0179)                     (2,774)
Observations                                                       7,569                             5,346                       5,351
R-squared                                                          0.785                             0.353                       0.098
                                                                                              High Divorce Risk
Age when unilateral divorce introduced                          0.0279***                         0.0269***                    -4,354***
                                                                (0.00223)                         (0.00699)                      (662.3)
Observations                                                       7,553                             5,347                        5,347
R-squared                                                          0.454                             0.128                        0.048

Source: Ever-married women ages 60 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Age when unilateral divorce became available is determined based on state of birth. Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth,
       age fixed effects, race (white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (less than high school, high school, some college and
       college or more), urban location at interview, and age at marriage. Women born in states where unilateral divorce was never available are
       omitted from this analysis. Standard errors clustered by state of birth are reported in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                                                                -40-
Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                                                  Women where           Ever-divorced women
                                                  Ever-married women    Ever-divorced women   unilateral divorce ever      where unilateral
                                                                                                     available          divorce ever available
                                                              Std.                  Std.                      Std.                     Std.
                                                   Mean                  Mean                   Mean                      Mean
                                                            Deviation             Deviation                Deviation                Deviation
Age                                                60.76      7.11       59.34      6.77        60.72         7.08        59.35        6.76
Marital status at first SIPP interview
 Currently married                                  0.68      0.47        0.44       0.50       0.70         0.46        0.46          0.50
 Currently divorced                                 0.14      0.35        0.44       0.50       0.13         0.34        0.43          0.49
 Currently separated                                0.01      0.12        0.02       0.13       0.01         0.11        0.02          0.12
 Currently widowed                                  0.17      0.37        0.10       0.30       0.15         0.36        0.10          0.30
Ever divorced                                       0.32      0.47        1.00       0.00       0.31         0.46        1.00          0.00
Age at divorce (conditional on divorce)            33.61      9.97       33.61       9.97       33.41        9.93        33.41         9.93
Divorced by 50                                      0.29      0.46        0.98       0.15       0.29         0.45        0.98          0.16
Age at marriage                                    22.08      5.79       20.85       4.45       21.99        5.70        20.77         4.37
Education at first SIPP interview
 Less than HS                                      0.19       0.40        0.18       0.39       0.19         0.40         0.18         0.39
 High school graduate                              0.37       0.48        0.32       0.47       0.37         0.48         0.32         0.47
 Some college                                      0.26       0.44        0.32       0.47       0.27         0.44         0.33         0.47
 College or more                                   0.17       0.37        0.17       0.38       0.17         0.37         0.16         0.37
Education at marriage
 Less than HS                                      0.28       0.45        0.32       0.47       0.32         0.47         0.34         0.47
 High school graduate                              0.40       0.49        0.38       0.49       0.38         0.48         0.37         0.48
 Some college                                      0.24       0.43        0.25       0.43       0.23         0.42         0.24         0.43
 College or more                                   0.08       0.26        0.05       0.22       0.07         0.25         0.05         0.21
Obtained additional education after
                                                   0.80       0.40        0.85       0.36       0.80         0.40         0.85        0.36
marriage
Obtained additional degree after marriage          0.28       0.45        0.39       0.49       0.28         0.45         0.39         0.49
Worked during 1st marriage                         0.66       0.47        0.63       0.48       0.66         0.47         0.63         0.48
Employed full time at any point in panel           0.33       0.47        0.43       0.50       0.33         0.47         0.43         0.50
Employed at any point in panel                     0.49       0.50        0.58       0.49       0.49         0.50         0.58         0.49
Employed full time in first panel month            0.28       0.45        0.36       0.48       0.27         0.45         0.36         0.48
Collected social security at any point in panel    0.53       0.50        0.48       0.50       0.52         0.50         0.48         0.50
Retired at any point in panel                      0.46       0.50        0.44       0.50       0.45         0.50         0.43         0.50



                                                                                                                                          -41-
Appendix Table 1, continued
                                                                                               Women where           Ever-divorced women
                                             Ever-married women      Ever-divorced women   unilateral divorce ever      where unilateral
                                                                                                  available          divorce ever available
                                                         Std.                    Std.                      Std.                     Std.
                                              Mean                    Mean                   Mean                      Mean
                                                       Deviation               Deviation                Deviation                Deviation
Have IRA, Keogh, 401K, 403b, or Thrift
                                              0.48       0.50          0.44       0.50       0.49         0.50         0.45        0.50
plan
Total market value all retirement accounts
                                              8,461     32,251        9,739     33,833      82,967       31,737       9,630       33,536
in own name

Observations                                 54,964                   17,970                49,882                    16,174

Source: Ever-married women age 50-74 in the SIPP 1986-2008 Panels.




                                                                                                                                          -42-
Appendix Table 2A: Trends in Women’s Employment by Age –Women Age 50-59

                                    Employed full time at any point in SIPP panel
Cohort (Omit 1920-
1924)
1925-1929                     0.0703*
                             (0.0416)
1930-1934                     0.104**          0.0258           0.0184           0.00537
                             (0.0408)         (0.0178)         (0.0180)          (0.0181)
1935-1939                    0.191***        0.0787***        0.0629***         0.0459**
                             (0.0410)         (0.0178)         (0.0180)          (0.0181)
1940-1944                    0.288***         0.149***         0.127***         0.109***
                             (0.0408)         (0.0180)         (0.0183)          (0.0184)
1945-1949                    0.328***         0.177***         0.149***         0.132***
                             (0.0408)         (0.0177)         (0.0180)          (0.0180)
1950-1954                    0.361***         0.201***         0.172***         0.155***
                             (0.0410)         (0.0180)         (0.0183)          (0.0184)
Ever married                                                 -0.0871***           0.0174
                                                               (0.0128)          (0.0994)
Ever divorced                                                 0.0895***        -0.0588***
                                                              (0.00651)          (0.0202)
Ever widowed                                                   0.0242**          -0.0108
                                                               (0.0101)          (0.0188)
Currently married                                                                 -0.135
                                                                                 (0.0981)
Currently divorced                                                              -0.00849
                                                                                 (0.0984)
Currently separated                                                               -0.128
                                                                                  (0.100)
Currently widowed                                                                -0.0504
                                                                                 (0.0995)
Ever married × age at                                                           0.000974
first marriage                                                                 (0.000596)
Ever divorced × age                                                            0.00297***
at first divorce                                                               (0.000591)
Demographic controls            No               Yes             Yes                Yes
Observations                  27,763           25,891          25,594             25,397
R-squared                      0.054            0.077           0.084              0.092

Source: Women ages 50 to 59 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: All columns control for age fixed effects. Columns two to five additionally control for race
       (white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (less than high school, high school,
       some college, college or more), and urban location at interview. Robust standard errors in
       parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                       -43-
Appendix Table 2B: Trends in Women’s Employment by Age –Women Age 60-64

                                   Employed full time at any point in SIPP panel
Cohort (Omit 1920-
1924)
1925-1929                 0.0341***         0.0274*          0.0164           0.00210
                           (0.0115)         (0.0140)        (0.0143)          (0.0144)
1930-1934                 0.0938***        0.0717***       0.0605***         0.0424***
                           (0.0131)         (0.0159)        (0.0162)          (0.0163)
1935-1939                  0.145***         0.111***       0.0933***         0.0799***
                           (0.0142)         (0.0170)        (0.0173)          (0.0174)
1940-1944                  0.167***         0.128***        0.107***         0.0912***
                           (0.0128)         (0.0155)        (0.0159)          (0.0160)
1945-1949                  0.216***         0.166***        0.144***          0.128***
                           (0.0149)         (0.0177)        (0.0180)          (0.0182)
1950-1954

Ever married                                               -0.0877***         -0.0268
                                                             (0.0217)          (0.147)
Ever divorced                                               0.0705***        -0.0715**
                                                            (0.00942)         (0.0283)
Ever widowed                                                 0.0261**         0.00439
                                                             (0.0104)         (0.0205)
Currently married                                                              -0.120
                                                                               (0.145)
Currently divorced                                                             0.0251
                                                                               (0.146)
Currently separated                                                           -0.0784
                                                                               (0.148)
Currently widowed                                                             -0.0644
                                                                               (0.146)
Ever married × age                                                          0.00228***
at first marriage                                                           (0.000755)
Ever divorced × age                                                         0.00245***
at first divorce                                                            (0.000834)
Demographic
                              No              Yes              Yes              Yes
controls
Observations                12,686           11,854          11,755           11,665
R-squared                    0.052            0.070           0.076            0.087

Source: Women ages 60 to 64 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: All columns control for age fixed effects. Columns two to five additionally control for race
       (white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (less than high school, high school,
       some college, college or more), and urban location at interview. Robust standard errors in
       parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                       -44-
Appendix Table 2C: Trends in Women’s Employment by Age –Women Age 65-69

                               Employed full time at any point in SIPP panel
Cohort (Omit 1920-
1924)
1925-1929                 0.0330***     0.0259***       0.0232***          0.0235***
                          (0.00754)     (0.00767)       (0.00768)          (0.00769)
1930-1934                 0.0620***     0.0494***       0.0455***          0.0447***
                          (0.00905)     (0.00976)       (0.00974)          (0.00973)
1935-1939                 0.0897***     0.0752***       0.0682***          0.0662***
                          (0.00881)     (0.00892)       (0.00885)          (0.00889)
1940-1944                 0.106***      0.0858***       0.0766***          0.0772***
                           (0.0110)      (0.0113)        (0.0114)           (0.0114)
1945-1949

1950-1954

Ever married                                            -0.0676***           -0.124
                                                          (0.0183)           (0.105)
Ever divorced                                            0.0688***           0.0258
                                                         (0.00802)          (0.0250)
Ever widowed                                             0.0226***           0.0132
                                                         (0.00675)          (0.0147)
Currently married                                                            0.0179
                                                                             (0.104)
Currently divorced                                                            0.118
                                                                             (0.105)
Currently separated                                                          0.0733
                                                                             (0.111)
Currently widowed                                                            0.0438
                                                                             (0.105)
Ever married × age                                                         0.00144**
at first marriage                                                          (0.000605)
Ever divorced × age                                                         0.000140
at first divorce                                                           (0.000741)
Demographic
                             No             Yes             Yes                Yes
controls
Observations                10,057        10,055           9,978              9,895
R-squared                    0.021         0.030           0.040              0.047

Source: Women ages 65 to 69 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: All columns control for age fixed effects. Columns two to five additionally control for race
       (white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (less than high school, high school,
       some college, college or more), and urban location at interview. Robust standard errors in
       parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                       -45-
Appendix Table 3: Unilateral Divorce Laws

         Definition 1: No-fault    Definition 2: No-fault       Definition 3: No-fault
                                                                                           Wolfers   Gruber   Friedberg    Voena
            dissolution, no        dissolution, allows for   dissolution, no separation,
                                                                                           (2006)    (2004)    (1998)      (2015)
        separation requirement    separation requirement     no-fault property/alimony
AK                1963                      1963                         1974               1935     1935        no       pre-1967
AL                1971                      1971                         1971               1971     1971       1971        1971
AR                 no                       1979                          no                 no       no         no          no
AZ                1974                      1974                         1974               1973     1973       1973        1973
CA                1970                      1970                         1970               1970     1970       1970        1970
CO                1972                      1972                         1972               1971     1972       1971        1972
CT                1973                      1973                          no                1973     1973       1973        1973
DC                 no                       1977                          no                 no       no         no          no
DE                1974                      1968                          no                 no      1968        no         1968
FL                1971                      1971                         1978               1971     1971       1971        1971
GA                1973                      1973                          no                1973     1973       1973        1973
HI                1972                      1972                         1972               1973     1972       1973        1972
IA                1970                      1970                         1972               1970     1970       1970        1970
ID                1971                      1971                         1990               1971     1971       1971        1971
IL                 no                       1984                          no                 no       no         no          no
IN                1973                      1973                         1973               1973     1973       1973        1973
KS                1969                      1969                         1990               1969     1969       1969        1969
KY                1972                      1972                         1987               1972     1972       1972        1972
LA                 no                        no                           no                 no       no         no          no
MA                1975                      1975                          no                1975     1975       1975        1975
MD                 no                       1983                          no                 no       no         no          no
ME                1973                      1973                         1985               1973     1973       1973        1973
MI                1972                      1972                          no                1972     1972       1972        1972
MN                1974                      1974                         1974               1974     1974       1974        1974
MO                 no                       1973                          no                 no       no         no          no



                                                                                                                                     -46-
Appendix Table 3, continued

         Definition 1: No-fault    Definition 2: No-fault      Definition 3: No-fault
                                                                                           Wolfers   Gruber   Friedberg    Voena
            dissolution, no        dissolution, allows for   dissolution, no separation,
                                                                                           (2006)    (2004)    (1998)      (2015)
        separation requirement    separation requirement     no-fault property/alimony
MS                 no                        no                           no                 no       no         no          no
MT                1975                      1975                        1975                1975     1973       1975        1973
NC                 no                        no                           no                 no       no         no          no
ND                1971                      1971                        1971                1971     1971       1971        1971
NE                1972                      1972                        1972                1972     1972       1972        1972
NH                1971                      1971                        1971                1971     1971       1971        1971
NJ                 no                       1971                          no                 no       no         no          no
NM                1973                      1973                        1976                1973     1933       1973        1973
NV                1973                      1973                        1973                1973     1967       1973        1967
NY                 no                        no                           no                 no       no         no          no
OH                 no                       1974                          no                 no       no         no         1992
OK                1953                      1953                        1975                1953     1953        no       pre-1967
OR                1971                      1971                        1971                1973     1971       1973        1971
PA                 no                       1980                          no                 no       no         no          no
RI                1976                      1976                          no                1976     1975       1976        1975
SC                 no                       1969                          no                 no       no         no          no
SD                1985                      1985                          no                1985     1985       1985        1985
TN                 no                       1977                          no                 no       no         no          no
TX                1970                      1970                          no                1974     1970       1974        1970
UT                1987                      1987                          no                 no      1987                   1987
VA                 no                       1960                          no                 no       no         no          no
VT                 no                       1969                          no                 no       no         no          no
WA                1973                      1973                        1973                1973     1973       1973        1973
WI                 no                       1978                          no                 no      1978        no         1978
WV                 no                       1977                          no                 no       no         no         1984
WY                1977                      1977                          no                1977     1977       1977        1977


                                                                                                                                     -47-
Appendix Table 4: Effect of Age When Unilateral Divorce Became Available on Indicator for Divorce by Age 50 – Ever-Married Women

                                                                                              Indicator for Divorced by 50
                                                                                                                               Some
                                                                                                              College or
                                                                  All women         White       Non-White                    college or       60-69
                                                                                                                more
                                                                                                                                less

Age when unilateral divorce became available                       0.00828*       0.00943*       -0.0112       0.0568***      -0.0113**     0.0132***
                                                                   (0.00456)      (0.00489)      (0.0158)      (0.00858)      (0.00540)    (0.000919)
Age at marriage                                                   -0.0152***     -0.0155***    -0.0139***     -0.0159***     -0.0150***    -0.0129***
                                                                  (0.000488)     (0.000526)    (0.000599)      (0.00137)     (0.000452)    (0.000671)
Observations                                                        29,623         22,518         7,105           4,873         24,750        11,050
R-squared                                                            0.096          0.103         0.094           0.097          0.100         0.081

Source: Ever-married women ages 50 to 74 at first interview in the SIPP, 1986-2008 Panels.

Notes: Age when unilateral divorce became available is determined based on state of birth. Regressions also control for birth year, state of birth,
       age fixed effects, race (if applicable; white, black, Hispanic, other race), education at interview (if applicable; less than high school, high
       school, some college and college or more) and urban location at interview. Women born in states where unilateral divorce was never
       available are omitted from this analysis. Standard errors clustered by state of birth are reported in parentheses.

*/**/*** Significantly different from zero at the 0.10/0.05/0.01 level, two tailed test.




                                                                                                                                                   -48-
