                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   SILVER POINTS, SILVER FLOWS, AND THE MEASURE OF CHINESE FINANCIAL
                              INTEGRATION

                                        David S. Jacks
                                           Se Yan
                                         Liuyan Zhao

                                     Working Paper 22747
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22747


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2016




We appreciate feedback from presentations at the 2015 All-UC Frontiers in Chinese Economic
History Conference and the 2016 Asian Historical Economics Conference. Jacks also gratefully
acknowledges research support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by David S. Jacks, Se Yan, and Liuyan Zhao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Silver Points, Silver Flows, and the Measure of Chinese Financial Integration
David S. Jacks, Se Yan, and Liuyan Zhao
NBER Working Paper No. 22747
October 2016
JEL No. E42,F15,N25

                                         ABSTRACT

To what degree were Chinese financial markets integrated with the rest of the world prior to the
1949 Revolution and to what extent was the Chinese foreign exchange market efficient during
this period?We estimate silver points for the Shanghai market from 1905 to 1933 to answer these
questions. Our inferred measures are small in value, favorably match measured costs of the silver
trade derived from contemporary accounts, and fare well in the comparison to estimates of trans-
Atlantic gold points. This leads to the conclusion that the degree of Chinese financial market
integration was substantial. However, during and immediately after World War I, our estimates of
the silver points increased appreciably, foreshadowing the collapse of China’s linkages to world
financial markets beginning in the 1930s.

David S. Jacks                                  Liuyan Zhao
Department of Economics                         School of Economics
Simon Fraser University                         Peking University
8888 University Drive                           Beijing 100871
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6                             China
CANADA                                          zhly@pku.edu.cn
and NBER
dsjacks@gmail.com

Se Yan
Department of Applied Economics
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
seyan@gsm.pku.edu.cn
1. Introduction

        As the development of financial markets is thought to be a critical mediating factor in modern

economic growth, there remains considerable interest among economic and financial historians in

chartering the course of financial market integration.2 In this literature, the rise and fall of the gold

standard from the 19th and into the 20th centuries has been of particular prominence (Chernyshoff et al.,

2009). The main issues underlying this theme have been the relative efficiency of the classical gold

standard, its role in moderating nominal exchange rates, the means by which arbitrage in the world gold

market ensured its smooth functioning, and the role of the price-specie flow mechanism in keeping

financial and trade imbalances in check. Tests of its efficiency have generally revolved around a

consideration of the so-called gold points. These are the exchange rates at which arbitrage should have

taken place in gold markets, ensuring re-equilibration of the system without official intervention. Key

contributions to measuring—both directly and indirectly—these gold points include Canjels et al. (2004),

Officer (1996), and Spiller and Wood (1988).

        At the same time, there is a relative paucity of research into conditions outside the gold club. In

particular, the Chinese experience with its silver standard in the early 20th century has been wholly

neglected. Little is known about the relative efficiency of the Chinese silver standard and the process of

Chinese financial markets’ integration into the world economy. For some time, a scarcity of data has

proven the most considerable barrier to studies on China’s economic and financial history in the early 20th

century, but this set of circumstances is rapidly changing. What is more, there is considerable interest in

understanding the historical precedents to financial market integration in China and their implications for

the conduct of monetary policy in the present day.

        China in the early 20th century is also interesting in another respect. It was the only large country

in the world on a silver standard throughout this period. While silver was ―just another commodity‖ in

other countries, it was the sole basis of currency in China. Thus, Chinese exchange rates vis-à-vis the rest


2
 For the role of financial markets in the process of economic development, see Levine (2005). For example of the
analysis of financial market integration, see Mitchener and Ohnuki (2009) and Bodenhorn (1992).

                                                                                                                   2
of the world were determined by a different mechanism than was the case for gold standard countries.

This difference was driven by the fact that the implied exchange rate between the Chinese tael and Great

British pounds or US dollars varied considerably as global silver prices were in constant flux. Thus,

China was effectively in a floating exchange rate regime while the much of the world remained fixed.

While the literature has generally emphasized this floating aspect of the Chinese currency, China’s silver

standard transmitted external disturbances—in particular, shocks to the world silver price—just as would

have occurred in a fixed exchange rate regime, limiting the exchange rate’s role as a shock absorber.

What is more, with rising world silver prices in the early 20th century, other commodity prices fell as a

direct consequence of the revaluation of the Chinese currency, inducing significant deflationary pressures

(Ho and Lai, 2013, 2016). In this regard, the choice of exchange rate regime looms as a large determinant

of China’s macroeconomic performance, both in the past and present.

        This paper fills this gap by laying out the conditions of the Chinese economy and monetary

system and examining how and how well its silver standard functioned. As China experienced remarkable

economic and financial development prior to the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese War in 1937, the analysis

of its foreign exchange markets in the early 20th century will provide a useful point of comparison with

western countries at that time. This paper also makes two distinct contributions. First, we bring new data

to the table in the form of daily and monthly time series data on domestic exchange rates, international

silver prices, and silver flows. This allows us to estimate China’s silver points from the pre-World War I

era and through the Great Depression. In recent years, a literature on modern Chinese market

integration has emerged, but its focus has been exclusively on commodities (Shiue, 2002; Shiue and

Keller, 2007). Thus, we are in position to make of one of—if not—the first assessments of the degree of

Chinese financial market integration for this period.

        Second, drawing inspiration from the large literature on gold market arbitrage, we formalize the

theory of silver market arbitrage in the presence of trade costs across spatial markets as it relates to

circumstances in China at the time. We adopt a non-linear time series methodology for measuring market

integration. The intuition underlying the model is straightforward: as the process of arbitrage in the silver

                                                                                                             3
market incurs trade costs, the cross-border shipment of silver is thought to only occur if the inherent price

of silver in the Shanghai foreign exchange market exceeds that in the global silver market by a sufficient

margin. By formalizing this concept, it becomes possible to estimate the relevant threshold for such

arbitrage activity. We refer to these estimated thresholds as silver points in direct parallel to the literature

on gold points. We also show that the deviations from parity across domestic and foreign exchange

markets followed a nonlinear process with the speed of mean-reversion toward equilibrium varying with

the size of these deviations. Within the range given by the silver points, there are no profitable arbitrage

opportunities and the law of one price does not strictly hold. We estimate the parameters of this system

using a threshold error correction mechanism (TECM) which captures all relevant dynamic features and

allows us to simultaneously recover the silver points and the speed of adjustment.

        Section 2 below sets the scene for China in the early 20th century, highlighting relevant features

of its place in the global economy of the day and the mechanics of its foreign exchange market. Sections 3

through 6 represent the main contributions of the paper, drawing together our data and methods. The

results suggest that Chinese financial markets were already reasonably well integrated with the rest of the

world from the turn of the 20th century. And while World War I had clear disintegrative effects on

Chinese financial markets, recovery from the trauma it induced was rapid. What is more, we establish the

reliability of our estimates by considering different frequencies, models, and time horizons and conclude

with a consideration of the relationship between our indirect measures of trade costs in silver markets and

direct measures of physical flows of silver over the period.



2. China and the global economy in the early 20th century

        Although there is some uncertainty regarding the nature and pace of Chinese economic growth

during the pre-war silver standard, there is extensive evidence that by the 1890s large parts of the Chinese

agricultural sector—and along with it, millions of households—had become highly integrated with world

markets. For example, Brandt (1989) shows that international forces served to determine the domestic

price of cotton and rice in China at large and the Lower Yangzi region, in particular. There is also

                                                                                                               4
qualitative evidence to the effect that the process of international commodity price arbitrage vitally

affected other key crops such as peanuts, soybeans, sugarcane, and tobacco (Brandt and Sargent, 1989).

Likely as a consequence, general price changes in China closely followed developments in prices in the

United States when expressed in terms of silver (Graham, 1934; Raeburn, 1937).

         In part, this rising tide of integration is reflected in China’s pattern of trade. Starting from 1910,

Chinese exports rapidly rose in value from 3.27 billion 1990 USD to 6.20 billion 1990 USD in 1919

before a gradual decline throughout the tumultuous 1920s and a 70% collapse in exports from 1929 to

1932. Chinese imports tell a broadly similar story: from 4.03 billion 1990 USD in 1910 to 6.81 billion

1990 USD in 1919 followed by a gradual decline and a 50% collapse in imports from 1929 to 1932.

Where Chinese export and import performance slightly diverges is in their respective shares for trade with

Asia (ex-Hong Kong), Europe, and North America. In 1910, 23% of its exports went to Asia (ex-Hong

Kong), 32% to Europe, and 15% to North America. Following rapid rises for Asia (ex-Hong Kong) and

North America during the 1910s, these shares stood at 45%, 18%, and 21% in 1933, respectively. For

imports, the share of Asia (ex-Hong Kong), Europe, and North America stood at 32%, 22%, and 6% in

1910, respectively. Less dramatic changes than that for exports followed with these same shares at 37%,

29%, and 29% in 1933. Over this same period, fairly significant trade deficits with Asia (ex-Hong Kong)

and modest trade surpluses with Europe and North America were all whittled down to size, so that the

aggregate trade deficit was fairly stable at around 1 billion 1990 USD annually.3

        At the center of it all was Shanghai, acting as the commercial, financial, and industrial capital of

China in this period. By the 1930s, it conducted more than half of China’s foreign trade, processed one-

fifth of Chinese shipping tonnage in its harbor, absorbed nearly half of total foreign direct investment in

China, and controlled nearly half of China’s stock of financial capital.4 At this time, Shanghai also

occupied an important position in the world economy, acting as the dominant foreign exchange market in

3
 All cited figures for exports and imports come from Jacks and Novy (2016).
4
 Various other figures can be cited to attest to the city’s prominence. In the 1930s, it produced over 40% of Chinese
manufacturing output (and nearly 50% if one excludes Japanese-controlled Manchuria) and generated about 50% of
Chinese electricity production (Ma, 2016). Consequently, some scholars refer to China’s growth experience in the
early twentieth-century as ―Shanghai-based industrialization‖ (Ma, 2008).

                                                                                                                    5
East Asia and thereby earning bragging rights as the third most important foreign exchange market in the

world after London and New York (Feng, 1935). By 1926, there were 22 foreign banks established in

Shanghai, comprising the Shanghai Foreign Bankers’ Association (Kann, 1926). All of these banks traded

heavily in foreign exchange. What is more, this period also gave rise to the Chinese Bankers’ Association

which was comprised of 23 modern Chinese commercial banks. Of these locally domiciled banks, eight

regularly took part in foreign exchange transactions.

        Much of this activity was predicated by domestic monetary arrangements. Silver acted as the basis

of the Chinese monetary system for nearly 700 years and continued in this role until the currency reform

of November 1935. And while copper coins circulated as the means of day-to-day transactions,

transactions involving large sums of money as in long-distance and wholesale trade were conducted using

silver. Furthermore, in the modern era, banks both kept their reserves and balanced their interbank

accounts in silver. Thus, China was for all practical purposes on a silver standard before 1935.5

        As a silver-standard country, China was obliged to derive the parity value of its nominal exchange

rate from the price of silver in global commodity markets.6 In this context, there were only two markets

which mattered for China: London and New York City. Conveniently, it was immaterial whether the

parity exchange rate of the Shanghai tael was calculated off the price of silver in London (quoted in one

standard ounce of silver with 0.925 fineness) or in New York City (quoted in one troy ounce of silver

with 0.999 fineness): one Shanghai tael equaled 1.16782 ounces of London standard silver and 1.08023

ounces of New York fine silver.7 Multiplying these constants by the price quoted for bar silver at either


5
  For a general history of the Chinese silver standard, please see Ma (2012) and Wang (1981).
6
  Throughout, we make use of term parity to denote the implied exchange rate coming from the global price of silver
in GBP/USD and the notional mint price of silver in China. This parallels the use of ―parity exchange rates‖ in the
gold standard literature. However, it diverges from this literature in that the parity exchange rate there is calculated
as the ratio of two gold mint prices. In this case, there is only one mint price. Consequently, the parity exchange rate
is not constant in the case of the Chinese silver standard. Regardless of this fact, we follow contemporary accounts
in Chinese and English which refer to this implied exchange rate as the ―parity exchange rate‖ (see Kann, 1926 and
Lin, 1936).
7
  The physical standard of this monetary system was in the form of ingots known as sycee. Sycee were not coined by
a central authority, but were instead minted privately. The tael, a widely quoted Chinese unit of silver weight, varied
greatly from city to city. To satisfy the need for a common unit across this mix of currencies, imaginary units of
account emerged for the various trading zones within China. These units of account were usually defined by a set of
physical characteristics such as the fineness and/or weight of silver, but did not exactly correspond to any circulating

                                                                                                                      6
London or New York City, we can obtain the parity quotations for one shanghai tael in pounds or in

dollars, respectively.8



3. Data

          We use nominal exchange rates based on US-dollar-denominated telegraphic transfers drawn on

New York City, settled in Shanghai, and reported by Wu (1935). The reason is straightforward: the

dominant form of arbitrage under the silver standard was via such telegraphic transfers—and not via

demand bills (Wu, 1935). For our purposes, the indirect quotation is used in which the price of one

Shanghai tael is expressed in US dollars. Our monthly data are average nominal exchange rates compiled

by the Shanghai Bureau of Social Affairs. It should be noted that these monthly observations are actually

the average of only three trading days (drawn from the beginning, middle, and end of the month) and not

all trading days in the month. Our sample is comprised of continuous monthly data for the period from

January 1905 to December 1933. The sample period ends in 1933 as cross-border arbitrage opportunities

were closed off by the silver export restrictions implemented in 1934.9

          Silver prices in London and New York City are used to calculate the parity rates of the Shanghai

tael. As London was both the world’s preeminent financial and silver trading center prior to World War I,



currencies. Nonetheless, they provided a reliable anchor against which the value of various currencies could easily
be converted. Given Shanghai’s role in the greater Chinese economy, its unit of account, the Shanghai tael, became
the most widely known and used with one Shanghai tael containing 518.512 troy grains of pure silver (Young, 1931;
Wu, 1935).
8
  The ―official‖ rates of exchange, as issued every morning by the Shanghai Banking Corporation, did not
necessarily correspond to the parity nominal exchange rates discussed above. Usually, these ―official‖ rates were
either above or below the corresponding parity values, depending on conditions prevailing in the domestic money
market. The foreign exchange market in Shanghai was also marked by frequent and wide fluctuations in market
exchange rates. Therefore, the ―official‖ rates can be thought of as acting as a guide to or influence on the market,
but one which failed to fully check activities created either by demand arising from genuine transactions or by
speculators (Kann, 1926).
9
  The tael system was abandoned in China in March 1933. However, silver was still used as currency in China
until November 1935 when the Central Bank of China announced the Currency Reform Decree and officially took
the country off the silver standard and placed it on a fiat currency. Rising sliver prices, accentuated by the 1934 US
Silver Purchase Act, wrought severe deflationary effects on China (Friedman, 1992). In the meantime, the Chinese
government began to take measures to protect its rapidly dwindling silver supply in 1934, especially through the
implementation of duties and an adjustable ―equalization charge‖ on silver exports (Chang, 1988). Of course, in
doing so, China had effectively removed itself from a pure silver standard. Given these events and the likely upward
bias they may impart on the estimation of silver points, we focus our attention on the period prior to 1934.

                                                                                                                    7
we calculate the parity rate of the Shanghai tael based on the sterling-denominated price of London

standard silver for the period up to and including December 1914. Given the parity exchange rate between

sterling and the Shanghai tael, the parity exchange rate between the US dollar and Shanghai tael can be

derived from the gold parity points for sterling and the US dollar. With the outbreak of World War I, not

only was London’s role as the preeminent world financial center called into question, but also—and more

importantly for our purposes—the free movement of silver across the UK border was prohibited. In

contrast, the New York City silver market remained open to all comers. Consequently, we use New York

City silver prices (that is, US dollar-denominated prices for one ounce of fine silver) in our calculations of

the parity exchange rate from January 1915.10

           The exchange rate for the Shanghai tael measured in US dollars in the Shanghai market is

denoted by Et while the parity rate for the Shanghai tael measured in US dollars in the London or New

York City market is denoted by Et* . Defining lower case letters as the natural logarithm of variables, the

proportional deviation from parity can be expressed as xt  et  et* . Figure 1 depicts xt from 1905 to

1933 where a value of zero corresponds to the strong form of the law of one price. Given frictions in the

form of information and trade costs, one might naturally expect deviations from parity. Here, a positive

value of      suggests that the tael is overvalued in the Shanghai foreign exchange market while a negative

value of      suggests that the tael is undervalued. The dynamics of xt will be the object of this paper.11

           The mean and standard deviation of xt are shown in Table 1. In addition to the results for the

entire sample period, we also present the equivalent figures for select sub-periods. This choice is

motivated by dramatic changes in both domestic and foreign markets over the period from 1905 to 1933.



10
   Our results would likely be materially unaffected by the use of New York silver prices throughout as the
correlation between silver prices in London and New York was extremely high. However, at the present day, we
lack the full series of monthly data for New York in the period from 1905 to 1914.
11
   It should be clear that xt does not exhibit explosive behavior. And apart from relatively large fluctuations of ±10%
from parity during World War I and its aftermath, the deviation process appears rather stable. What is more, the
augmented Dickey-Fuller test statistic (with an intercept, linear time trend, and one lag chosen by the Schwarz
criterion) comes in at a highly significant -10.02. We, therefore, assume stationarity in all that follows.

                                                                                                                   8
To this end, we focus our attention across three nearly equally-sized sub-periods: from January 1905 to

June 1914, from July 1914 to December 1923, and from January 1924 to December 1933. This yields

observation counts of 114, 114, and 120, respectively. The first break in sub-samples is defined by the

outbreak of World War I. The second break in sub-samples is intended to capture changes in the world

economy attendant upon the late 1920s and early 1930s. We note that the mean of xt is positive and

somewhat sizeable in the full sample. However, this result is primarily driven by the second sub-period:

both the mean and dispersion of the deviations from parity greatly increased, especially when compared

to the other sub-periods. Taken at face value, this movement implies either that World War I presented

enhanced arbitrage opportunities or that trade costs grew in response to hostilities and indicated a possible

decline in the degree of market integration during World War I.12

         We are also able to partially supplement our analysis with higher frequency data. Higher

frequency data is likely more informative than monthly as the adjustment of exchange rates would be very

quick—if not instantaneous—under a fully efficient silver-arbitrage mechanism. In that context, monthly

data might obscure the high-frequency dynamics of the exchange rate. To this end, we have collected data

at the daily frequency. This new data set on exchange rates is drawn from contemporary periodicals,

namely the Economic Statistics Quarterly (various dates) and the North China Daily News (various dates).

The hope is that this time series more closely corresponds to the time of adjustment in the foreign

exchange market. The drawback is that our daily data is only available for the period from January 1923

to March 1933. We choose to limit out attention to the period from January 1, 1924 to March 31, 1933 to

match the third sub-period from above. The data cover every trading day in this period. We discard non-

trading days—that is, holidays, Sundays, and a few exceptional days on which the exchange was closed—

and generate approximately 280 daily observations in each year. All told, we have 2,574 daily

12
  Additionally, we can allow for endogenous breaks in the data. In this context, we employ the sequential testing
procedure developed by Bai (1997) and Bai and Perron (1998) to analyze the time series properties of the data in
Figure 1. Allowing for a maximum number of three breaks, employing a trimming parameter of 15%, and using a 5%
significance level, the sequential test results indicate that there are exactly two endogenous breakpoints in the series:
one in October 1914 and the other in February 1923. Not surprisingly, the summary statistics for the sub-periods
divided by these breakpoints are very close to those of the equally-sized sub-periods reported in Table 1. Therefore,
we only present the econometric results for the latter.

                                                                                                                     9
observations at our disposal. Figure 2 displays the daily data. The mean and standard deviation for our

daily data corresponding to Table 1 are 0.602% and 1.481%, respectively. This, of course, represents a

similar dispersion but a markedly higher mean deviation for the daily as compared to monthly data for the

same sub-period.




4. A model of arbitrage in the silver market

        Here, we lay out the basic intuition of a model of arbitrage in the Chinese silver market. We

follow the lead provided by Canjels et al. (2004) in order to ensure a strict comparability of results in

between the trans-Atlantic gold trade and the trans-Pacific silver trade and refer the reader to their paper

for details. One of the key historical insights for the model is that as China was on a silver standard, net

exports or imports of silver would have affected the supply of silver in the Shanghai market and, thereby,

affected the prevailing exchange rate. Here, we assume that the deviation in silver prices, et  et* , is

negatively influenced by silver stocks in Shanghai.

        We also assume arbitrageurs will ship silver up to the point where their marginal revenue equals

their marginal cost. By equating MR and MC, we can obtain an optimal level of silver in- or out-flows.

This, in turn, acts as an arbitrage condition such that when the absolute value of the deviation between

exchange rates exceeds a certain threshold (θ), silver would flow into Shanghai from abroad (when the

deviation is positive and the tael is overvalued in Shanghai) and silver would flow from Shanghai to

abroad (when the deviation is negative and the tael is undervalued in Shanghai). Additionally, there are

likely instances in which the absolute value of the deviation in exchange rates is less than the threshold

and for which no profitable arbitrage opportunities arise. Thus, θ can be thought of as the trade costs

associated with the trans-Pacific movement of silver.

        Our estimating equation is then the following:




                                                                                                               10
          k    xt 1     vt   when xt 1  
          
(1) xt   vt                         when xt 1  
          
           k    xt 1     vt   when xt 1  

where Δxt is the first difference of et  et* , k is a constant, λ measures the speed of adjustment and

implies that the deviation will be fractionally reduced by λ in one period, and vt is an exogenous

disturbance term and is assumed to be serially uncorrelated. Generally, we would expect deviations to be

reduced through the adjustment of the Shanghai exchange rate. It may also be reduced through adjustment

of the parity exchange rate—in other words, the international price of silver. However, since silver was

heavily traded globally, its price was predominantly determined by external factors, irrespective of

conditions in the Chinese economy (Ho and Lai, 2013; Shiroyama, 2008, p. 31).

         This equation also concisely describes the dynamics of exchange rate deviations. This process is

divided into three regimes by the symmetric thresholds of θ and –θ with (–θ , θ ) constituting a ―neutral

band‖. It also incorporates a simple formulation of the relevant silver points. If the contemporaneous

deviation is in either the upper or lower regime, then it will revert in value toward the edge of the band

(defined by the silver points, θ or –θ) at a speed of convergence defined by λ. In the middle regime within

the silver points, there is no reversion, and the change in the exchange rate deviation follows a white noise

process. In this case, silver prices in Shanghai and foreign markets will not demonstrate any tendency

towards convergence. In other words, efficient silver-market arbitrage does not entail that the value of the

exchange rate deviation will necessarily converge to zero. Instead, the equilibrium value of xt can be any

point within the range given by the silver points.

         The value of θ is determined by a constant marginal cost component with higher marginal costs

making arbitrage more difficult. The value of λ is determined by two parameters. First, there is a quadratic

cost parameter in the underlying model of arbitrage. With increasing shipments of silver, a large value for

this parameter entails rapidly increasing marginal costs. As a result, some of the potential silver flows are

postponed, making the speed of convergence decline. Second, a higher elasticity of the exchange rate

deviation with respect to silver flows will serve to increase the speed of convergence.

                                                                                                             11
         It should be noted that the threshold error correction mechanism (TECM) specified in (1) is a

special case of a threshold autoregressive (TAR) model with three regimes. To test the validity of the

TECM, we can also estimate a much less restricted specification. This more general model can be

expressed as an n-order TAR (Tong, 1983):

          u n u
           0   i xt i   t when xt 1  
                  i 1

                     n
(2) xt    0m   im xt i   t when xt 1  
                   i 1
          l n l
           0   i xt i   t when xt 1  
                 i 1



where εt is an exogenous disturbance term and is assumed to be serially uncorrelated. In what follows, we

will refer to (1) as the restricted model and (2) as the general model. In any case, we estimate these

models in a similar fashion using conditional least squares estimators. This entails the use of a grid search

to determine the value of the threshold θ. This is implemented as a two-step process: using distinct values

for the threshold, each regime is estimated using OLS; subsequently, we minimize the sum of squared

residuals over all the values of θ used.



5. Results

         We first estimate the restricted (TECM) model as in equation (1), using the full sample of 348

months from January 1905 to December 1933. We confine the grid search to values such that the upper

and lower regimes combined have no less than 10% and no more than 70% of the observations. This

corresponds to the restriction that the silver points fall within the range of (0.6%, 4.2%). The results are

presented in the first column of Table 2. Tests show that the residuals are serially uncorrelated while we

fail to reject the null hypothesis of no ARCH effects at the 10% level. Cumulatively, these tests speak

broadly in favor of the model’s specification.

         The threshold—or silver point, θ—is estimated to be 2.6% of parity. Thus, when the deviation of

exchange rates lies in the interval (-2.6%, +2.6%), it can be characterized as a random walk process.


                                                                                                               12
Within this range, profits from arbitrage operations are not sufficient to cover costs. The number of

observations underlying each regime is also presented in the lower panel of the table. Of the 348 monthly

observations of the entire sample, the upper regime accounts for 34 observations. Silver shipments from

the United States to Shanghai were, therefore, profitable in these months. The lower regime accounts for

38 observations where silver shipments in the opposite direction were profitable. The remaining 276

observations, representing 79% of the sample, underlie the middle regime. Here, there are no profitable

arbitrage opportunities as the deviation from parity is insufficient to cover trade costs. Clearly,

exploitable arbitrage opportunities did periodically emerge, but they did not persist for long. What is more,

the correlation between the exchange rate in Shanghai and international silver prices could be zero in this

middle regime, despite the fact that the two markets were indeed integrated.13 The estimated convergence

coefficient (λ) is 0.37. This implies that deviations greater (in absolute value) than the estimated silver

point will be, reduced by 39 percent within a month, or equivalently, that the half-life of such deviations

is 1.5 months.

           We also estimate equation (1) by sub-periods. We do this to acknowledge the dramatic changes in

both Chinese and foreign markets over the entire sample period from 1905 to 1933 which might not be

reflected in the previous estimation. Again, we estimate the TECM model across three nearly equally-

sized sub-periods: from January 1905 to June 1914, from July 1914 to December 1923, and from January

1924 to December 1933. If the dynamics of exchange rate deviations are not identical across sub-periods,

the estimation of a constant silver point and adjustment speed across the entire sample could be seen as

the ―average‖ of time-varying results of sub-periods, thus, obscuring interesting developments across sub-

periods.

           The results are presented in the last three columns of Table 2. The results obtained in the first and

last sub-periods are highly consistent. The silver point is estimated to be 1.70% and 2.00%, respectively.

The estimates of the speed-of-adjustment parameter λ are 0.80 and 0.49, respectively. We note that these

13
  There is a substantial literature which assesses market integration solely by calculating the correlation of prices in
two markets. However, taking into account the random walk nature of prices in the no-profitable-arbitrage regime
suggests that low correlations do not necessarily imply low levels of market integration.

                                                                                                                     13
values are much higher than those reported for entire sample. The results for the second sub-period from

July 1914 to December 1923 are, however, significantly different. During and immediately after World

War I, the estimated silver points have increased while the estimated speed-of-adjustment has

declined significantly. The estimated silver point for this middle sub-period is 2.8%, or roughly, one- to

two-thirds higher than those for the other two sub-periods. The estimated adjustment speed is 0.24 and

not statistically significant. This implies the half-life of exchange rate deviations is 2.6 months, or roughly,

twice as high as the other two sub-periods. Thus, highly persistent deviations from parity occurred during

and immediately after World War I. This relative disintegration during and after the wars years as

evidenced by higher estimates of trade costs and slower speeds of adjustment can be rationalized by

acute constraints and attendant higher freight rates in the shipping industry as well as a likely scarcity of

working capital for arbitrage and greater opportunity costs for traders in the form of Europe’s critical need

for war materiel.

         A natural question at this juncture may be how these various estimates of the silver points

compare to contemporary accounts. According to Kann (1926, p. 10), in the New York City-Shanghai

silver trade, there were three principal routes to consider: shipping from New York City by direct steamer

(or through bill of lading by steamer via San Francisco) to Shanghai which entailed a cost of 1.71%;

shipping from New York City via Seattle, Vancouver, or Victoria by rail which entailed a cost of 2.05%;

or shipping from New York City via London which entailed a cost of 2.65%.14 He also notes that unless

money was cheap and silver was little needed in Shanghai, the routing of silver from New York City by

direct steamer was preferred as it afforded the lowest shipment cost. When silver was urgently needed in

Shanghai, the routing of silver from New York City via Seattle, Vancouver, or Victoria was preferred as it

afforded the quickest transit ties. Thus, our estimates of the silver points—in particular, those for the last

sub-period—are very close to these reported costs. Given this close correspondence, there were

apparently no significant informational or policy barriers to the silver trade in this period.

14
  More precisely, Kann reports the dis-aggregated costs of cartage, freight, insurance, interest, and dealer/bank
commission. For instance, these are reported as 0.05%, 0.75%, 0.20%, 0.65%, and 0.06% (that is, 1.71%
cumulatively) for the direct steamer to Shanghai.

                                                                                                                    14
        Another natural question is the extent to which these results can be compared to estimates of the

more well-known gold points. While the estimates of the trans-Pacific silver points vary across sub-

periods as demonstrated above, all of them are higher than estimates of the contemporaneous gold points

between London and New York City. For example, Spiller and Wood (1988) estimate gold points of

around 0.25% for the period from 1899 to 1908 while Officer (1996) estimates these at 0.50% for the

period from 1900 to 1913. In the most recent contribution to this literature, Canjels et al. (2004) estimate

gold points of 0.67% for the period from 1879 to 1913. Is it safe to say then that the degree of financial

integration across the Pacific was lower than that across the Atlantic? We would argue no for three

reasons. First, there are the physical characteristics of gold versus silver. Silver suffered from a lower

value-to-weight ratio than gold, so that shipping costs for silver were about 2 to 3 times higher than those

for gold when evaluated using equivalent dollar figures. Second, there are the geographical characteristics

of the cities involved in the two trades. The distance from New York City to Shanghai is 2.6 times the

distance from London to New York City. Finally, there are the monetary characteristics of the gold versus

silver standard. Both the United Kingdom and the United States were on the gold standard, implying a

constant parity value and, thus, no exchange rate risk on the part of arbitrageurs. China was nearly alone

on the silver standard. Thus, not only the exchange rate, but also the parity value of the Chinese tael

versus the US dollar fluctuated with the price of silver. Given that there were often lengthy transit times

between New York City and Shanghai, arbitrageurs had to assume the risk of silver price fluctuations.

Thus, some sort of risk premium—albeit small in light of the figures provided above—was likely required.

This view is informally corroborated by examining the time-series above where it is clear that periods

with greater variation in the parity value were associated with larger deviations in the exchange rate.



Robustness: estimation under the general model derived from equation (2) using monthly data

        We further estimate a general n-order TAR model as in equation (2). To discriminate between

TAR models with different values of n, we choose n = 2 as this serves to minimize the value of the

Bayesian information criterion (BIC). The results are reported in the first column of Table 3. The estimate

                                                                                                             15
of the silver point is 2.8% using the entire sample, which is quite close to the results for the restricted

model reported in Table 2. Here, convergence in the lower and upper regimes toward the silver points is

allowed to be asymmetric: the estimates of the error correction coefficients are 0.33 and 0.21, respectively.

        The results for the general model by sub-period are also presented in the remaining three columns

of Table 3. The estimates of the silver points in the first and last sub-periods are 1.4% and 1.6%,

respectively. That is, they are slightly smaller than the corresponding results for the restricted model. The

estimate of the silver points in the second sub-period is 3.3%. That is, it is a little higher than the

corresponding results for the restricted model. As for the speed of adjustment in the first sub-period, the

estimates of the error correction coefficients are 0.81 and 0.72 in the lower and upper regimes,

respectively. Both are close to the symmetric speed-of-adjustment estimate of 0.80 reported in Table 2.

Similarly, in the last sub-period, the estimates of the error correction coefficients are 0.63 and 0.67 in the

lower and upper regimes, respectively. Again, both are close to the symmetric speed-of-adjustment

estimate of 0.49 reported in Table 2. However, in the second sub-period, we find marked asymmetry in

the speed of adjustment. Specifically, the estimates of the error correction coefficients are 0.17 and 0.38

in the lower and upper, respectively. Both are smaller than the results for the general model in the other

two sub-periods, a result which is consistent with what was found in the restricted model.



Robustness: estimation under the general model derived from equation (2) using daily data, with and

without symmetric thresholds

        Our previous results relied on monthly data over the period from 1905 to 1933. To ensure the

robustness of the estimates of the silver points, we estimate a general TAR model using 2,574

observations on daily data but for a shorter period of time spanning the years from 1924 to 1933. We

choose n = 4 to minimize the BIC. The results are reported in the first column of Table 4. Here, the

estimate of the threshold is 1.8% which is very close to that of 1.6% generated from the monthly data for

the last subsample using the same general TAR model and to that of 2.0% generated from the daily data

for the last subsample using the restricted TECM model. We take this as a positive indication of the

                                                                                                              16
validity of our previous silver point estimates. Moreover, the steady-state value of x is close to zero in this

middle regime which is in line with our expectations. The middle regime is estimated to encompass

around 80% of the observations, implying that the Shanghai exchange rate and international silver prices

seldom strayed from each other even in the context of daily data. Also as before, the lower and upper

regimes encompass 6% and 15% of the observations, respectively. Thus, it was again a more frequent

occurrence that the Chinese tael was overvalued in the Shanghai foreign exchange market relative to the

international silver price. This is a result consistent with China’s previously noted net purchases of silver

in international markets.

        As a final robustness exercise in generalizing the model, we also allow for asymmetric thresholds

in the general TAR model using daily data. The results of this exercise are reported in the second column

of Table 4 and suggest that no great damage is done by imposing symmetric thresholds when considering

our benchmark results using monthly data. Here, we find that the upper threshold is estimated to be 2.1%

while the lower threshold is estimated to be 1.8% (in absolute terms). This favorably compares with the

estimate of 1.8% under the general TAR model with symmetric thresholds using daily data and the

estimate of 1.6% under the ATECM model with symmetric thresholds using monthly data.



6. Silver points and silver flows

        Up to this point, we have estimated silver points based on the restricted TECM and general TAR

models. We have found a broad correspondence across models and across data frequencies: in general,

silver points were estimated to be in the range of 1.5 to 2.0% in peacetime, but they rose appreciably

during and immediately after World War I. We also noted that that there were relatively few out-of-

equilibrium observations on exchange rate deviations across all frequencies, models, and periods.

However, the limitations of our modeling must be acknowledged. In particular, these are methods of

indirect observation on activity in silver markets in that the parameters are inferred solely through a

consideration of exchange rate dynamics. Thus, it would be reassuring if we could cross-validate our

results by seeing if our estimated silver points do a good job in predicting cross-border silver flows.

                                                                                                            17
        To this end, we have compiled weekly records on imports of silver from the Americas from

1923.15 The data were obtained from the North China Daily News in its Week’s Exchange Notes column.

The newspaper collected weekly aggregates of silver arrivals into Shanghai from Japan, the United

Kingdom, and, most importantly, the Americas.16 There are two reasons why this silver volume figure

may not be as informative as we wish. First, we can only collect weekly aggregates of silver imports, so

the timing of the silver arrivals is not precise. Second, one has to allow for the time from silver shipment

to silver arrival, that is, the days in transit. This lag is likely to be somewhere in between 22 and 28 days.

        Nonetheless, we can first present an informal cross-check of our results. Previously, Figure 2

demonstrated that there was slightly more variation in the exchange rate series at the beginning of the

sample period and significantly more variation in the exchange rate series during the Great Depression

which may be useful in determining the relationship with silver flows. Hence, in figures 3 and 4, we plot

the maximum of the exchange rate over a two week period (that is, in the six days before and after the

potential shipment of silver by arbitragers), our silver point estimates from the symmetric TAR model

using daily data (1.8%), and the volume of silver imports from the Americas for the two periods from

January 1924 to December 1926 and from January 1930 to March 1933. To highlight the timing of

substantial silver imports, we omit weekly aggregates of silver import volume which are less than 1000

bars (about 1 million ounces).

        They demonstrate a broad correspondence in between particularly large exchange-rate deviations

and silver flows. In Figure 3, almost all of the large net imports of silver occurred when deviations were

above the estimated thresholds. The same also holds true during the Great Depression when there was

significantly more variation in the exchange rate series and when, presumably, arbitrage opportunities




15
   Only rarely was silver exported from Shanghai to the Americas.
16
   Kann (1926, p. 143) reckons that Mexico and the United States contributed nearly one-third each to world silver
production during this period with Canada and South America contributing 10 and 8%, respectively. Thus, total
silver production in the Americas amounted to 82% of world production. In a related fashion, over 95% of this silver
production of the Americas was processed through one of two places, New York City or San Francisco (Kann, 1926,
p. 199).

                                                                                                                 18
emerged more frequently in the silver market. Finally, when the deviation fell within the bounds of the

silver points, both net exports and imports of silver were generally very small.

        However, these results should be interpreted as merely suggestive and not definitive. As

mentioned previously, data is only available for weekly aggregates of silver imports. Necessarily, the

precise timing of these silver flows remains unknown. This fact could explain why we observe several

instances in which silver was shipped to Shanghai when the deviation from parity was actually below the

estimated silver point for inflows. It also remains a possibility that silver was shipped for reasons other

than arbitrage in the silver market, thus, rendering cross-validation problematic. For these reasons, we are

of the view that any single observation on imports of silver should be viewed with caution and instead

that it is general tendencies in the data which are most relevant.

        In this spirit, we now take a more formal approach. In particular, we estimate a probit model to

test the relationship between our estimated silver points and observed silver imports. In this model, the

dependent variable is an indicator variable representing the occurrence of substantial silver imports (that

is, more than 1000 bars) from the Americas. The explanatory variable is an indicator representing the

instance of a deviation in the exchange rate from parity which exceeds our preferred silver point estimate

(that is, more than 1.8%). When this model is estimated, we arrive at positive and significant (at the 1%

level) coefficient of 9.75. This translates into an average marginal effect of an extreme exchange rate

deviation on the conditional probability of above 55%. Thus, the economic and statistical significance of

this measure is substantial, leading to a measure of corroboration in between the estimates of our model

and independent outcomes taken from the global market for silver itself.



7. Conclusion

        In this paper, we have estimated the silver points for Shanghai, thereby, assessing the degree of

Chinese financial market integration in the early 20th century and examining to what extent the Chinese

foreign exchange market was efficient during this period. Our inferred measures of the Shanghai silver

points were low in value and favorably matched the measured costs of the silver trade derived from

                                                                                                              19
contemporary accounts. They also fared well in the comparison to estimates from the trans-Atlantic gold

point literature. This naturally leads to the conclusion that the degree of Chinese financial market

integration was substantial.

        At the same time, it did not remain unaffected by events external to China. In particular, both

during and immediately after World War I, our estimates of the silver points increased appreciably. While

the notion that conflict and war significantly disrupts markets is an uncontroversial one (Hynes et al.,

2011), it is interesting that market disintegration occurred even though China and the United States

remained somewhat peripheral to the war effort and the Pacific Ocean was not an active theatre of war.

        What this paper has not addressed is the broader significance of these developments in the

context of Chinese history. That a significant component of the Chinese financial market, particularly one

which acted as a vital link to the rest of the world, had moved in rapid order to rival its trans-Atlantic

counterpart points to the depth of China’s transformation from a relatively insular giant to one of the

world’s largest markets in the span of a few generations (Mitchener and Yan, 2014). That China had

progressed so far in its integration into the global economy of the day is a fact more often than not

obscured from the perspective of the present day and which points to the impermanent nature of

globalized capital and trade flows. This also raises the issue of the potential counterfactual trajectories

that Chinese financial markets in particular and the Chinese economy in general could have taken if it

were not for the deleterious events of the 1930s and 1940s, starting with the Japanese invasion of

Manchuria in 1934 and the outbreak of civil war in 1945. The prospect that much of the history of China

in the last half of the 20th century merely represents a long pause in its rise to prominence in global

markets is a tantalizing proposition, but one which invariably remains outside the scope of this paper.




                                                                                                              20
References
Bai, J. and P. Perron. ―Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple Structural Changes.‖
         Econometrica 66, no. 1 (1998): 47-78.
Bai, J. ―Estimating Multiple Breaks One at a Time.‖ Econometric Theory 13, no. 2 (1997): 315-352.
Bodenhorn, H. ―Capital Mobility and Financial Integration in Antebellum America.‖ Journal of
         Economic History 52, no. 3 (1992): 585-610.
Brandt, L. Commercialization and Agricultural Development: Central and Eastern China, 1870–1937.
         New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Brandt L. and T.J. Sargent. ―Interpreting New Evidence about China and US Silver Purchases.‖ Journal
         of Monetary Economics 23, no. 1 (1989): 31-51.
Canjels, E., G. Prakash-Canjels, and A.M. Taylor. ―Measuring Market Integration: Foreign Exchange
         Arbitrage and the Gold Standard, 1879–1913.‖ Review of Economics and Statistics 86, no. 4
         (2004): 868-882.
Chang, P.-H. K. ―Commodity Price Shocks and International Finance.‖ Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts
         Institute of Technology, 1988.
Chernyshoff, N., D.S. Jacks, and A.M. Taylor. ―Stuck on Gold: Real Exchange Rate Volatility and the
         Rise and Fall of the Gold Standard, 1875-1939.‖ Journal of International Economics 77, no. 2
         (2009): 195-205.
Feng C. ―The Shanghai Foreign Exchange Market.‖ Monthly Bulletin of Chinese Native Banking 15, no. 7
          (1935): 16-23. (In Chinese)
Friedman, M. ―Franklin D. Roosevelt, Silver, and China.‖ Journal of Political Economy 100, no. 1 (1992):
         62-83.
Graham F.D. ―Silver and Chinese Purchasing Power.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics 48, no. 3 (1934):
         565-568.
Ho, T.-K. and C.-C. Lai. ―Silver Fetters? The Rise and Fall of Chinese Price Level 1928-34.‖
         Explorations in Economic History 50, no. 4 (2013): 446-462.
Ho, T.-K. and C.-C. Lai. ―A Silver Lifeboat, not Silver Fetters: Why and How the Silver Standard
        Insulated China from the 1929 Great Depression.‖ Journal of Applied Econometrics 31, no. 2
        (2016): 403-419.
Hynes, W., D.S. Jacks, and K.H. O’Rourke. ―Commodity Market Disintegration in the Interwar Period.‖
         European Review of Economic History 16, no. 2 (2012): 119-143.
Jacks, D.S. and D. Novy (2016), ―Market Potential and Global Growth over the Long Twentieth Century.‖
         Working Paper.
Kann, E. The Currencies of China: An Investigation of Silver and Gold Transactions Affecting China with
         a Section on Copper. Shanghai: Kelly & Walsh Press, 1926.
Levine, R. ―Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence.‖ In Aghion and Durlauf (Ed.s), Handbook of
         Economic Growth. North Holland: Elsevier, 2005.
Lin, W. The New Monetary System of China, A Personal Interpretation. Shanghai: Kelly & Walsh Press,
         1936.
Ma, D. ―Money and the Monetary System in China in the 19th-20th Century: An Overview.‖ London
         School of Economics Economic History Working Papers No. 159/12, 2012.
Ma, D. ―The Rise of a Financial Revolution in Republican China in 1900-1937: An Institutional
         Narrative.‖ London School of Economics Economic History Working Papers No. 235/16, 2016.
Ma, J. ―Traditional Finance and China’s Agricultural Trade, 1920–1933.‖ Modern China 34, no. 3 (2008):
         344-371.
Mitchener, K. and M. Ohnuki. ―Institutions, Competition, and Capital Market Integration in Japan.‖
         Journal of Economic History 69, no. 1 (2009): 204-237.
Mitchener, K. and S. Yan. ―Globalization, Trade and Wages: What Does History Tell Us About China?‖
         International Economic Review 55, no. 1 (2014): 131-168.


                                                                                                    21
Officer, L. Between the Dollar-Sterling Gold Points: Exchange Rates, Parity, and Market Behavior.
         Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Raeburn, J.R. ―Changes in China’s Price Level since 1871.‖ Economic Facts 9, no .7 (1937): 282-289.
Shiroyama, T. China during the Great Depression: Market, State, and the World Economy, 1929-1937.
         Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2008.
Shiue, C. ―Transport Costs and the Geography of Arbitrage in Eighteenth-Century China.‖ American
         Economic Review 92, no. 5 (2002): 1406-1419.
Shiue, C. and W. Keller. ―Markets in China and Europe on the Eve of the Industrial Revolution.‖
         American Economic Review 97, no. 4 (2007): 1189-1216.
Spiller, P. and R.W. Wood. ―Arbitrage during the Dollar-Sterling Gold Standard, 1899-1908: An
         Econometric Approach.‖ Journal of Political Economy 96, no. 4 (1988): 882-892.
Tong, H. Threshold Models in Non-linear Time Series Analysis. New York: Springer, 1983.
Wang, Y.-C. ―Evolution of the Chinese Monetary and Banking System, 1644-1937.‖ Reprinted
         in Collected Essays in the Economic History of Qing China, Volume One (1981). Taipei: Institute
         of Economics Academia Sinica, 161-274.
Wu, D.-Y. ―A New Exchange Rate Index.‖ Review of Political Economics 3, no. 3 (1935): 463-509. (In
         Chinese)
Young, J. ―The Shanghai Tael.‖ American Economic Review 21, no.4 (1931): 682-684.




                                                                                                     22
Figure 1: Deviation from parity for the tael in percent, monthly, from January 1905 to December 1933.
Source: Wu (1935).




Figure 2: Deviation from parity for the tael in percent, daily, from January 1924 to March 1933.
Source: Economic Statistics Quarterly (various issues, 1924-1933).




                                                                                                        23
Figure 3: Deviation from parity in the tael in percent, estimated silver points, and imports for silver into
Shanghai from the Americas, January 1924 to December 1926
Note: The silver point estimates are from the symmetric TAR model using daily data (1.8%).
Sources: Daily exchange rate in Shanghai and silver price data in New York City taken from Economic
Statistics Quarterly (various issues, 1924-1933); silver import volume into Shanghai from the Americas
taken from the North China Daily News.




                                                                                                         24
Figure 4: Deviation from parity in the tael in percent, estimated silver points, and imports for silver into
Shanghai from the Americas, January 1930 to March 1933
Note: The silver point estimates are from the symmetric TAR model using daily data (1.8%).
Sources: Daily exchange rate in Shanghai and silver price data in New York City taken from Economic
Statistics Quarterly (various issues, 1924-1933); silver import volume into Shanghai from the Americas
taken from the North China Daily News.




                                                                                                           25
Table 1: Summary statistics of deviations from exchange rate parity

                            Full period:     Sub-period 1:     Sub-period 2:          Sub-period 3:
                            01/1905 to        01/1905 to        07/1914 to             01/1924 to
                             12/1933           06/1914           12/1923                12/1933
        Mean (%)               0.122            -0.013            0.679                  -0.277
        Standard
                               2.740             1.684                4.031              1.813
        deviation (%)




Table 2: Restricted (TECM) model, monthly data


                        Full period:          Sub-period 1:        Sub-period 2:             Sub-period 3:
                         01/1905 to            01/1905 to           07/1914 to                01/1924 to
                          12/1933               06/1914              12/1923                   12/1933
        k            0.016 (0.004)***      0.002 (0.004)        0.023 (0.007)***          -0.002 (0.004)
                    0.370 (0.117)***      0.797 (0.325)**      0.237 (0.217)             0.493 (0.140)***
                    0.026                 0.017                0.028                     0.020

        Q1              0.877 [0.349]        1.521 [0.217]            0.144 [0.704]         0.247 [0.619]
        Q3              1.961 [0.580]        3.822 [0.281]            1.907 [0.592]         3.051 [0.384]
            2
        R                   0.225                0.195                   0.263                   0.135
SE of residuals             0.023                0.013                   0.034                   0.013
Regime (months)
Upper ( , )               34                    10                      29                     2
Middle ( , )              276                   83                      63                    105
Lower (,  )              38                    21                      22                     13
Notes: Standard errors and p-values reported in parentheses and brackets, respectively. *, **, and ***
denote 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively. Qk is the Ljung-Box statistic for residual
autocorrelation up to order k. ―Upper‖ refers to the number of months for which the deviation exceeds the
estimated (+) silver point. ―Middle‖ refers to the number of months for which the deviation is bounded by
the estimated (+) and (-) silver point. ―Lower‖ refers to the number of months for which the deviation
exceeds in absolute value the estimated (-) silver point.




                                                                                                            26
Table 3: General (TAR) model, monthly data

                         Full period:        Sub-period 1:         Sub-period 2:         Sub-period 3:
                         01/1905 to           01/1905 to            07/1914 to            01/1924 to
                          12/1933              06/1914               12/1923               03/1933
         0u         -0.004 (0.010)        0.007 (0.008)         0.011 (0.019)         0.016 (0.014)
        1u           0.455 (0.189)**      0.029 (0.351)         0.275 (0.317)        -0.180 (0.303)
         2u          0.340 (0.107)***     0.256 (0.235)         0.347 (0.175)*       0.505 (1.318)
           m
            0         0.000 (0.001)        -0.003 (0.002)*      -0.003 (0.004)        -0.053 (0.162)
        1
          m
                      0.716 (0.128)***      0.424 (0.227)*       0.664 (0.264)**      0.425 (0.220)*
           m
            2         0.067 (0.070)        -0.00.051 (0.118)    -0.005 (0.119)        0.248 (0.119)**
         0l          0.002 (0.010)        -0.018 (0.010)*       0.051 (0.026)*       -0.013 (0.006)**
           1
             l
                      0.522 (0.202)**      -0.214 (0.391)        1.161 (0.480)*       0.734 (0.174)***
           l
            2         0.148 (0.127)        0.408 (0.205)**      -0.328 (0.274)        -0.362 (0.152)**
                     0.028                0.014                 0.033                0.016

Q1                      0.024 [0.875]        0.258 [0.611]         0.043 [0.836]         0.001 [0.974]
Q3                      0.876 [0.831]        1.486 [0.685]         0.443 [0.931]         5.623 [0.131]
 2
R                           0.335                0.478                 0.331                0.484
Log likelihood             820.262              337.431               228.893              339.341
SE of residuals             0.023                0.012                 0.034                0.014
Regime (months)
Upper ( , )                32                   18                    27                    3
Middle ( , )               280                  72                    67                   100
Lower (,  )               36                   24                    20                   17
Notes: Standard errors and p-values reported in parentheses and brackets, respectively. *, **, and ***
denote 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively. Qk is the Ljung-Box statistic for residual
autocorrelation up to order k. ―Upper‖ refers to the number of months for which the deviation exceeds the
estimated (+) silver point. ―Middle‖ refers to the number of months for which the deviation is bounded by
the estimated (+) and (-) silver point. ―Lower‖ refers to the number of months for which the deviation is
exceeds in absolute value the estimated (-) silver point.




                                                                                                         27
Table 4: General (TAR) model, daily data, 01/1924 to 03/1933.

                                                 Symmetric            Asymmetric
                                              threshold model       threshold model
                               0u           0.012 (0.002)***      0.016 (0.004)***
                              1u           -0.135 (0.097)        -0.385 (0.146)***
                                  u
                                   2         0.341 (0.060)***      0.518 (0.085)***
                                 u
                                  3          0.071 (0.052)         0.031 (0.101)
                                  u
                                   4         0.064 (0.059)         0.153 (0.099)
                               0m           0.001 (0.000)***      0.001 (0.000)**
                               1
                                 m
                                             0.517 (0.033)***      0.533 (0.029)***
                                 m
                                  2          0.108 (0.026)***      0.109 (0.024)***
                                 m
                                  3          0.153 (0.027)***      0.134 (0.024)***
                                 m
                                  4          0.127 (0.023)***      0.128 (0.022)***
                                  l
                                   0        -0.005 (0.001)***     -0.005 (0.001)***
                                  1
                                    l
                                             0.159 (0.045)***      0.159 (0.045) ***
                               2l           0.331 (0.041)***      0.331 (0.041) ***
                                  l
                                   3        -0.110 (0.042)***     -0.110 (0.042)***
                                  l
                                   4         0.367 (0.041)***      0.367 (0.041)***
                                                  0.018
                              u                                         0.021
                               l                                        -0.018

                      Q1                       0.370 [0.543]         0.540 [0.462]
                      Q3                       2.371 [0.499]         2.775 [0.428]
                       2
                      R                            0.614                 0.617
                      SE of residuals              0.009                 0.009
                      Regime (months)
                      Upper ( , )                396                   169
                      Middle ( , )              2,015                 2,239
                      Lower (,  )               163                   165
Notes: Standard errors and p-values reported in parentheses and brackets, respectively. *, **, and ***
denote 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively. Qk is the Ljung-Box statistic for residual
autocorrelation up to order k. ―Upper‖ refers to the number of months for which the deviation exceeds the
estimated (+) silver point. ―Middle‖ refers to the number of months for which the deviation is bounded by
the estimated (+) and (-) silver point. ―Lower‖ refers to the number of months for which the deviation is
exceeds in absolute value the estimated (-) silver point. θu and θl refer to the upper and lower thresholds,
respectively.




                                                                                                         28
