                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHEN DISCOUNTS RAISE COSTS:
            THE EFFECT OF COPAY COUPONS ON GENERIC UTILIZATION

                                       Leemore Dafny
                                       Christopher Ody
                                       Matthew Schmitt

                                      Working Paper 22745
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22745


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2016




We are grateful for comments from Ernie Berndt, Pauline Kennedy, and participants in the 2015
Bates White Life Sciences Symposium, NBER Productivity Lunch, University of Chicago Health
Economics Workshop, and Columbia University CPRC Seminar. We are thankful for many
helpful conversations with David Schmidt and Elizabeth Schneirov of the Federal Trade
Commission. We thank Susie Liu for outstanding research assistance. The statements, findings,
conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed in this paper are based in part on data
obtained under license from IMS Health Incorporated: National Prescription Audit, January 2007
– December 2010. All Rights Reserved. The statements, findings, conclusions, views, and
opinions contained and expressed herein are not necessarily those of IMS Health Incorporated,
any of its affiliated or subsidiary entities, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Leemore Dafny, Christopher Ody, and Matthew Schmitt. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Discounts Raise Costs: The Effect of Copay Coupons on Generic Utilization
Leemore Dafny, Christopher Ody, and Matthew Schmitt
NBER Working Paper No. 22745
October 2016
JEL No. I11,L40,L65

                                         ABSTRACT

Branded pharmaceutical manufacturers frequently offer "copay coupons'" that insulate consumers
from cost-sharing, thereby undermining insurers' ability to influence drug utilization. We study
the impact of copay coupons on branded drugs first facing generic entry between 2007 and 2010.
To overcome endogeneity concerns, we exploit cross-state and cross-consumer variation in
coupon legality. We find that coupons increase branded sales by 60+ percent, entirely by
reducing the sales of bioequivalent generics. During the five years following generic entry, we
estimate that coupons increase total spending by $30 to $120 million per drug, or $700 million to
$2.7 billion for our sample alone.


Leemore Dafny                                   Matthew Schmitt
Harvard Business School                         UCLA Anderson School of Management
Morgan Hall 247                                 110 Westwood Plaza, D513
Soldiers Field                                  Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
Boston, MA 02163                                matthew.schmitt@anderson.ucla.edu
and NBER
ldafny@hbs.edu

Christopher Ody
Strategy Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
c-ody@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1       Introduction
Health insurance plans are increasingly relying on high-powered incentives to diminish moral
hazard on the part of enrollees and to reduce the total cost of care. Enrollment in high-
deductible employer-sponsored health plans tripled between 2009 and 2014, and 18% of em-
ployers report offering a high-deductible plan as employees’ only insurance option.1 Several
recent studies find reductions in spending when high-deductible or other, related “value-
based” plan designs are adopted, e.g. Chernew et al. (2010), Brot-Goldberg et al. (2015),
and Gruber and McKnight (2016). Consumer responses to high-powered incentives are likely
to give rise to strategic responses by providers. Existing studies have short post-periods, and
may be overstating savings as a result. The U.S. pharmaceutical industry offers a glimpse into
how providers may respond to the new plan designs. Consumer cost-sharing and formulary
tiering are bulwarks of pharmaceutical benefit design, and pharmaceutical manufacturers
have developed programs to counter some of these mechanisms. One in particular – the
“copay coupon” – has become particularly prevalent in the past decade. In this study, we
explore the impact of copay coupons on drug utilization and spending. Understanding both
the mechanisms through which coupons impact healthcare spending and the magnitude of
the effect may provide important lessons for policymakers and insurers interested in designing
more effective, value-based plans.
    As branded and generic versions of the same molecule are very close substitutes – but
branded drugs are considerably more expensive – it is no coincidence that pharmacy benefits
have been at the vanguard of active plan design. The FDA reports that branded drugs are
more than five times as costly as their bioequivalent generics.2 In 2014, total U.S. spending
for brands (including those without bioequivalent generics) accounted for 72 percent of $300+
billion in pharmaceutical spending, but only 12 percent of total dispensed prescriptions.3
Given the large price differences between branded and generic drugs, insurers and pharmacy
benefit managers (henceforth, “insurers”) utilize a variety of tools to steer enrollees toward
lower-priced generic drugs in order to control costs. The most prominent of these tools is the
copay. Most insurers require higher member copays for branded drugs, thereby discouraging
their use, especially when a bioequivalent generic is available. The ability of insurers to steer
patients with copays toward specific branded drugs also plays a meaningful role in insurer–
    1
    PricewaterhouseCoopers, Health and Well-Being Touchstone Survey, 2014.
    2
    Source: FDA Facts about Generic Drugs. Available at www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/consumers/
buyingusingmedicinesafely/understandinggenericdrugs/ucm167991.htm, accessed 6/28/2016.
  3
    IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics, Medicines Use and Spending Shifts: A Review of the Use of
Medicines in the U.S. in 2014, April 2015.


                                                  2
manufacturer negotiations. Insurers can offer to set a low copay for a given drug within a
therapeutic category, thereby steering volume to that drug, in exchange for an attractive
price from the drug manufacturer. In recent years, insurers have used increasingly complex
copay tiering4 to steer consumers and to increase their leverage with drug manufacturers.
For example, among consumers with prescription drug coverage from an employer, the share
of consumers with three or more copay tiers increased from 27 percent in 2000 to 80 percent
in 2014.5
    These efforts to encourage the utilization of generic drugs have coincided with a surge
of generic entry, spurred by the 1984 Hatch Waxman Act. Since the passage of the act,
which smoothed the regulatory pathway for generic drug approvals by the FDA, the generic
share of total prescriptions has risen from 19 percent in 1984 to 75 percent in 2009 and 88
percent in 2014.6 Part of the recent increase reflects the impact of the so-called “patent cliff”
in which several blockbuster drugs such as Pfizer’s Lipitor lost patent protection, shifting
large volumes to generics. However, even among drugs for which a bioequivalent generic
is available, there have been steady increases in the percentage of prescriptions filled using
those generics (henceforth “generic efficiency”). According to IMS Health, generic efficiency
increased from 90 percent in 2006 to 95 percent in 2012, halving branded drug utilization in
cases where a bioequivalent generic is available.7
    One recent response by drug manufacturers to tougher negotiations with insurers, tighter
drug formularies, and price-elastic patient demand is to offer “copay coupons.”8 A copay
coupon is an offer by a branded drug manufacturer to pay some or all of a consumer’s copay
for the manufacturer’s drug.9 By offering a copay coupon, a manufacturer can reduce the
   4
      Under a tiered copay system, drugs are grouped into tiers with different copay amounts. Insurers
typically place costly branded drugs in higher (more expensive) tiers, while cheaper generic drugs are placed
in lower (less expensive) tiers. For example, one 2015 UnitedHealthcare three-tier system has (most) generic
drugs in Tier 1 ($10 copay), preferred branded drugs in Tier 2 ($25 copay), and non-preferred branded and
specialty drugs in Tier 3 ($50 copay).
    5
      The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust: Employer Health Benefits
2014 Annual Survey, Exhibit 9.1.
    6
      The numbers for 1984 and 2009 are from Berndt and Aitken (2011), while the number for 2014 is
from IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics, Medicines Use and Spending Shifts: A Review of the Use of
Medicines in the U.S. in 2014, April 2015.
    7
      The number for 2006 is from IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics, The Use of Medicines in the
United States: Review of 2010, April 2011. The number for 2012 is from IMS Institute for Healthcare
Informatics, Avoidable Costs in U.S. Healthcare, June 2013.
    8
      Other names for copay coupons include “copay cards” and “copay assistance programs.” We exclude
means-based copay assistance programs from our sample.
    9
      Coupons are also occasionally available for “branded generic” drugs. A branded generic drug is a drug
that is (a) bioequivalent to the original branded drug but not made by the innovator firm and (b) marketed
under a brand name (unlike generics).


                                                     3
out-of-pocket price difference for consumers between the manufacturer’s drug and competing
drugs, thereby encouraging consumers to buy the manufacturer’s drug. By encouraging
the use of high-priced branded drugs over low-priced generics, coupons can decrease generic
efficiency and cause insurer costs to skyrocket. If these costs are passed through to consumers
in the form of higher premiums, then consumers may lose in the long run as well.
    The prevalence of copay coupons has increased steadily since their introduction in the
mid-2000s. Figure 1 plots the share of total branded retail spending in the U.S. accounted
for by drugs with coupons, from June 2007 to December 2010.10 During this period, the
share of branded retail spending accounted for by drugs with coupons more than doubled
from 26 percent to 54 percent. While the figure does not capture coupon usage — not all
brand buyers use or are even eligible to use copay coupons — it suggests that coupons are
an increasingly common phenomenon, highlighting the need for research on their effects.
    To investigate the impact of copay coupons, we begin by compiling a dataset on coupons
available from June 2007 to December 2010. We then match this information to two datasets
from which we can calculate generic efficiency rates, one using “drug level” prescription
counts and one using individual pharmacy claims data. Using several different empirical
strategies, including difference-in-differences models that utilize cross-state variation in the
availability of coupons (due to a coupon ban in Massachusetts) and triple-difference models
that also exploit cross-consumer variation (due to a national coupon ban for Medicare-
insured patients), we find that copay coupons meaningfully reduce generic efficiency rates.
Our main difference-in-differences estimate indicates that coupons cause a 3.4 percentage
point reduction in generic efficiency, on average. Given average generic efficiency rates of
95+ percent in the years following generic entry, a 3+ percentage point reduction in generic
efficiency translates into a 60+ percent increase in the utilization of branded drugs.
    Our analysis is limited to drugs for which a bioequivalent generic is available. It is gener-
ally accepted that there is no clinical differentiation between branded drugs and bioequivalent
generics (see, e.g., Kesselheim et al. (2008)). In the absence of clinical differentiation, to-
tal spending (holding total quantity fixed) is a reasonable proxy for (static) consumer and
insurer welfare.11 Estimating the impact of coupons on total prescription drug outlays re-
quires additional assumptions about the path of drug prices and the total quantity sold. To
  10
    See section 3 for more information about the sources used to create Figure 1.
  11
    One may reasonably wonder why a consumer would ever buy branded drugs if branded and generic drugs
were truly undifferentiated. One possibility is that there is a difference between “decision utility” at the time
of the purchase choice and “experienced utility” at the time of consumption. Baicker et al. (2015) explore
the implications of this idea for optimal copay design, and Handel and Kolstad (2015) pursue a similar idea
in modeling the demand for health insurance.


                                                       4
inform these assumptions, we estimate models relating price and quantity to coupon intro-
duction. Because these models assume that coupon status is exogenous, the results are best
interpreted as suggestive.
    We find that coupons are associated with faster branded price growth. Drugs without
coupons experience real price growth of 7–8 percent per year, while drugs with coupons
experience price growth of 12–13 percent per year. We do not find an association between
coupons and quantity levels or growth rates. Incorporating these estimates into back-of-the-
envelope calculations of the impact of coupons on total retail spending for a given drug, we
estimate that the introduction of a copay coupon increases retail spending in the five-year
period following generic entry by between 1.2 and 4.6 percent. For the average drug in our
sample, this corresponds to an increase in spending of around $30 to $120 million in 2010
dollars ($6 to $24 million per year).
    Our findings vis-a-vis generic efficiency paths, branded price growth following generic
entry, and no appreciable increases in the quantity of a drug sold after generic entry, are
consistent with a large prior literature on these topics (e.g., Caves et al. (1991); Frank and
Salkever (1997); Berndt and Aitken (2011); Huckfeldt and Knittel (2011)). In addition to es-
timating the direct costs of copay coupons for branded drugs with an available bioequivalent
generic, our analysis also builds on the literature documenting extensive agency problems
in healthcare markets. The distortions to the provision of healthcare that can result when
physicians have financial conflicts of interest are well-documented (e.g., Gruber and Owings
(1996); Yip (1998); Baker (2010)), and indeed the role of physicians in determining generic
utilization has been studied in several prior articles (e.g., Hellerstein (1998); Lundin (2000);
Iizuka (2012)). Numerous regulations to prohibit self-referrals and kickbacks are currently
in place (e.g., the “Stark laws”), however the rise in high-deductible health plans and coin-
surance rates is likely to spark more creative attempts to circumvent these restrictions. The
lessons learned from copay coupons are likely to be valuable to regulators, policymakers, and
payers developing strategies to address the various actions that healthcare providers may take
to weaken consumer cost-sharing incentives. Besides coupons, for instance, physicians may
agree to waive patient copays and/or coinsurance to encourage out-of-network visits.12 Sev-
eral diagnostic laboratory firms have recently been sued for routinely waiving patient copays
(and paying physicians processing fees for referrals).13 Absent interventions,14 these actions
  12
     Freudenheim, M. (2003, December 27). Some Doctors Letting Patients Skip Co-Payments. New York
Times.
  13
     Department of Justice Press Release (2015, April 9). Two Cardiovascular Disease Testing Laboratories
to Pay $48.5 Million to Settle Claims of Paying Kickbacks and Conducting Unnecessary Testing.
  14
     Generic substitution laws are one notable example of an intervention intended to encourage generic


                                                   5
may considerably limit the ability of cost-sharing incentives to help control healthcare spend-
ing. Finally, coupons are but one of the strategies pursued by pharmaceutical manufacturers
facing loss of exclusivity, such as product reformulations (e.g., Huskamp et al. (2008)), that
have attracted substantial legal and policy interest.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 explains how health insur-
ance creates a novel mechanism that makes it attractive for drug manufacturers to offer
copay coupons, and develops predictions regarding the effects of copay coupons on behavior.
Section 3 describes our data on coupons and pharmaceutical sales. Section 4 presents the
empirical analyses of the effects of copay coupons on generic efficiency, drug pricing, total
quantity, and spending. Section 5 presents robustness checks. Section 6 concludes.


2     Conceptual Framework
There are several theories for why firms offer coupons, e.g. to facilitate price discrimination
or encourage trial use (see Nevo and Wolfram (2002) for a review of such theories). These
factors may be present in the pharmaceutical industry as well, but here we highlight a
mechanism unique to healthcare: undermining insurer copayment systems.
    One of the primary goals of health insurance is risk protection, which means subjecting
consumers to less than full cost-sharing. To fix ideas, suppose that insurers do not bargain
directly with drug manufacturers; instead, they just set a coinsurance rate and then let
manufacturers set prices. For a drug manufacturer, this means that price changes will in
general be passed through to consumers imperfectly — i.e., a one dollar price reduction will
decrease consumer out-of-pocket costs by less than a dollar. By contrast, if a manufacturer
offers a copay coupon, then the full value of the coupon is passed through to the consumer.
This asymmetry makes offering a copay coupon more profitable than offering a lower price
directly to the insurer: a coupon is a less costly way to reduce consumers’ out-of-pocket
costs. (In the appendix, we develop this idea in a formal model that shows how coupons can
undermine copayment systems.)
    This basic logic suggests several predictions regarding the effect of coupons on behavior.
Most immediately, since coupons reduce the out-of-pocket cost of branded drugs relative to
generics, branded utilization for drugs with coupons is predicted to increase (equivalently,
generic efficiency is predicted to decrease). We explore the impact of coupons on generic
efficiency in section 4.1. In addition, since coupons allow manufacturers to offset the effects of
utilization (see e.g., Masson and Steiner (1985); Andersson et al. (2007); Shrank et al. (2010)).


                                                      6
price increases on cost-sharing, coupons will increase manufacturers’ incentives to raise prices
to insurers. As one biotech analyst put it, “It seems the best strategy for a pharmaceutical
company is to price their drug as high as they possibly can and offer that co-pay assistance
broadly.”15 We examine whether coupons are associated with higher branded drug prices in
section 4.2. While in principle coupons could expand the market, for the drugs in our sample
— drugs with bioequivalent generics — higher branded utilization is likely to come largely at
the expense of generic utilization rather than through market expansion. We study whether
coupons are associated with higher total quantity (brand and generic combined) in section
4.3, which would be indicative of market expansion. Finally, by shifting consumers away
from generics to high-priced brands, coupons are predicted to increase drug spending. In
section 4.4, we perform back-of-the-envelope calculations to estimate the magnitude of the
effect of coupons on overall spending.
    Given these predictions, a fair question is: why have insurers not banned redemption
of copay coupons? Private insurers claim they are unable to prevent the use of coupons
(although public insurance programs, some of which are administered by private insurers,
do ban coupons, as discussed below). When an insurer receives a pharmacy claim, the claim
does not reveal whether a consumer or a drug company paid the copay. According to F.
Everett Neville, Chief Trade Relations Officer at the largest pharmacy benefits manager
(PBM) Express Scripts, “The payer doesn’t know, and the PBM doesn’t know.... We have
no ability to stop it and no ability to prohibit it.”16 In addition, insurer efforts to curtail
coupon usage have faced strong consumer backlash.17 It may be that insurers are eventually
able to find a way to restrict the usage of coupons and/or to appropriately adjust tiering to
undo their effects, but there appear to be insufficient incentives and/or substantial frictions
impeding this reaction at present.


3      Data
Our analysis relies on three datasets, which we discuss in turn below. (More detailed in-
formation is available in the appendix.) We collect data on copay coupons from archived
copies of the website www.internetdrugcoupons.com. We use two data sources to estimate
  15
      Pollack, A. (2011, January 1), “Coupons for Patients, but Higher Bills for Insurers,” New York Times.
  16
      Ibid.
   17
      For example, in April 2014, UnitedHealthcare backed down from a proposed policy to discontinue the use
of copay coupons: “We have decided at this time to not implement the new initiative to have retail pharmacies
discontinue the facilitation of copay coupons” (UnitedHealthcare, Pharmacy Retail Coupon Update, April
11 2014).



                                                     7
the effect of coupons on generic efficiency: the IMS National Prescription Audit (NPA) and
the New Hampshire Comprehensive Health Care Information System (NHCHIS). We also
use the IMS data to investigate the relationship between coupons, drug prices, and total
quantity sold.

A. Coupon Data

Our source for information on copay coupons, www.internetdrugcoupons.com, was founded
in 2007 and claims to be the most heavily utilized drug-coupon website. The website compiles
comprehensive information about coupons for both prescription and over-the-counter drugs.
Ross and Kesselheim (2013) use a single cross section of the data to study the prevalence of
copay coupons. We build a longitudinal dataset of copay coupons using historical versions
of the website, which are available at www.archive.org. By scraping the main website and
the links it contains, we construct a dataset with one row per drug-month, capturing (a)
whether a coupon was available for that drug in that month and (b) if so, the value of the
coupon.18 To check the accuracy of the website, we verified coupon availability for 500 of
the top-selling non-injectable drugs in the U.S. using the current version of the website, and
we found only one error.

B. Retail Prescription Sales Data

We merge the coupon data with two datasets, the first of which is the IMS National Pre-
scription AuditTM (NPA). The subsample of the NPA data that we use draws from approx-
imately 57,000 retail pharmacies located throughout the United States.19 The data include
revenues and prescription counts for each unique combination of national drug code (NDC)
and month. Each NDC code corresponds to a molecule(s), manufacturer, dosage strength,
dosage form, and package size. We collapse these data to the level of molecule-dosage form-
month, aggregating over dosage strength and package size.20,21 Henceforth, we refer to a
unique combination of molecule-dosage form as a “drug.”
  18
     The website also tracks free-trial offers. We do not code free-trial offers as coupons.
  19
     The full NPA dataset also contains information from mail-order pharmacies, but we exclude mail-order
prescriptions because revenue data are missing for these prescriptions. In addition, mail-order pharmacies
often do not accept copay coupons.
  20
     Dosage form refers to the physical characteristics of the product. Examples include tablets, capsules,
solutions, and extended-release formulations (e.g., an extended-release capsule).
  21
     We retain the distinction between dosage forms due to the recent rise of product reformulations such
as extended-release products. For a given molecule, generic entry may occur at different times for different
forms.



                                                     8
    We begin by restricting the data to the 125 branded drugs that experienced generic
entry during the overlapping period between our NPA and coupon datasets (June 2007 to
December 2010). Spending on these drugs is roughly one-third of all spending on drugs
with brand/generic competition at any point during the period. We do not consider drugs
experiencing generic entry prior to June 2007, because we observe only a portion of the
generic efficiency path for these drugs, and we do not know the coupon status of these drugs
prior to June 2007.22
    We make three additional sample restrictions. First, we eliminate 22 drugs with either
multiple branded manufacturers or at least one branded generic.23 For these drugs, it is
unclear how to define coupon status (e.g., if one brand offers a coupon and another does not)
and/or generic efficiency (e.g., how should branded generic sales be counted?). Second, we
drop 15 drugs with patent disputes or other circumstances that create difficulties in properly
defining the timing of generic entry. Patent disputes can result in generics moving in and
out of the data.24 Other circumstances that make the timing of generic entry difficult to
ascertain include partial entry (e.g., a generic enters but only in an atypical dosage strength)
or apparent mistakes in generic classifications (e.g., a generic appears in the data prior to
the earliest recorded approval of a generic in the FDA’s Orange Book). Third, we exclude 3
drugs (none with coupons) that are Schedule II controlled substances. Prescriptions for such
drugs are tightly controlled by state and federal laws, leading to different generic efficiency
patterns from the rest of the sample.
    Table 1 summarizes the effects of the sample restrictions. Our final sample of 85 drugs
accounts for nearly 75 percent of all revenue (between 6/2007 and 12/2010) for drugs experi-
encing generic entry during the period and about 25 percent of total revenue for drugs with
direct brand and generic competition at any point during the period. Of the 85 drugs in
our final sample, 29 have a coupon for at least one month while facing generic competition.
Figure 2 plots a histogram of the percentage of months (through December 2010) that a
  22
     A coupon is available during at least one month of our study period for only 8 percent of these drugs,
as compared to 34 percent of drugs in our final sample.
  23
     Drugs with multiple branded manufacturers are identified by searching the data for different drug names
within the same molecule-form combination. For example, Fortical (produced by Upsher-Smith) and Mia-
calcin (produced by Novartis) are both Calcitonin sprays.
  24
     For example, generic firm Teva launched a generic version of AstraZeneca’s Pulmicort (budesonide) in
November 2008, prior to the expiration of AstraZeneca’s patents. As part of a settlement agreement between
Teva and AstraZeneca reached shortly after Teva’s launch, Teva agreed to pull its generic from the market
until a year later, in December 2009. The generic efficiency pattern for budesonide solutions reflects these
events (generic efficiency reaches almost 50 percent at the end of 2008 before falling back down to less than
10 percent prior to Teva’s re-entry, at which point generic efficiency again increases).



                                                     9
coupon is available for drugs while they face generic competition. The figure demonstrates
that, in general, a coupon is either never or always available for a given drug. For the few
drugs that do experience changes in coupon status, the coupon is either discontinued shortly
after generic entry or persists for nearly all months. With these facts in mind, we treat drugs
as either (a) having a coupon or (b) not having coupon, rather than attempting to exploit
the limited within-drug variation in coupon status. For us to classify a drug as having a
coupon, a coupon must be available for that drug in at least 40 percent of the months during
which generics are present.25 For the 23 drugs classified as having a coupon according to this
definition, the timing of coupon launches is strongly linked to the timing of generic entry.
Nearly half of coupons are launched within 3 months of generic entry, and nearly 70 percent
are launched within a year of generic entry.
    We construct two dependent variables from the IMS data. The first, generic efficiency, is
the share of prescriptions filled using generics.26 Second, we measure price as average revenue
per prescription. An unfortunate limitation of the IMS data is that revenues do not include
off-invoice rebates from drug manufacturers to insurers. Therefore, our price measure is an
upper bound for the true prices paid by insurers.
    We also construct several control variables using the IMS data. First, we create a variable,
refill percentage, which is the percentage of prescriptions for each drug that are refills in the
three months prior to generic entry. Drugs for chronic conditions will have a higher refill
percentage than drugs for acute illnesses. Next, we create a (time-varying) count of the
number of generic firms competing with the branded drug in each month. We only count
generic firms with a 1 percent or higher share of generic prescriptions, so that extremely
small manufacturers do not affect the measure.
    Table 2 provides descriptive statistics comparing drugs with coupons (23 drugs) to drugs
without (62 drugs). The full list of drugs with coupons is given in Table 3. From Table
2, we see that both sets of drugs experience generic entry at similar times, although drugs
with coupons tend to have higher sales volume and prices. The differences in revenue and
the number of generic firms 12 months after generic entry are significant at the 10% level,
  25
     In section 5, we report that the results are robust to different classifications of the three drugs whose
classification is sensitive to this threshold.
  26
     The IMS data have a field that marks whether a national drug code (NDC) pertains to a brand, generic,
or branded generic medicine. To ensure the accuracy of the branded generic category, we utilize drug-
approval information from the FDA — if available — to reclassify these NDCs as branded or generic. NDCs
associated with a New Drug Application (NDA) and a brand name (i.e., with a product name other than
the molecule) are reclassified as brands, while NDCs associated with an Abbreviated New Drug Application
(ANDA) or without a brand name (thought to be Authorized Generics) are reclassified as generics. Branded
generic NDCs without matching FDA approval information are left as branded generic.


                                                     10
suggesting that drugs with coupons have larger markets and attract more generic entry.
    In addition to observing whether a drug is covered by a coupon, we also observe the
value of the coupon. Coupons differ in their generosity; some coupons offer less than $20
off a consumer’s copay, while others offer up to $150 off. Whether a coupon is capable of
affecting generic efficiency may depend on the degree to which it offsets consumer copays. As
a measure of coupon intensity, we divide the value of each coupon by an estimate of an average
consumer’s copay for the covered drug, which we obtain using Medical Expenditure Panel
Survey (MEPS) data from 2007-2010.27 The median of this measure across all drugs with
coupons is 0.91; we use this cutoff to define coupons as “high-intensity” or “low-intensity.”28
In the empirical analysis, we explore the effects of coupon intensity in addition to presence.

C. Insurance Claims Data

Massachusetts is the only state in the U.S. to pass a law banning certain copay coupons.29
In neighboring New Hampshire, a state with a rich “all-payer claims database” that in-
cludes claims from residents of Massachusetts, there is no similar statewide ban. In section
4.1, we use the variation in coupon availability across these two states to estimate the ef-
fects of coupons using difference-in-differences models. To perform that analysis, we obtain
pharmacy claims for 2007–2013 from the New Hampshire Comprehensive Health Care In-
formation System (NHCHIS).30 The analysis using the NHCHIS data is complementary to
  27
      The Medical Expenditure Panel Survey is a compilation of large-scale surveys about individuals’ and
families’ healthcare utilization, costs, and insurance coverage. For prescription drugs, survey participants
are asked about their prescription drug use and asked for permission to collect further information from their
pharmacies (e.g., insurer payments).
   To estimate consumer copays, we estimate a parametric model of the relationship between retail prices
and consumer out-of-pocket cost using MEPS data and then apply the estimated relationship to prices in the
IMS data. Specifically, we assume that oop = αpσ and then estimate α and σ with nonlinear least squares
using data from privately insured patients in the MEPS, 2007–2010 (α̂ = 2.36 and σ̂ = 0.50).
   28
      Other potential definitions of intensity, such as the raw offer size or the offer divided by price (without
converting price to out-of-pocket cost) yield essentially the same high-intensity and low-intensity split, with
only two drugs changing classification.
   29
      In 2012, Massachusetts eliminated its ban on copay coupons for drugs without a bioequivalent generic.
For drugs with a bioequivalent generic — the entirety of our sample — coupons are still banned. “Pharma-
ceutical manufacturing companies shall be prohibited from offering any discount, rebate, product voucher
or other reduction in an individuals out-of-pocket expenses, including co-payments and deductibles, for any
prescription drug that has an AB rated generic equivalent as determined by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.” (Massachusetts House of Representatives, No. 4200, lines 1448–1451.)
   30
      Recall that the analysis using IMS data covers 2007–2010. We use the full 2007–2013 period to benefit
from additional data, and we verify that drugs for which coupons are available in the 2007–2010 period
typically also have coupons during later years. Specifically, we found that 19 of 23 coupon drugs still have
coupons available as of December 2013 or later. Our results are both quantitatively and qualitatively similar
when we restrict the NHCHIS analysis to 2007–2010. See section 5 for further details.


                                                       11
the analysis using the IMS data. The higher frequency (monthly rather than yearly), larger
sample size (national coverage), and richer characteristics (e.g., the number of generic firms)
in the IMS data make it ideal for defining the sample and for examining more detailed generic
efficiency patterns. The NHCHIS data allow us to relax the assumption that coupon status
is exogenous.
    NHCHIS contains insurance claims from private insurers. Most of the sample derives
from individuals with comprehensive private insurance. However, the dataset also includes
claims from Medicare beneficiaries who receive supplemental Medicare coverage through
their (possibly former) employers. The data do not contain traditional Medicare or Medicaid
claims, or claims for Medicare Part D plans. We use data from individual pharmacy claims,
including the year the prescription was filled, information about the drug (e.g., name and
brand status), and information about the consumer (e.g., insurance type, age, and state of
residence).
    Importantly, all insurers and plan administrators must submit claims for (a) all New
Hampshire residents and (b) all lives covered through policies issued in New Hampshire,
including residents living outside of New Hampshire. For instance, if a national business has
its headquarters in New Hampshire and health benefits for all of its employees are handled by
headquarters, the insurer must submit claims for all of that business’s employees. The data
therefore include a nontrivial number of claims from residents of states that surround New
Hampshire, particularly Massachusetts. As we examine the impact of Massachusetts’ ban on
copay coupons, our estimation sample focuses on just New Hampshire and Massachusetts,
which generate 90.4 and 2.3 percent of pharmacy claims, respectively. In section 5, we also
incorporate the data from other states to conduct falsification tests.
    Table 4 contains descriptive statistics about the number of pharmacy claims filled for
drugs in our final sample. While there are far more claims in the data for New Hampshire
than Massachusetts, there are more than 80,000 claims for Massachusetts residents in our
final sample. There is substantial variation across drugs in the number of observed claims.
Four drugs, none of which have coupons, lack any claims in Massachusetts. Overall, how-
ever, the sample sizes are quite large: for the median drug, we see hundreds of claims for
Massachusetts residents and more than 10,000 for New Hampshire residents. As we discuss
in section 4.1, we use the claim-level data to calculate generic efficiency rates within unique
combinations (cells) of drug, year since generic entry, insurance type, and state of residence.
We then estimate regression models using the cell-level data.
    One potential concern with the NHCHIS data is that some Massachusetts residents may


                                              12
fill their prescriptions in New Hampshire (or other surrounding states). There is some
ambiguity about whether it is legal for Massachusetts residents to redeem coupons even
if they fill their prescriptions in other states, and in addition some drug manufacturers
offering coupons appear to exclude Massachusetts residents from eligibility. Regardless, to
the extent that Massachusetts residents travel out-of-state to use coupons, our estimates of
the coupon effect will likely be biased downward (i.e., biased against finding an effect). That
said, only 10 percent of Massachusetts residents’ prescriptions are filled in New Hampshire,
and empirically we find no evidence of a bias: our results are essentially unaffected when
excluding these claims, suggesting that Massachusetts residents are likely not traveling in
large numbers to other states to circumvent Massachusetts’ coupon ban.


4     Analysis
4.1    Do coupons affect generic efficiency?
We pursue two approaches to investigate whether coupons have an effect on generic efficiency.
In both, we estimate regression models to determine whether coupons are associated with
decreased generic drug usage. The first analysis, which utilizes IMS data at the drug–month
level, treats coupon status as exogenous — i.e., uncorrelated with unobserved determinants
of generic efficiency. The second analysis, which utilizes claims data aggregated to the
drug–year–consumer group level, addresses the possibility that coupon status is endogenous
by estimating difference-in-differences models that compare differences in generic efficiency
between New Hampshire (where coupons can be used) and Massachusetts (where coupons
of the type we study are prohibited) for drugs with and without coupons.

A. Retail Prescription Sales Data (IMS)

Figure 3 plots average generic efficiency by coupon status and months since generic entry,
weighting each drug by the average revenue of the branded version in the three months prior
to generic entry. On average, drugs with a coupon experience slower increases in generic
efficiency than drugs without. After two years of generic competition, the generic efficiency
rate is 98.4 percent for drugs without a coupon but only 88.3 percent for drugs with a coupon.
These differences are highly statistically significant.
    We next estimate a more parametric model that incorporates control variables. Specifi-
cally, we estimate a “confined exponential” equation, as is commonly utilized in the literature


                                              13
on growth and diffusion (see, e.g., Banks (1994)):
                                                             
                             geneffdt = 1 − θ · exp − λdt · t + εdt .                          (1)

Generic efficiency in the month of generic entry (t = 0) is given by 1 − θ, and λdt controls the
speed at which generic efficiency approaches 1. We model λdt as a linear function of coupon
status and other covariates Xdt :

                               λdt = β0 + β1 · coupond + Xdt βX .                              (2)

In Xdt , we follow the literature (e.g., Caves et al. (1991) and Frank and Salkever (1997)) and
control for generic competition using the number of generic firms. The number of generic
firms is associated with lower generic prices and hence should be a positive predictor of
generic efficiency. We also control for refill percentage, the proportion of total prescriptions
accounted for by refills (in the three months prior to generic entry). The anticipated sign
on refill percentage is ambiguous. On one hand, refills will automatically have the same
branded/generic status as the initial fill, suggesting that a higher refill percentage should
lead to lower generic substitution. On the other hand, chronic drug expenses may be more
salient and consumers may be better informed about the availability and quality of generic
substitutes for chronic drugs, suggesting that a high refill percentage might lead to higher
generic substitution. We do not control for brand or generic prices because coupons may
affect generic efficiency at least partially through pricing; we explore this mechanism in
section 4.2.
    Estimates of equation (1) (estimated via iterated GMM) are presented in Table 5. In
column (1), we estimate the model without any controls. We control for the number of
generic firms in column (2) and add refill percentage in column (3). In columns (4) to (6),
we explore the effect of coupon intensity. Column (4) estimates separate effects for low-
intensity and high-intensity coupons, while columns (5) and (6) directly interact the coupon
indicator with our intensity measure (linear and quadratic). To facilitate interpretation of
the estimates, the bottom panel of the table shows the implied average generic efficiency
over the first three years following generic entry (t = 0 to t = 36).
    Across all six specifications, coupons are linked to lower generic efficiency. The coefficients
on the coupon indicators are negative, statistically significant, and economically meaningful.
Averaging over the first three years of generic entry, generic efficiency for drugs with coupons
is estimated to be around 10 percentage points lower than for drugs without coupons. On
balance, the evidence also supports the hypothesis that higher coupon intensity is connected


                                                14
with lower generic efficiency. While the effect sizes in column (4) for low-intensity and high-
intensity coupons cannot be statistically distinguished from one another, the specifications in
columns (5) and (6) indicate statistically significant differences. In column (6), the estimated
effect of intensity follows an intuitive pattern — starting around zero, decreasing, and then
flattening out as intensity grows.
    In unreported analyses, we also experimented with other control variables and alternative
functional forms, such as using indicators for different numbers of generic firms (e.g., as in
Reiffen and Ward (2005)). None of these modifications substantially improved model fit, and
in all specifications examined, the estimated coefficient on the coupon indicator remained
negative, significant, and of similar magnitude.

B. Insurance Claims Data (NHCHIS)

Difference-in-differences (DD)

The primary concern with the preceding analysis is that there may be unobserved factors
that influence generic efficiency and are correlated with coupon status (i.e., coupons may
be endogenous). Any such unobserved factors will bias our initial estimates, which use
cross-drug variation in coupon status to estimate its effect. For instance, suppose that
manufacturers launch coupons when generic efficiency is expected to increase particularly
quickly following generic entry. In this case, our estimates will tend to understate the
effect of coupons. On the other hand, if drugs with coupons were likely to have slow generic
penetration even absent the coupon, our estimates will be biased toward finding that coupons
have an effect.
    In this section, we address this concern by exploiting Massachusetts’ copay coupon ban.
For drugs with coupons, we can compare generic efficiency rates in Massachusetts (where
coupons are banned) with those in New Hampshire (where coupons are permitted). However,
in addition to the effect of coupons, this first difference also contains any other differences
between the two states that may affect generic efficiency, such as physicians’ prescribing
practices. To isolate the effect of coupons, we estimate a difference-in-differences model that
compares the state differences in generic efficiency for drugs with and without coupons. The
difference between states for drugs without coupons captures the impact of state-specific
factors unrelated to coupons and potentially correlated with generic efficiency. Specifically,
we estimate:

              geneffdtks = αd + γt + δk + β0 · N Hs + β1 · N Hs · coupond + εdtks ,         (3)


                                               15
where d is drug, t is years since generic entry,31 k is insurance type (HMO, PPO, POS,
and other), and s is state (New Hampshire or Massachusetts). N Hs is an indicator variable
equal to 1 for New Hampshire. The estimating equation includes fixed effects for drugs (αd ,
which subsumes the coupon indicator coupond ), years since generic entry (γt ), and insurance
type (δk ). Observations more than four years after generic entry (t > 4) are pooled with
observations four years after generic entry (t = 4). All models are estimated by weighted
least squares, with observations weighted by the number of claims used to construct the
relevant generic efficiency rate. Standard errors are clustered by drug. As we explain in the
next subsection, since coupons are banned for consumers with Medicare-sponsored insurance,
we estimate the difference-in-differences model using only claims from consumers under the
age of 65.
    The coefficient of interest is β1 , which is the difference-in-differences estimate of the effect
of coupons on generic efficiency. Table 6 presents the results. Column (1) gives the estimates
of equation (3). Columns (2) to (4) explore the effects of coupon intensity. For drugs without
coupons, we cannot reject the null of no difference in generic efficiency between the two states.
For drugs with coupons, on the other hand, generic efficiency is more than 3 percentage points
lower in New Hampshire, indicating that coupons significantly reduce generic utilization. In
column (2), only the coefficient on high-intensity coupons is statistically significant, and a
test for equality of the two coupon coefficients is rejected at the 1% level. While we fail to
detect statistically significant effects when using the continuous intensity measure in columns
(3) and (4), the pattern of the point estimates is very similar to what we found in the IMS
data (though with a smaller overall magnitude).

Triple-difference (DDD)

The key identifying assumption in the difference-in-differences analysis above is that the
observed difference across states in generic efficiency for drugs without coupons accurately
captures the effect of state-specific factors other than coupons that are correlated with generic
efficiency. This assumption may be violated if, for instance, differences in out-of-pocket costs
between states vary by coupon status. Our analysis of the claims data does not support this
particular hypothesis,32 but the potential for bias along unobserved dimensions remains. For
  31
     Unlike the IMS data, in which data are available monthly, the claims data only capture the year in which
a prescription was filled.
  32
     Estimating models like equation (3) but with the average out-of-pocket price difference between brands
and generics as the dependent variable yields statistically insignificant copay differences between states, with
or without coupons.



                                                      16
example, the estimated coupon effect may also reflect unobserved marketing efforts that
coincide with the coupon and occur only in New Hampshire. Arguably, any marketing that
co-occurs with a coupon strategy is part and parcel of a coupon effect, however to err on
the conservative side we pursue a triple-difference model. This model compares the impact
of coupons (in Massachusetts versus New Hampshire) in the under 65 versus 65 and over
population. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services bans coupon redemption for
all individuals in Medicare-sponsored plans (whether traditional, Medicare Advantage, Part
D, or subsidized employer supplemental plans). If, for example, the estimated effect in
the difference-in-differences analysis is actually due to heavy television advertising in New
Hampshire for drugs with coupons, we should observe this effect in the 65 and over population
as well. To implement the model, we subdivide our unit of observation by less than/at least
the age of 65 and add interactions with an indicator variable marking individuals under the
age of 65 (under65) to the estimating equation. The resulting model is:


       geneffdtksm = αd + γt + δk + β0 · N Hs + β1 · under65m + β2 · N Hs · under65m
                      + β3 · N Hs · coupond + β4 · under65m · coupond                      (4)
                      + β5 · N Hs · under65m · coupond + εdtksm ,

where m denotes the consumer group with respect to the standard age for Medicare eligibility
(65). The primary coefficient of interest is β5 , which gives the triple-difference estimate of
the effect of coupons on generic efficiency.
    The DDD estimate of the coupon effect is likely to be conservative for several reasons.
First, there is no automated system that monitors or restricts Medicare beneficiaries from
using coupons. Indeed, a survey of Medicare beneficiaries by the National Coalition on
Health Care found that 6 percent of respondents admitted to using copay coupons while on
Medicare.33 Second, it is possible that some of the consumers in our data aged 65 or older
have prescription drug coverage that is not subsidized by Medicare at all, in which case they
are legally able to use copay coupons. Unfortunately, our data do not permit us to identify
which seniors are eligible to use coupons and which are not. Both of these factors will tend
to cause the DDD estimate of the coupon effect to be understated (e.g., if all New Hampshire
seniors in the data use coupons, then the age distinction ceases to be meaningful). Third,
sample sizes in the data are relatively small for consumers aged 65 or older in Massachusetts,
 33
   National Coalition on Health Care (NCHC), “Seniors’ Awareness and Use of Prescription Co-pay
Coupons in Medicare,” Survey. March 26-30, 2012.



                                              17
which decreases the precision of the DDD estimate.
    Table 7 displays the results. Rather than the individual β coefficients, which are difficult
to interpret in isolation, we present the implied difference-in-differences estimates for the
under 65 and 65 and over groups, as well as the DDD estimate β5 . In the table, “NH-MA
difference, with coupon” and “NH-MA difference, without coupon” refer to the estimated
values (respectively) of:34
        h                                   i   h                                   i
       E geneffdtksm | N Hs = 1, coupond = 1 − E geneffdtksm | N Hs = 0, coupond = 1

                                             and
        h                                   i    h                                  i
       E geneffdtksm | N Hs = 1, coupond = 0 − E geneffdtksm | N Hs = 0, coupond = 0 .

    Based on the difference-in-differences estimate shown in panel A, for consumers under the
age of 65 and eligible to use coupons, coupons are estimated to decrease generic efficiency by
3.4 percentage points. Panel B performs the same exercise for consumers aged 65 or older.
For this group, coupons are estimated to increase generic efficiency, although the estimate
is not statistically significant. This estimate provides evidence against the hypothesis of
statewide marketing efforts for drugs with coupons in New Hampshire; if such marketing
were present, we would expect generic efficiency in the 65 and over population for drugs
with coupons to be lower in New Hampshire than in Massachusetts. Given the positive
estimated effect of coupons on generic efficiency in the 65 and over population, the resulting
DDD estimate is larger than the DD estimate, suggesting that coupons decrease generic effi-
ciency by 6.3 percentage points. Separate DDD estimates for high-intensity and low-intensity
coupons indicate negative effects of coupons on generic efficiency for both, although only the
high-intensity coupon estimate is statistically significant.35 When calculating the spend-
ing implications of permitting copay coupons for branded drugs with generic bioequivalents
(section 4.4), we use the more conservative DD point estimate of 3.4 percentage points.


4.2     Do coupons affect drug pricing?
As noted in section 2, manufacturers utilizing copay coupons may also have incentives to
increase prices, as coupons can be used to offset any copay increases resulting from price
hikes. Contracts between insurers and drug manufacturers/retail pharmacies often do not
  34
     To be clear, the expectation is only over the error term εdtksm . Drug, years since generic entry, insurance
type, and under/over age 65 are fixed, but the notation is suppressed for brevity.
  35
     Full results from these specifications are available upon request.


                                                       18
vary across states, so we are unable to exploit the Massachusetts coupon ban to study prices.
Therefore, we explore the link between the use of coupons and pricing using only the IMS
data. To begin, we estimate

             ln(pdt ) = α + β0 · t + β1 · coupond + β2 · t · coupond + Xdt βX + εdt ,       (5)

where pdt is average revenue per prescription (for drug d, t months since generic entry). All
prices are measured in CPI-adjusted 2010 dollars. The set of controls represented by Xdt
contains the controls in the generic efficiency analysis (the number of generic firms and refill
percentage), and also includes the log of the average brand price in the three months prior
to generic entry. Since we control for brand price prior to generic entry, β1 represents a time-
invariant percentage change in the price level (i.e., a shift in the price intercept) associated
with coupons, while β2 reflects any change in the growth rate of prices (i.e., a shift in the
slope).
    We also estimate a fixed effects regression that relates within-drug price growth to the
presence of coupons. This model eliminates unobserved, time-invariant factors that might
explain differences in price levels for drugs with and without coupons, and which could bias
our estimates of the effects of coupons on prices. Specifically, we estimate

                     ln(pdt ) = αd + β0 · t + β1 · t · coupond + Xdt βX + εdt ,             (6)

where αd are drug fixed effects. The coupon indicator, pre-generic-entry brand price, and
refill percentage variables are all subsumed by the drug fixed effects. In (6), Xdt therefore
includes only a count of the number of generic firms. The coefficient β1 measures whether
prices for drugs with coupons change at different rates than prices for drugs without coupons.
    We estimate (5) and (6) separately for the branded price and the average generic price
(combining all generic firms). As with the IMS generic efficiency analysis, standard errors
are clustered by drug and observations are weighted by the average revenue of the branded
drug in the three months prior to generic entry. The estimates are presented in Table 8.
Columns (1) to (3) contain the results for branded prices, while columns (4) to (6) contain
the results for generic prices. Columns (1) and (4) give the estimates of equation (5), and
columns (2) and (5) give the estimates of equation (6). In columns (3) and (6), we eliminate
the t · coupond term in equation (6); this model captures average price growth across coupon
statuses and is an input into our calculations of spending under different scenarios in section
4.4. We do not estimate models with the intensity measures on the right-hand side because




                                                19
intensity is a function of price.36
    In columns (1) and (4), we see that (a) coupons are not associated with a statistically
significant difference in initial branded or generic price levels, and (b) coupons are associated
with faster branded price growth (12.2 percent yearly with coupons and 7.1 percent without)
and slower generic price declines (-2.3 percent yearly with coupons and -8.8 percent without).
The difference is statistically significant at the 5% level for brand prices and at the 10%
level for generic prices. Slower generic price declines are consistent with a relaxation of
the constraint on these prices imposed by the branded price. In columns (2) and (5), which
include drug fixed effects, coupons continue to be associated with faster branded price growth
(and with a similar magnitude as in column (1)), but the association between coupons and
generic prices approaches zero and is statistically insignificant. This result may be due to
limited within-drug price variation, however it is also consistent with perfectly competitive
generic markets (which, if present, imply no impact of coupons on generic prices).
    The remaining results are consistent with other published work. Branded prices rise after
generic entry, and generic prices fall over time (see, e.g., Grabowski and Vernon (1992) and
Frank and Salkever (1997)). Additional generic firms are associated with higher branded
prices but substantially lower generic prices.
    To summarize, we find evidence that copay coupons are associated with faster branded
price growth and perhaps slower generic price declines, though the evidence for generic prices
is weaker. The finding for branded prices in particular is consistent with the observation
that copay coupons provide incentives for manufacturers to raise prices. However, because
our analysis treats coupon status as exogenous, effectively comparing price trends for drugs
with and without coupons, we view the pricing results as suggestive rather than conclusive.
In light of the limitations of the analysis, in the spending calculations in section 4.4, we
assume that coupons have no effect on generic prices and we perform the calculations with
and without an effect of coupons on branded price growth.


4.3     Do coupons affect total quantity?
One of the main arguments advanced by proponents of copay coupons is that reduced copays
improve patient medication adherence.37 If so, then any increased spending resulting from
decreased generic efficiency may have the offsetting benefit of improving patients’ health. As
  36
    Price enters in the denominator of intensity via the estimated copay (see footnote 27).
  37
    For example, see Tenaglia, M. (January 2012), “Letting the Facts Get in the Way: An Empirical Defense
of Coupons and Copay Offset Programs,” Pharmaceutical Executive. For a review of the academic literature
on the topic, see Eaddy et al. (2012).


                                                   20
the claims data lack an individual patient identifier, we cannot examine this question directly,
but we can check whether the change in total quantity sold after generic entry is meaningfully
different for drugs with and without coupons. To do so, we estimate specifications similar to
those we estimate for prices but with the log of total retail prescriptions as the dependent
variable. Table 9 presents the results. In columns (1)-(3), we include a control for the
quantity sold in the three months prior to generic entry. Column (4) includes drug fixed
effects, subsuming this quantity measure (and capturing any other time-invariant factors
impacting post-generic entry quantity). In column (2), we add controls for the number of
generic firms and refill percentage. In column (3), we allow for coupons to be associated with
a change in the growth rate of prescriptions in addition to the level. As previously noted,
column (4) includes drug fixed effects, thereby limiting attention to within-drug volume
growth and its relationship to coupon status and the entry/exit of generic firms.
    Columns (1) and (2) reveal small, statistically insignificant associations between coupons
and the volume of retail prescriptions. In column (3), the estimates indicate that coupons
are associated with higher initial quantity (relative to quantity prior to generic entry), but
a slower growth rate (both estimates are significant at the 10% level). This pattern is
consistent with highly publicized examples (e.g., Zocor) in which insurers have attempted to
steer enrollees toward large drugs going off patent. The observed higher quantity for drugs
with coupons following generic entry is consistent with the descriptive statistics, which show
that coupons are introduced for higher volume drugs, on average. That said, the initial
quantity bump is brief; around a year after generic entry, estimated total quantities are
similar for drugs with and without coupons. When we add drug fixed effects in column (4),
the estimated effect of coupons on total quantity growth remains negative but is no longer
statistically significant.
    On balance, then, we do not find any statistically or economically significant association
between the presence of a coupon and quantity levels and/or growth rates. However, as
with pricing, our analysis is limited to comparisons across drugs, and therefore should not
be viewed as strong evidence of a causal relationship — or lack thereof. Lacking arguably
exogenous variation in coupon status, we cannot rule out the possibility that coupons expand
the market via improved medication adherence and/or by taking sales from therapeutic
substitutes (i.e., different drugs). That said, given we do not find any clear correlation
between coupons and quantity levels and/or growth rates, we assume that coupons have no
effect on total quantity in the spending calculations below.




                                              21
4.4     How much do coupons affect pharmaceutical spending?
We now use our estimates of the effects of coupons on generic efficiency and drug pricing to
estimate the effect of coupons on retail drug spending. Because coupons may reduce generic
utilization in non-retail channels as well (e.g., hospital pharmacies), channels which account
for around 30 percent of all prescription activity in the U.S.,38 we view these estimates as a
lower bound for the total effect of coupons on spending.
    We estimate the net present value of spending over the five-year period following generic
entry for the average drug in our sample, with and without a coupon. To derive the estimates,
we use inputs from the preceding analysis as well as several additional assumptions about
unmeasured parameters that enter the calculation (e.g., the discount rate). The results of
the spending calculations are shown in Table 10. We assume that generic efficiency behaves
according to the confined exponential equation (1), as presented in section 4.1. In columns
(1) and (2) (labeled “IMS”), we assume that coupons affect generic efficiency according to
the estimates from the IMS data as presented in column (2) of Table 5. In columns (3) and
(4) (labeled “NHCHIS”), we assume that coupons reduce generic efficiency by a fixed amount
that is set using the estimates from the NHCHIS data as presented in column (1) of Table
6. We assume that brand and generic prices follow equation (6), as presented in section 4.2,
using the estimates presented in Table 8. We perform the calculations assuming that coupons
do not affect branded price growth (columns (1) and (3)) and that they do (columns (2) and
(4)). In all columns, we assume that generic prices are unaffected by coupons; if coupons do
slow generic price declines, then the effect of coupons on spending will be substantially larger
than what we report here. We assume that market size is independent of coupon status.
    A crucial piece of information that we lack is the fraction of consumers buying the branded
drug who redeem a coupon; this fraction is significant because coupon redemption reduces
(out-of-pocket) spending. We therefore consider several possible values, book-ended with
the logical extremes. The upper bound is of course 1. We obtain a lower bound by assuming
that manufacturers can perfectly target coupons, such that the only users of coupons are
those who would have bought the generic in the absence of the coupon. If manufacturers can
perfectly target coupons, then the fraction of brand buyers using the coupon is equal to the
effect of coupons on generic efficiency divided by the total proportion of consumers who buy
the branded formulation. Given a base of 5 percent branded utilization and a 3 percentage
point coupon effect, this lower bound is given by 3/8=0.375. We report the estimates for a
  38
   “The NPA represents and captures over 70 percent of all prescription activity in the United States.”
IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics, HSRN Data Brief: National Prescription Audit.


                                                  22
grid of values: 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1. Additional details about the calculations are given in the
notes under the table and in the appendix.
    In the table, we report both the percentage change in spending due to coupons as well as
the absolute change. The results indicate an increase in per-drug spending due to coupons
of between 0.3 and 6.1 percent ($6.5 to $158.6 million). Spending effects are larger when (a)
fewer brand buyers use the coupon, (b) coupons lead to faster branded price growth, and
(c) we use the IMS generic efficiency estimates, which imply a larger effect of coupons over
a five-year horizon. To evaluate the plausibility of our estimates, we also report the return
on investment (ROI) of coupons to branded drug manufacturers as the additional revenues
from the coupon divided by manufacturer spending on copays (implicitly assuming that both
production costs and the fixed and operating costs of coupon programs are negligible). A
value of 1 represents a breakeven result for the manufacturer — every additional dollar of
revenue is offset by a dollar of coupon redemptions. Several industry sources indicate that
drug manufacturers earn a 4:1 to 6:1 return on copay coupon programs, numbers which
are in line with our results.39 Given the reported ROIs from industry sources, we prefer
the estimates with ROIs of at least 4:1 and no higher than 7:1 (particularly as our ROI
calculations do not include any production or fixed costs). These estimates indicate an
increase in retail spending over the five-year period following generic entry of between 1.2
and 4.6 percent, or $30.9 to $119.3 million.
    It may be surprising that manufacturers can earn such high returns from copay coupons
when total spending increases by only a few percent. The reason is that generic entry swiftly
destroys brand profits, so even modest reductions in generic penetration can yield substantial
gains to brand profits in percentage terms. The effects are also sizable in absolute terms; for
our preferred estimates, the lowest estimated spending difference is $30.9 million (about $6
million per year on average). Our sample of drugs with coupons includes 23 drugs, so in total
the estimates imply that coupons increased retail spending for our sample — drugs facing
generic entry during the June 2007 to December 2010 period — by at least $700 million over
the five year period following generic entry, and as much as $2.74 billion.
  39
    The 4:1 to 6:1 statistic is cited by both proponents and opponents of copay coupons. A proponent:
“returns are as high as 4:1 (and up to 6:1)” (Tenaglia, M. (January 2012), “Letting the Facts Get in the
Way: An Empirical Defense of Coupons and Copay Offset Programs,” Pharmaceutical Executive.) An
opponent: “Manufacturers reportedly earn a 4:1 to 6:1 return on investment” (Visante. (November 2011),
“How Copay Coupons Could Raise Prescription Drug Costs by $32 Billion over the Next Decade.”)




                                                  23
5      Robustness Checks
A. Falsification tests

If the difference-in-differences estimates we obtain reflect Massachusetts’ coupon ban rather
than other factors that differ between New Hampshire and Massachusetts and that vary by
coupon status, then the estimated effect should disappear when substituting Massachusetts
with a state that does not have a coupon ban. To implement this falsification test, we
re-estimated the difference-in-differences model (equation (3)) using data from Vermont —
the most natural comparison state for New Hampshire — in place of Massachusetts. As
coupons may be used in both states, we would not expect the difference in generic efficiency
between New Hampshire and Vermont to depend on coupon status. The results are given in
column (2) of Table 11; column (1) replicates the original difference-in-differences analysis
using Massachusetts data. The estimated effect for Vermont is much smaller in magnitude
than the estimated effect for Massachusetts and not statistically significant. However, a test
for the equality of the Vermont effect and the Massachusetts effect fails to reject the null
hypothesis that the effects are equal (narrowly; the p-value is just above 0.10). Since the
number of underlying claims in Vermont is somewhat small (about 40% fewer claims than
in Massachusetts), we add all other non-Massachusetts states in column (3) to increase the
precision of the estimate.40 The point estimate remains similar to the estimate using only
Vermont, but due to the reduction in the standard error, we are able to reject equality of the
coupon effect for Massachusetts and the coupon effect for other states. Overall, we take these
results as evidence that our main results are likely attributable to Massachusetts’ coupon
ban rather than spuriously reflecting the effect of other factors.

B. Sensitivity to included fixed effects

In our difference-in-differences specifications, we include drug, year since generic entry, and
insurance type fixed effects. To see if the result hinges on the inclusion of any of these
fixed effects, we re-estimated the model varying the fixed effects included in the estimation.
Table 12 presents the results, with column (5) replicating the main analysis for purposes of
comparison. Specifications without drug fixed effects (columns (1) and (3)) instead include
a coupon indicator. Across all specifications, the difference-in-differences estimate remains
negative, statistically significant, and of a similar magnitude as the main result. The results
  40
   Besides Vermont, the three other states with the most claims in the data are Maine, Florida, and New
York.


                                                  24
also indicate that the high R-squared value (0.746) for the main results is primarily driven by
the inclusion of the drug and year since generic entry fixed effects, which increase R-squared
from 0.020 (column (1)) to 0.745 (column (4)).

C. Other robustness checks

We conducted numerous other robustness checks to further examine the sensitivity of our
results. We discuss the outcomes of several of these other checks here; tables are available
upon request.
    In Figure 2, we showed that a coupon is essentially either never or always available for
a drug while facing generic entry, with the exception of three drugs for which coupons are
present in 40 to 60 percent of the months after generic entry. In the results reported above, we
coded these drugs as having copay coupons. We also estimated each model (a) treating these
drugs as not having coupons and (b) dropping them. The results are extremely similar to the
main results in both cases, with minimal changes in magnitudes and statistical significance.
    Given our relatively small sample size (23 drugs with coupons and 62 without), a related
concern is that the results may be driven by the generic efficiency and pricing patterns of
only one or two drugs. We reran each analysis 23 separate times, each time leaving out
one drug with a coupon. The results always remain similar to what is reported above: the
coefficient on coupon status in the IMS generic efficiency regressions is always negative,
statistically significant, and of a similar magnitude; the difference-in-differences and triple-
difference results continue to indicate a negative and statistically significant effect of coupons
on generic efficiency of a similar magnitude; and coupons continue to be associated with faster
branded price growth.
    We also estimated the branded price regressions using long differences, measuring prices
for each drug several months prior to generic entry and then again several months after
generic entry. We regressed the long differences on coupon status, the number of generic
firms in the post month, and refill percentage, weighting observations by the average revenue
of the branded drug in the three months prior to generic entry (as with the results reported
in the text). We estimated specifications using prices 3 and 6 months prior to generic entry
and 6, 12, and 18 months after generic entry. The results imply yearly branded price growth
between 6 and 11 percent for drugs without coupons, and an additional boost of 3 to 7
percentage points for drugs with coupons. These results are similar to those reported in
Table 8.
    Finally, we repeated the NHCHIS analysis but restricting the data to the years 2007–2010


                                               25
to match the sample period for the IMS data. The results remain similar. In the difference-
in-differences analysis, the estimated coupon effect remains statistically significant and is
similar in magnitude. In the triple-difference analysis, the DDD estimate remains similar in
magnitude but is no longer statistically significant. The loss of significance is due to larger
standard errors in the 65 and older (i.e., control) group, in which the number of underlying
claims is substantially smaller.


6     Conclusion
Copay coupons have become increasingly common for branded prescription drugs in the
United States. Over the period from June 2007 to December 2010, the share of branded
retail spending accounted for by drugs with coupons more than doubled, increasing from 26
percent to 54 percent. These coupons cover at least a portion of consumers’ out-of-pocket
expenses, thereby reducing the out-of-pocket price difference between branded and generic
medicines for those drugs where both are available. We examine the effect of copay coupons
on generic utilization for a sample of branded drugs that first face generic entry during our
time period.
    We find that copay coupons lead to an economically and statistically significant reduction
in generic efficiency of 3 or more percentage points. Since brand shares typically shrink to 5
percent or less in the years following generic entry, this corresponds to a 60+ percent increase
in branded utilization. Assuming coupons reduce out-of-pocket costs to nearly zero, the
implied demand elasticity with respect to out-of-pocket cost is at least -0.6. Estimates from
the literature utilizing differences, changes, and/or kinks in benefit design find elasticities
ranging from around -0.1 to as high as -0.7 (see Simonsen et al. (2015) for recent estimates
along with a discussion of prior work). The demand response induced by coupons is at the
upper end of prior estimates, which is consistent with coupons representing a particularly
salient decrease in out-of-pocket cost compared with less prominent adjustments to benefit
design. In addition, the outside option to purchasing a branded drug in our study includes
purchasing a bioequivalent generic; in other studies the outside option may not include
bioequivalent generics (and instead only include different drugs and/or nonadherence).
    We find economically and statistically significant effects across several analyses. Our first
analysis uses IMS retail prescription data to estimate the effect of copay coupons under the
assumption that coupon status is exogenous. We then perform two analyses using claims
data from residents of New Hampshire and Massachusetts: (1) a difference-in-differences
analysis that exploits a ban on copay coupons in Massachusetts, and (2) a triple-difference

                                               26
analysis that further exploits a ban on copay coupons for government-subsidized patients.
These analyses mitigate concerns regarding confounding factors that could be correlated
with coupon issuance as well as generic efficiency. We also find that copay coupons are
correlated with faster branded price growth. Prices of branded drugs with coupons grow
over 12 percent per year, while prices of branded drugs without coupons grow 7–8 percent
per year. These results are suggestive, however, as coupon decisions may be endogenous.
    The sizable implied demand elasticity for branded prescription drugs, paired with the
relatively small share of drug spending represented by consumer copays, yields sizable esti-
mates of the impact of coupons on the combined drug spending of consumers and insurers.
For the average drug in our sample, introducing a copay coupon is estimated to increase
retail spending (brand and generic combined) by 1.2 to 4.6 percent over the five-year period
following generic entry, or roughly $30 to $120 million in 2010 dollars ($6 to $24 million per
year). Our analysis utilizes only drugs for which bioequivalent generics are available. We
find no compelling evidence of increases in utilization of drugs with coupons, as would result
from improvements in patient compliance with recommended therapies. We are not aware
of any studies documenting health benefits from brand utilization for our sample of drugs.
According to 2010 IMS data, about 80% of all prescriptions are for drugs with an available
bioequivalent generic, and these prescriptions account for roughly 50% of the more than
$300 billion in prescription drug spending. If copay coupons were offered for the entirety of
this sample, even a 1% increase in spending would correspond to about $1.5 billion in higher
drug spending annually.
    This study addresses only one type of copay coupon: coupons for branded drugs with
generic bioequivalents. Copay coupons are also often available for branded drugs that do
not face (direct) generic competition. In such cases, the static welfare implications of copay
coupons are less clear. For instance, for branded drugs without an available bioequivalent
generic, there may be a more nuanced trade-off between efficacy and price. In addition,
business-stealing in that context does not necessarily raise spending. That said, while sub-
stitution between branded drugs may not raise spending, substitution between branded
drugs and generics for different molecules likely still will.41 Moreover, without a competitive
generic industry to temper pricing, copay coupons may be a more effective tool for softening
price competition between brands that are therapeutic substitutes. This is an important
area for future research, particularly given policy questions about whether and where copay
  41
    For example, a copay coupon for the branded statin Lipitor (which faced loss of exclusivity in 2011) may
have resulted in a loss of share for generic statins like simvastatin (Zocor; generic available in 2006).



                                                    27
coupons should be allowed. In 2012, Massachusetts overturned its copay coupon ban for
drugs without a bioequivalent generic, while maintaining the ban for drugs with a bioequiv-
alent generic. Our research provides evidence that the continued ban on copay coupons for
drugs with a bioequivalent generic will help to control healthcare costs, but does not speak
to the consequences of the removal of the coupon ban for drugs without a bioequivalent
generic.
    This study also highlights a more general problem for health insurance product design;
if healthcare providers can make side payments to consumers, they can undermine insurers’
attempts to steer consumer decisions via cost sharing. Side payments can also meaningfully
impact the actions available to each party during insurer and provider negotiations. These
issues are particularly pertinent given the renewed interest in selective contracting (and
narrow network products in particular) and value-based insurance design. One important
reason for tiered prescription drug formularies is that patients have heterogeneous responses
to treatments and heterogeneous preferences over drugs. While more expensive to insurers
and consumers, high-cost options such as specialty tier drugs may be a good value for some
patients. Through tiering, insurers create incentives for consumers to reveal their valuations
of products, thereby allowing insurers to provide the most costly care only to those patients
who value it the most. Copayment foregiveness programs promote the over-diffusion of high-
cost technology to low-benefit patients, which is one of the main drivers of innovation-related
increases in healthcare spending (Chandra and Skinner (2012)). If providers can make side
payments to consumers, insurers may have to default to the cruder tool of excluding providers
who undermine the cost-sharing system, which threatens the insurance value that consumers
get by knowing they can access the most costly care if it is necessary.


References
Andersson, K., G. Bergström, M. G. Petzold, and A. Carlsten (2007). Impact of a generic
 substitution reform on patients and society’s expenditure for pharmaceuticals. Health
 Policy 81 (2), 376–384.

Baicker, K., S. Mullainathan, and J. Schwartzstein (2015). Behavioral hazard in health
  insurance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (4), 1623–1667.

Baker, L. C. (2010). Acquisition of mri equipment by doctors drives up imaging use and
  spending. Health Affairs 29 (12), 2252–2259.


                                              28
Banks, R. B. (1994). Growth and diffusion phenomena: mathematical frameworks and ap-
  plications, Volume 14. Springer Science & Business Media.

Berndt, E. R. and M. L. Aitken (2011). Brand loyalty, generic entry and price competi-
  tion in pharmaceuticals in the quarter century after the 1984 waxman-hatch legislation.
  International Journal of the Economics of Business 18 (2), 177–201.

Berndt, E. R., T. McGuire, and J. P. Newhouse (2011). A primer on the economics of pre-
  scription pharmaceutical pricing in health insurance markets. Forum for Health Economics
  & Policy 14 (2).

Brot-Goldberg, Z. C., A. Chandra, B. R. Handel, and J. T. Kolstad (2015). What does a
  deductible do? the impact of cost-sharing on health care prices, quantities, and spending
  dynamics. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Caves, R. E., M. D. Whinston, and M. A. Hurwitz (1991). Patent expiration, entry, and
  competition in the us pharmaceutical industry. Brookings Papers: Microeconomics, 1–66.

Chandra, A. and J. Skinner (2012). Technology growth and expenditure growth in health
 care. Journal of Economic Literature 50 (3), 645–80.

Chernew, M. E., I. A. Juster, M. Shah, A. Wegh, S. Rosenberg, A. B. Rosen, M. C. Sokol,
 K. Yu-Isenberg, and A. M. Fendrick (2010). Evidence that value-based insurance can be
 effective. Health Affairs 29 (3), 10–1377.

Eaddy, M. T., C. L. Cook, K. ODay, S. P. Burch, and C. R. Cantrell (2012). How patient
  cost-sharing trends affect adherence and outcomes. Pharmacy and Therapeutics 37 (1),
  45–55.

Frank, R. G. and D. S. Salkever (1997). Generic entry and the pricing of pharmaceuticals.
  Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 6 (1), 75–90.

FTC (2011). Authorized generic drugs: Short-term effects and long-term impact.

Grabowski, H. G. and J. M. Vernon (1992). Brand loyalty, entry, and price competition in
  pharmaceuticals after the 1984 drug act. Journal of Law and Economics 35 (2), 331–350.

Gruber, J. and R. McKnight (2016). Controlling health care costs through limited net-
  work insurance plans: Evidence from massachusetts state employees. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy 8 (2), 219–250.

                                            29
Gruber, J. and M. Owings (1996). Physician financial incentives and cesarean section deliv-
  ery. RAND Journal of Economics 27 (1), 99–123.

Handel, B. and J. Kolstad (2015). Health insurance for “humans”: information frictions,
  plan choice, and consumer welfare. American Economic Review 105 (8), 2449–2500.

Hellerstein, J. K. (1998). The importance of the physician in the generic versus trade-name
  prescription decision. RAND Journal of Economics 29 (1), 108–136.

Huckfeldt, P. J. and C. R. Knittel (2011). Pharmaceutical use following generic entry: Paying
 less and buying less. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Huskamp, H. A., J. M. Donohue, C. Koss, E. R. Berndt, and R. G. Frank (2008). Generic
 entry, reformulations and promotion of ssris in the us. PharmacoEconomics 26 (7), 603–
 616.

Iizuka, T. (2012). Physician agency and adoption of generic pharmaceuticals. American
   Economic Review 102 (6), 2826–2858.

Kesselheim, A. S., A. S. Misono, J. L. Lee, M. R. Stedman, M. A. Brookhart, N. K. Choudhry,
  and W. H. Shrank (2008). Clinical equivalence of generic and brand-name drugs used in
  cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of the American
  Medical Association 300 (21), 2514–2526.

Lundin, D. (2000). Moral hazard in physician prescription behavior. Journal of Health
  Economics 19 (5), 639–662.

Masson, A. and R. L. Steiner (1985). Generic substitution and prescription drug prices:
 economic effects of state drug product selection laws. Bureau of Economics, Federal Trade
 Commission.

Nevo, A. and C. Wolfram (2002). Why do manufacturers issue coupons? an empirical
  analysis of breakfast cereals. RAND Journal of Economics 33 (2), 319–339.

Reiffen, D. and M. R. Ward (2005). Generic drug industry dynamics. Review of Economics
  and Statistics 87 (1), 37–49.

Ross, J. S. and A. S. Kesselheim (2013). Prescription-drug coupons – no such thing as a free
  lunch. New England Journal of Medicine 369 (13), 1188–1189.


                                             30
Shrank, W. H., N. K. Choudhry, J. Agnew-Blais, A. D. Federman, J. N. Liberman, J. Liu,
  A. S. Kesselheim, M. A. Brookhart, and M. A. Fischer (2010). State generic substitution
  laws can lower drug outlays under medicaid. Health Affairs 29 (7), 1383–1390.

Simonsen, M., L. Skipper, and N. Skipper (2015). Price sensitivity of demand for prescription
  drugs: exploiting a regression kink design. Journal of Applied Econometrics 31 (2), 320–
  337.

Yip, W. C. (1998). Physician response to medicare fee reductions: changes in the volume of
  coronary artery bypass graft (cabg) surgeries in the medicare and private sectors. Journal
  of Health Economics 6 (17), 675–699.




                                             31
7   Figures and Tables




Figure 1: Share of Brand Spending with a Coupon Available, 6/2007–12/2010




        Figure 2: Coupon Frequency for Drugs in the Final Sample




                                   32
Figure 3: Generic Efficiency by Time Since Generic Entry and Coupon Status




                                    33
                               Table 1: IMS Sample Restrictions
                                                                    Drugs                 Revenue
                         Restriction                           (molecule-forms)          ($ million)
          Full data (6/2007 to 12/2010)                                3,553                $887,810
          Any brand/generic competition                                 814                 $465,723
      1 Branded drugs facing new generic entry                            125               $151,499
      2 Only one brand, no branded generic                                103               $125,500
      3 Timing of generic entry clear                                      88               $118,933
      4 Non-schedule II substances (final sample)                          85               $112,346
Notes: Restrictions are made successively, so, e.g., restriction 2 also makes restriction 1. Revenues are in
CPI-adjusted 2010 dollars and are for all manufacturers, regardless of brand status.



                Table 2: Drug Descriptive Statistics, by Coupon Status
                                                                 With            Without
                          Statistic (mean)                      Coupon           Coupon
              Drugs                                                 23               62
              Coupon Value ($ off)                                $47.29              –
              Month of Generic Entry                              4/2009           4/2009
              In the 3 months before generic entry:
              Prescriptions (million)                             0.256             0.169
              Revenue ($ million)                                 $54.3             $30.1
              Revenue per Prescription                           $260.71           $217.73
              Refill Percentage                                   51.2%             56.2%
              Generic firms:
              t = 0 (month of generic entry)                       2.04              2.10
              t = 6 (6 months after entry)                         3.21              2.98
              t = 12 (12 months after entry)                       4.47              3.30
        Notes: All monetary quantities are in CPI-adjusted 2010 dollars. The differences in means
        for revenue and the number of generic firms at t = 12 are statistically significant at the 10%
        level.




                                                     34
                                                  Table 3: List of Drugs with Coupons
          Brand                                                                Dosage               Drug               Generic  Brand
          Name             Manufacturer                Molecule(s)              Form               Category             Entry  Revenue+
       Protonix         Wyeth                     Pantoprazole               ER Tablet  Gastrointestinal                Jan-08
       Lamictal         GlaxoSmithKline           Lamotrigine                Tablet     Neurological Disorders          Jul-08       ≥$100
       Effexor XR       Wyeth                     Venlafaxine                ER Capsule Psychotherapeutics              Jul-10
       Keppra      UCB                            Levetiracetam              Tablet         Neurological Disorders      Nov-08
       Depakote ER Abbott Laboratories            Divalproex                 ER Tablet      Neurological Disorders      Feb-09
       Depakote    Abbott Laboratories            Divalproex                 Tablet         Neurological Disorders      Aug-08
                                                                                                                                    $50-$100
       Ambien CR   Sanofi                         Zolpidem                   ER Tablet      Sedatives & Hypnotics       Nov-10
       Trileptal   Novartis                       Oxcarbazepine              Tablet         Neurological Disorders      Oct-07
       Prograf     Astellas Pharma                Tacrolimus                 Capsule        Immunologic Agents          Sep-09
       Cellcept         Roche                Mycophenolate Mofetil           Tablet         Immunologic Agents          May-09
       Mirapex          Boehringer Ingelheim Pramipexole                     Tablet         Neurological Disorders      Jan-10
       Skelaxin         Pfizer               Metaxalone                      Tablet         Musculoskeletal             Apr-10
       Cellcept         Roche                Mycophenolate Mofetil           Capsule        Immunologic Agents          May-09
35




       Famvir           Novartis             Famciclovir                     Tablet         Antiviral                   Sep-07
       Differin         Galderma             Adapalene                       Gel            Dermatologicals             Jun-10
       Zegerid          Santarus             Omeprazole/Sodium               Capsule        Gastrointestinal            Jul-10
                                                                                                                                      <$50
       Depakote         Abbott Laboratories Divalproex                       Capsule        Neurological Disorders      Feb-09
       Keppra           UCB                  Levetiracetam                   Solution       Neurological Disorders      Jan-09
       Differin         Galderma             Adapalene                       Cream          Dermatologicals             Jul-10
       Evoclin          Stiefel Laboratories Clindamycin                     Aerosol        Dermatologicals             Apr-10
       Ovide            Taro                 Malathion                       Lotion         Dermatologicals             Jun-09
       Zyrtec           Pfizer               Cetirizine                      Solution       Allergy/Cold Preps          Jun-08
       Loprox           Medicis              Ciclopirox                      Gel            Anti-Fungal Agents          Dec-07
     Notes: + average revenue in the 3 months prior to generic entry ($ million, 2010 dollars). Sorted descending on brand revenue. “ER” refers to
     all extended release formulations.
Table 4: NHCHIS Claim Counts in Final Sample, 2007–2013
                                  With    Without
        Statistic   State        Coupon   Coupon
         Total      NH       1,477,523    2,427,783
         Claims     MA         33,024      48,011
      Median Over   NH           29,839    14,594
        Drugs       MA            588       202
        Min Over    NH            2,067      11
         Drugs      MA             23        0




                            36
                Table 5: Effect of Coupons on Generic Efficiency (IMS)
                                 (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
          genefft=0            0.663***     0.673***      0.675***    0.674***     0.676***    0.687***
                                (0.031)      (0.027)       (0.025)     (0.025)      (0.025)     (0.026)
          Coupon              -0.088***    -0.081***      -0.082***               -0.061***      0.006
                                (0.018)      (0.019)       (0.020)                  (0.023)     (0.057)
  Low-Intensity Coupon                                                 -0.067**
                                                                        (0.029)
  High-Intensity Coupon                                               -0.084***
                                                                        (0.020)
     Coupon*Intensity                                                              -0.014*      -0.092*
                                                                                   (0.008)      (0.052)
    Coupon*Intensity2                                                                           0.018*
                                                                                                (0.010)
      Generic Firms                        0.013***       0.013***    0.013***    0.015***     0.016***
                                            (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)
     Refill Percentage                                      -0.069      -0.053      -0.074       -0.046
                                                           (0.089)     (0.090)     (0.089)      (0.084)
         Constant             0.134***     0.068***        0.108*      0.099*      0.104*        0.076
                               (0.021)      (0.023)        (0.058)     (0.059)     (0.058)      (0.060)
       Observations             1,740        1,740          1,740       1,740       1,740        1,740
    Generic Efficiency+
     Without coupon             92.8%        91.9%         92.1%       92.0%        92.0%        91.7%
      With coupon               83.3%        80.6%         81.2%
      Low-intensity                                                    84.5%        83.5%        86.5%
      High-intensity                                                   80.4%        80.6%        74.8%
Notes: *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10. The unit of observation is the drug-month. Observations are
weighted by the average revenue of the branded drug in the 3 months prior to generic entry, and standard
errors are clustered by drug. + The bottom panel gives the average predicted generic efficiency from t = 0
to t = 36, evaluated at the mean level of the covariates (generic firms and refill percentage: 3.43 and 0.55
respectively). The first row gives estimates for drugs without coupons and the second row gives estimates
for drugs with coupons. For columns (4) to (6), separate estimates are given for low-intensity and high-
intensity coupons. For column (4), low-intensity combines all coupons below the median intensity (0.91)
and high-intensity combines all coupons above the median. For columns (5) and (6) — which require a
specific intensity to evaluate — low-intensity is evaluated using the 25th percentile of the measure (0.69)
and high-intensity is evaluated using the 75th percentile (1.52).




                                                     37
             Table 6: Effect of Coupons on Generic Efficiency (DD)
                                    (1)               (2)            (3)              (4)
               NH                  -0.003           -0.003          -0.003           -0.003
                                  (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.007)
          NH*Coupon              -0.034***                          -0.007           0.029
                                  (0.011)                          (0.019)          (0.046)
       NH*Low-Intensity                            -0.000
                                                  (0.011)
      NH*High-Intensity                          -0.041***
                                                  (0.011)
         NH*Intensity                                               -0.022           -0.086
                                                                   (0.014)          (0.080)
         NH*Intensity2                                                               0.026
                                                                                    (0.030)
          Observations             2,106            2,106           2,106            2,106
           R-squared               0.746            0.746           0.746            0.746
Notes: *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10. The unit of observation is the drug-year since generic
entry-insurance type-state. Observations are weighted by the number of insurance claims over which
generic efficiency is calculated and standard errors are clustered by drug. All specifications include
drug, year since generic entry, and insurance-type fixed effects.




                                                 38
          Table 7: Effect of Coupons on Generic Efficiency (DDD)
                     Description                           Expression          Estimate
       A: Treated consumers (age<65)
       NH-MA difference, with coupon β0 + β2 + β3 + β5                         -0.037***
                                                                                (0.008)
       NH-MA difference, without coupon               β0 + β2                    -0.003
                                                                                (0.006)
       Difference-in-differences                      β3 + β5                  -0.034***
                                                                                (0.011)
       B: Control consumers (age≥65)
       NH-MA difference, with coupon                  β0 + β3                     0.034
                                                                                 (0.024)
       NH-MA difference, without coupon               β0                          0.004
                                                                                 (0.015)
       Difference-in-differences                      β3                          0.029
                                                                                 (0.031)
                         DDD                          β5                       -0.063**
                                                                                (0.027)
                     Observations                                                 3,630
                      R-squared                                                   0.739
Notes: *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10. The table presents linear combinations of the estimated
coefficients of equation (4). The unit of observation is the drug-year since generic entry-insurance
type-state-consumer group. Observations are weighted by the number of insurance claims over
which generic efficiency is calculated and standard errors are clustered by drug. The specification
includes drug, year since generic entry, and insurance-type fixed effects.




                                                39
                            Table 8: Effect of Coupons on Prices
                                     ln(Brand Price)                       ln(Generic Price)
                               (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
             t              0.006***    0.006***     0.008***     -0.008***    -0.007***    -0.007***
                             (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)
         Coupon                0.015                                 0.030
                             (0.032)                               (0.041)
        t*Coupon             0.004**    0.003***                    0.006*       0.001
                             (0.002)     (0.001)                   (0.003)      (0.004)
     Generic Firms           0.012**    0.009**         0.010*    -0.094***    -0.070***    -0.070***
                             (0.006)     (0.004)        (0.005)    (0.008)      (0.010)      (0.010)
    Refill Percentage         -0.109                                -0.133
                             (0.193)                               (0.222)
  ln(pre brand price)+      0.982***                              0.985***
                             (0.033)                               (0.035)
  Drug Fixed Effects?          No          Yes           Yes         No           Yes          Yes
      Observations           1,740        1,740         1,740       1,740        1,740        1,740
       R-squared             0.961        0.993         0.992       0.932        0.979        0.978
  Yearly Price Change
   Without Coupon             7.1%        8.0%                      -8.8%        -8.2%
                                                         9.7%                                 -7.7%
     With Coupon             12.2%        12.6%                     -2.3%        -6.9%
Notes: *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10. t is months since generic entry (t = 0 is the month of generic
entry). Observations are weighted by the average revenue of the branded drug in the 3 months prior to
generic entry, and standard errors are clustered by drug. + “pre brand price” refers to the average brand
price in the 3 months prior to generic entry. All prices are measured in CPI-adjusted 2010 dollars.




                                                   40
                    Table 9: Effect of Coupons on Total Quantity
                                                ln(Total Quantity)
                                   (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
                t                  0.003          0.001          0.003           0.004
                                 (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.003)         (0.003)
            Coupon                -0.006          0.009         0.097*
                                 (0.053)         (0.043)        (0.056)
          t*Coupon                                              -0.006*          -0.004
                                                                (0.004)         (0.003)
        Generic Firms                           0.020***       0.019***           0.004
                                                 (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.007)
      Refill Percentage                           -0.001         -0.013
                                                 (0.183)        (0.182)
      ln(pre quantity)+         1.008***        1.007***       1.009***
                                 (0.018)         (0.013)        (0.012)
     Drug Fixed Effects?           No               No             No             Yes
         Observations             1,740            1,740         1,740           1,740
          R-squared               0.983            0.984         0.985           0.995
Notes: *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10. Observations are weighted by the average revenue
of the branded drug in the 3 months prior to generic entry, and standard errors are clustered by
drug. + “pre quantity” refers to the average quantity in the 3 months prior to generic entry.




                                              41
                       Table 10: Effect of Coupons on Spending
                                               (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                 Effect on Generic Efficiency
              Fraction Brand                      IMS               NHCHIS
               Buyers Using                        Effect on Brand Prices?
      Measure    Coupon                        No       Yes       No         Yes
                             0.4               5.0%          6.1%          1.7%          2.3%
                             0.6               4.2%          5.4%          1.2%          1.8%
       Percent
                             0.8               3.4%          4.6%          0.7%          1.4%
                              1                2.7%          3.8%          0.3%          0.9%
                             0.4              $128.8        $158.6         $43.0         $59.5
                             0.6              $109.2        $139.0         $30.9         $47.3
      Absolute
                             0.8              $89.6         $119.3         $18.7         $35.2
                              1               $69.9          $99.7          $6.5         $23.0
                             0.4              10.25         11.01          6.29          6.97
                             0.6               6.84          7.34          4.20          4.65
         ROI
                             0.8               5.13          5.51          3.15          3.49
                              1               4.10          4.40           2.52          2.79
Notes: All numbers are calculated over a fixed time horizon of 5 years. The (monthly) discount factor
is set to 0.901/12 . ROI is defined as the ratio of additional brand revenues from the coupon and
manufacturer spending on copays. Absolute spending differences are in millions of 2010 dollars. For
generic efficiency: columns (1) and (2) use the estimates from the IMS data reported in column (2)
of Table 5, and columns (3) and (4) use the difference-in-differences estimate from the NHCHIS data
reported in column (1) of Table 6. For brand prices: columns (1) and (3) use the estimates from column
(3) of Table 8, and columns (2) and (4) use the estimates from column (2) of Table 8. For generic
prices: all columns use the estimates from column (6) of Table 8. Initial brand and generic prices, the
number of generic firms, the value of the coupon, and market size are set to their average values in the
data for drugs with coupons.




                                                  42
Table 11: Effect of Coupons on Generic Efficiency (DD): Falsification Tests
                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)
                                     MA                   VT           All non-MA
                  NH                -0.003                0.003               0.001
                                   (0.007)              (0.010)             (0.004)
             NH*Coupon            -0.034***              -0.009              -0.008
                                   (0.011)              (0.017)             (0.012)
            Observations             2,106               2,024              12,614
             R-squared               0.746               0.748              0.733
             p-value H0 +              –                 0.100             0.031**
     Notes: *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10. The unit of observation is the drug-year since
     generic entry-insurance type-state. Observations are weighted by the number of insur-
     ance claims over which generic efficiency is calculated and standard errors are clustered
     by drug. All specifications include drug, year since generic entry, and insurance-type
     fixed effects. + p-value of a test of the null hypothesis that the coupon effect is the same
     as the effect in MA (from a regression estimating both effects simultaneously).




                                                 43
 Table 12: Effect of Coupons on Generic Efficiency (DD): Specification Checks
                                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
               NH                    0.011         0.010        -0.008         -0.009        -0.003
                                   (0.010)        (0.008)      (0.008)        (0.006)       (0.007)
            Coupon                  -0.025                      -0.014
                                   (0.047)                     (0.055)
         NH*Coupon                -0.039***      -0.026**     -0.041***     -0.033***     -0.034***
                                   (0.011)        (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.011)       (0.011)
        Fixed Effects:
            Drug                      No            Yes           No            Yes           Yes
  Years Since Generic Entry           No            No            Yes           Yes           Yes
       Insurance Type                 No            No            No            No            Yes
         Observations                2,106         2,106         2,106         2,106         2,106
          R-squared                  0.020         0.277         0.486         0.745         0.746
Notes: *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10. The unit of observation is the drug-year since generic entry-
insurance type-state. Observations are weighted by the number of insurance claims over which generic
efficiency is calculated and standard errors are clustered by drug.




                                                  44
8      Appendix
8.1     Formal coupon analysis
In this section, we present a stylized formal model to illustrate the effect of coupons on
behavior, emphasizing the incentives generated by insurance. Throughout, we assume that
a bioequivalent generic for the branded drug is available and is produced by several generic
firms. We further assume that the generic firms produce undifferentiated products and price
at marginal cost. This assumption, which is consistent with evidence on generic pricing,42
allows us to abstract away from any strategic interactions between brand and generic pricing.

Pricing without coupons

Consider a brand-name pharmaceutical manufacturer (without the ability to offer copay
coupons) setting the price p of its drug to an insurer. While the manufacturer receives p for
every prescription filled, the price that determines demand is not p itself. Rather, insured
consumers pay only m(p) for a prescription, where m(·) is a function chosen by the insurer.
The price facing consumers — m(p) — is what determines demand rather than p directly.
In practice, m(·) typically consists of several tiers of copayments, but for the purposes of the
analysis here, we will assume that m(·) is a smooth, differentiable function of p.
    To get a sense of what m(p) looks like in the data, Figure 4 plots consumer out-of-
pocket cost and total (insurer plus consumer) payments for privately insured consumers in
the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) from 2005 to 2012. Based on the pattern in
Figure 4, we make the following three assumptions about m(·) in the subsequent analysis:

    1. m(0) = 0 and m(p) < p for all p > 0 (insurance)
    2. m0 (p) > 0 for all p (increasing absolute cost sharing)
    3. m00 (p) < 0 for all p (decreasing proportional cost sharing)

    Suppose there is a mass of consumers (normalized to 1) with unit demand who choose
between the branded drug and a bioequivalent generic.43 The proportion of consumers choos-
ing the branded drug is given by demand curve Q(·), while the remaining 1 − Q(·) consumers
  42
     For example, Berndt et al. (2011) note that generic prices eventually fall close to typical estimates of
marginal cost, a result that is consistent with perfectly competitive markets.
  43
     The analysis here assumes away quantity effects; in principle coupons could also generate sales through
cross-drug substitution or by reducing non-adherence.



                                                     45
Figure 4: MEPS Expected Out-of-Pocket Costs, 2005–2012 All numbers are measured
in CPI-adjusted 2010 dollars. Total payments are censored from above at $500 — 97 percent of prescriptions
in the data have total payments of less than $500. The points are averages within $10 buckets, and the fitted
line is a locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (lowess) line through the points.


buy generic (generic efficiency). Given (constant) marginal cost c, the manufacturer chooses
price to maximize profits:
                                                        
                                   max p − c · Q m(p) .                                  (7)
                                          p

The difference between (7) and the standard profit-maximization problem is that, due to
the presence of insurance, the price received by the manufacturer is not the same price that
determines demand. (If there is no insurance, m(p) = p and (7) reduces to the standard
profit-maximization problem.) Further assume that Q0 < 0 and Q00 ≤ 0, which are sufficient
conditions to guarantee that the manufacturer’s profit function is concave.
    Given the assumptions made on m(·) and Q(·), it can be shown that the manufacturer’s
optimal price when facing insured consumers is higher than the optimal price without in-
surance. Intuitively, the cost to the manufacturer of increasing price — lower quantity — is
dampened by the presence of insurance, which passes through price increases to consumers
at less than a 1:1 rate. The manufacturer optimally responds by increasing price beyond the
optimal price in the absence of insurance (a similar result is shown in Berndt et al. (2011)).




                                                     46
Adding coupons

Suppose now that the manufacturer is able to offer consumers a coupon which reduces
                                        
their out-of-pocket cost by z ∈ 0, m(p) . Further assume that all consumers who buy
the branded drug use the coupon. This simplifying assumption — though unlikely to be
true in practice — enables us to focus on the interaction between coupons and the insurer
copayment mechanism rather than other rationales for coupons such as price discrimination.
With coupons, the manufacturer’s problem becomes
                                                           
                             max p − z − c · Q m(p) − z .                              (8)
                                   (p,z)

Unlike p, which is dampened by m(·), the coupon z reaches consumers directly. We derive
three specific propositions with regard to the effects of coupons on behavior. Here we present
the intuition and interpretation of the predictions; the proofs follow in the next section.

Proposition 1. Suppose that the manufacturer is constrained to price no higher than P̄
(i.e., p ∈ [0, P̄ ]).44 When coupons are allowed, the manufacturer’s optimal price is p∗ = P̄ .

    Proposition 1 states that, holding m(·) fixed, coupons undermine the efficacy of copays
in limiting prices. No matter how high P̄ is, the manufacturer optimally prices at the
maximum. In essence, the addition of coupons creates a money tree for the manufacturer.
By increasing both p and z by the same amount, for instance, the manufacturer can hold
its margin constant while simultaneously reducing consumers’ out-of-pocket cost, thereby
increasing quantity sold.45 Of course, insurers are unlikely to leave m(·) unchanged as they
see their costs skyrocket. Proposition 1 is therefore best interpreted as explaining why copay
coupons undermine standard copayment systems. The existing copayment rule m(·) is no
longer suitable when manufacturers are able to offer coupons.

Proposition 2. Denote the manufacturer’s optimal price without coupons (z = 0) by p̂, and
let P̄ ≥ p̂. When coupons are allowed, the manufacturer (a) offers a coupon (z ∗ > 0), (b)
consumers’ out-of-pocket cost is lower (i.e., m(p∗ ) − z ∗ < m(p̂)), and (c) generic efficiency
is lower.

   By Proposition 1, we know that the manufacturer’s optimal price is p∗ = P̄ . Given
a coupon that leaves out-of-pocket cost unchanged from the situation without coupons,
  44
     The price cap P̄ can be interpreted as a choke price beyond which the insurer drops the drug from the
formulary.
  45
     This intuition is not complete because of boundary cases, but the basic idea is correct.


                                                   47
z = m(P̄ ) − m(p̂), it can be shown that the manufacturer still has an incentive to increase
the value of the coupon. Intuitively, at out-of-pocket cost m(p̂), demand is relatively elastic
but price reductions are not profitable because the pass-through from price to out-of-pocket
cost is imperfect. Since coupons reach consumers directly, however, the manufacturer can
induce the same increase in quantity as any price cut but with a smaller effect on the margin.
Part (c) of the proposition follows directly from part (b): since coupons decrease consumers’
out-of-pocket cost for the branded drug, they lead to an increase in the quantity consumed
of the branded drug.

Proposition 3. Again denote the manufacturer’s optimal price without coupons by p̂, and
let P̄ ≥ p̂. Further assume that generic marginal cost cg is weakly less than brand marginal
cost, i.e., cg ≤ c. When coupons are allowed, total spending (insurer plus consumer) is
higher.

    Proposition 3 contains the final prediction about the effects of coupons that we study in
the empirical analysis in the text — total spending increases as a result of coupons. Whether
coupons increase total spending depends crucially on the price of available substitutes (in
this case, a bioequivalent generic). A sufficient — albeit not necessary — condition for total
spending to increase is weakly lower generic marginal costs, together with a competitive
generic market where generics price at marginal cost. More generally, as long as the gap
between the brand’s price net of the coupon (p∗ − z ∗ ) and the generic price is large, which
is true in practice, total spending will tend to increase with the addition of coupons.


8.2    Proofs
Proposition (unnumbered): The manufacturer’s optimal price when facing insured con-
sumers is higher than the optimal price without insurance.
Proof: Denote the manufacturer’s optimal price when consumers are uninsured by p̃. Writ-
ing out the derivative of manufacturer profit when consumers are insured (∂π/∂p) with
respect to price, evaluated at p̃:

                       ∂π  
                           p̃ = Q m(p̃) + p̃ − c · Q0 m(p̃) · m0 (p̃)
                                                         
                       ∂p
                              > Q p̃ + p̃ − c · Q0 p̃
                                                    

                               =0



                                              48
The equality at the end follows by the definition of p̃ as the optimal price facing uninsured
consumers. The inequality follows because:

    Q m(p̃) > Q p̃ (since Q is decreasing and p̃ > m(p̃))
                     


    Q0 m(p̃) · m0 (p̃) > Q0 p̃ (since Q0 < 0, m0 (p̃) < 1, and Q0 m(p̃) > Q0 p̃ because Q0
                                                                              

     is decreasing)46

Therefore, the manufacturer facing insured consumers benefits from increasing price beyond
the optimal price when facing uninsured consumers.

Proposition 1: Suppose that the manufacturer is constrained to price no higher than P̄
(i.e. p ∈ [0, P̄ ]). When coupons are allowed, the manufacturer’s optimal price is p∗ = P̄ .
Proof: Suppose the optimal price/coupon pair is given by (p, z), with p < P̄ . Now consider
the alternative pair (p0 , z 0 ) = P̄ , min(z + P̄ − p, m(P̄ )) . We will show that (p0 , z 0 ) yields
                                                               

higher profits and thus (p, z) cannot be optimal.
Suppose that z + P̄ − p ≤ m(P̄ ). Profits from (p0 , z 0 ) are given by:

                     π(p0 , z 0 ) = (P̄ − z − P̄ + p − c) · Q m(P̄ ) − z − P̄ + p
                                                                                         
                                                                        
                                  = (p − z − c) · Q m(P̄ ) − z − P̄ + p

The margin above is the same as for (p, z). Therefore profits are higher under (p0 , z 0 ) if
quantity is higher, or equivalently if consumer out-of-pocket cost is lower. Consumer out-of-
pocket cost is lower if m(P̄ ) − z − P̄ + p < m(p) − z. Rearranging, this holds if P̄ − m(P̄ ) >
p − m(p), which is true because m is concave.

Now suppose instead that m(P̄ ) < z + P̄ − p. Profits from (p0 , z 0 ) are given by:

                          π(p0 , z 0 ) = P̄ − m(P̄ ) − c · Q(0)
                                                        

Quantity can be no higher than Q(0) under (p, z), so profits will be higher under (p0 , z 0 ) if
the margin is higher. The margin is higher if P̄ − m(P̄ ) − c > p − z − c. Rearranging, this
holds if m(P̄ ) < z + P̄ − p, which is exactly what we started with.

Proposition 2: Denote the manufacturer’s optimal price without coupons (z = 0) by p̂,
and let P̄ ≥ p̂. When coupons are allowed, the manufacturer (a) offers a coupon (z ∗ > 0),
                                                         m(∆)−m(0)              m(∆)
  46
    To see that m0 (p̃) < 1, note that m0 (0) = lim∆→0       ∆       = lim∆→0    ∆     < lim∆→0   ∆
                                                                                                  ∆   = 1. m0 (p) <
1 for all p > 0 then follows because m0 is decreasing.


                                                    49
(b) consumers’ out-of-pocket cost is lower (i.e. m(p∗ ) − z ∗ < m(p̂)), and (c) generic efficiency
is lower.
Proof: By Proposition 1, we know that the manufacturer’s optimal price is p∗ = P̄ . Now
take a coupon that leaves consumer out-of-pocket cost unchanged from the situation without
coupons, z = m(P̄ ) − m(p̂) ≥ 0. We will show that ∂π
                                                                                  
                                                          ∂z
                                                             P̄ , m( P̄ ) − m(p̂)   > 0, so the
manufacturer would like to further increase the value of the coupon.

               ∂π
                  P̄ , m(P̄ ) − m(p̂) = −Q m(p̂) − P̄ − m(P̄ ) + m(p̂) − c · Q0 m(p̂)
                                                                                   
               ∂z
                                       ≥ −Q m(p̂) − p̂ − c · Q0 m(p̂)
                                                                    

                                       > −Q m(p̂) − p̂ − c · Q0 m(p̂) · m0 (p̂)
                                                                   
                                             h                                      i
                                       = −1 · Q m(p̂) + p̂ − c · Q0 m(p̂) · m0 (p̂)
                                                                       

                                             =0

The first inequality follows because P̄ −m(P̄ ) ≥ p̂−m(p̂) (since m is concave and P̄ ≥ p̂). The
second inequality follows because m0 (p̂) < 1. The last equality holds because the expression
inside the brackets on the line before is the derivative of profits with respect to price when
coupons are not allowed, and since p̂ is optimal when coupons are not allowed, this expression
is equal to zero. Therefore, the optimal coupon value z ∗ is greater than m(P̄ ) − m(p̂) ≥ 0,
which implies that consumer out-of-pocket spending is lower than without coupons because
m(P̄ ) − z ∗ < m(P̄ ) − m(P̄ ) + m(p̂) = m(p̂). Part (c) follows immediately from part (b) and
the fact that Q is decreasing in out-of-pocket cost.

Proposition 3: Again denote the manufacturer’s optimal price without coupons by p̂, and
let P̄ ≥ p̂. Further assume that generic marginal cost cg is weakly less than brand marginal
cost, i.e. cg ≤ c. When coupons are allowed, total spending (insurer plus consumer) is higher.
Proof: Denote the optimal price/coupon pair with coupons by (p∗ , z ∗ ) and the optimal pair
without coupons by (p̂, 0). The difference between total spending with coupons and without
coupons is given by:
                                          h                                                        
        ∗      ∗
                             ∗      ∗
                                                    ∗      ∗
                                                              i                      h           i
        p −z           · Q m(p ) − z + cg · 1 − Q m(p ) − z       − p̂ · Q m(p̂) + cg · 1 − Q m(p̂)
    |                                {z                        }     |              {z              }
                               spending with coupons                        spending without coupons


Rearranging:


                                                       50
                                                     h                       i
         ∗     ∗                ∗      ∗                   ∗      ∗
                                                                 
       p − z · Q m(p ) − z − p̂ · Q m(p̂) − cg · Q m(p ) − z − Q m(p̂)
                                                       h                        i
       ≥ p∗ − z ∗ · Q m(p∗ ) − z ∗ − p̂ · Q m(p̂) − c · Q m(p∗ ) − z ∗ − Q m(p̂)
                                                                   

       = p∗ − z ∗ − c · Q m(p∗ ) − z ∗ − p̂ − c · Q m(p̂)
                                                      

       ≥0

The first inequality follows because Q m(p∗ )−z ∗ > Q m(p̂) (by Proposition 2) and cg ≤ c.
                                                              

The expression following the equal sign is the difference between manufacturer profits with
coupons and manufacturer profits without coupons. This difference is at least weakly positive
because (p̂, 0) is a feasible choice for the manufacturer in the problem with coupons.


8.3    Spending calculation details
Suppose that generic efficiency, brand prices (gross of any coupon discounts), and generic
prices are given by a set of functions that depend on the time since generic entry t and
a variable marking coupon status (c ∈ {0, 1}). Denote these functions by g(t, c), pb (t, c),
and pg (t, c) (respectively). Several additional objects affect total spending: total market
size (in prescriptions), the value of the coupon, and the fraction of brand buyers utilizing
a coupon. Denote these objects by M , z, and ψ, respectively, all of which we assume to
be time invariant. As we do not find compelling evidence of an association between volume
and coupons, we assume that market size is independent of coupon status. Given monthly
discount factor δ and a fixed time horizon T , the net present value of spending (in t = 0
dollars) as a function of coupon status, S(c), can be written as:
                       T −1
                       X               h                                              i
                              δ t · M · pb (t, 0) · 1 − g(t, 0) + pg (t, 0) · g(t, 0)
                                                               
             S(0) =                                                                                           (9)
                       t=0
                                         |          {z         } |        {z        }
                                               brand buyers                generic buyers
                       T −1
                       X               h
                              δ t · M · pb (t, 1) − z · ψ · 1 − g(t, 1)
                                                                       
             S(1) =                                                                                          (10)
                       t=0
                                         |             {z               }
                                               brand buyers using coupon
                                                                                               i
                                      + pb (t, 1) · (1 − ψ) · 1 − g(t, 1) + pg (t, 1) · g(t, 1) .
                                        |                {z              } |        {z        }
                                               brand buyers not using coupon                generic buyers


To summarize the effect of copay coupons, we calculate the percentage change in spending
from adding a coupon (S(1)/S(0)−1) as well as the absolute change (S(1)−S(0)). For generic


                                                           51
efficiency, we assume that g(t, c) behaves according to the confined exponential equation (1),
presented in section 4.1. We use estimates from both the IMS and NHCHIS analyses to
calculate (9) and (10). For IMS, we use the parameter estimates reported in column (2)
of Table 5. For NHCHIS, generic efficiency for drugs without coupons is still assumed to
behave according to equation (1), while generic efficiency for drugs with coupons is assumed
to be a fixed amount lower. We use the estimate reported in column (1) of Table 6 which
indicates that coupons result in a 3.4 percentage point reduction in generic efficiency.
    For prices, we assume that pb (t, c) and pg (t, c) behave according to equation (6), in which
coupons affect only price growth rates. For brand pricing, we perform the calculation both
with and without coupon effects. When coupons are allowed to affect brand price growth,
we use the estimates from column (2) of Table 8. When not, we use the estimates from
column (3). In all scenarios, we assume no effect of coupons on generic prices (using the
estimates from column (6) of Table 8). For initial prices, we use the average prices in the
month of generic entry for drugs with coupons (about $264 per prescription for the brand
price and $218 per prescription for the generic price). The number of generic firms is set to
the average number in the data for drugs with coupons (3.68). For the coupon value z, we
use the average over drugs with coupons (about $47 per prescription). We set market size
M to be the average number of prescriptions sold per month for drugs with coupons (about
295,000). We set the (monthly) discount rate to 0.901/12 , and measure spending over a fixed
time horizon of five years (T = 60).


8.4    Data construction details
This section provides additional information about the steps we take to go from the raw
data to the dataset used to perform the analyses discussed in the main text. For further
information beyond what we describe here, please feel free to contact any of us with questions.

Coupon Data (www.internetdrugcoupons.com)

Figure 5 displays an example of the content available on the internetdrugcoupons website:
the main page on the left and a drug-specific page on the right. We begin by scraping
the text data of historical versions of the website from www.archive.org. We scrape and
then clean the data (e.g., converting text that says “save up to $600 per year” to “$50 off”
to reflect savings on a single prescription) both from the main page and the drug-specific
pages linked therein. Of the 43 months from June 2007 and December 2010, we have data


                                               52
         Figure 5: Content on www.internetdrugcoupons.com, June 2009


from 30 months. To fill out coupon data for the missing months, we interpolate data. For
example, if the same coupon is known to be present in May and August of some year while
the data for June and July is missing, then we code that coupon as also being present in
June and July. To take another example, suppose the coupon is not present in May but is
available in August, and again the data for June and July is missing. In that case, we use the
midpoint, coding the coupon as first being available in July. We also make several manual
corrections based on internet searches, e.g. to fill out coupon information in cases where the
text scraping program does not pull down sufficient information to identify discount types
(e.g. free samples, which we do not code as coupons) or amounts.

Retail Prescription Sales Data (IMS National Prescription Audit)

One row in our raw NPA data is essentially a unique combination of national drug code
(NDC) and month. To perform the analyses presented in the text, we collapse this data to
the molecule-dosage form-month level. Before doing so, we execute several steps to clean the
data.
    First, we drop repackager firms who buy drugs from manufacturers and then repack them
into different package forms (e.g., blister packs), as it is possible that including repackagers
will double-count sales. The list of firms considered to be repackagers is contained in Table
I-5 of FTC (2011). Second, we drop injectable drugs because they appear in our data
starting in 2009, well after the beginning of our study period. Injectable drugs are identified
using the three-letter product code (TLC) variable in the IMS data: the code for injectable
preparations typically begin with the letter “F” or “G”. Third, we drop products for which
over-the-counter use, which is identified by a prescription status variable in the data, accounts
for 10 percent or more of total retail prescriptions in the data over all years. Fourth, we

                                               53
convert the three-letter product code variable into a less granular measure of dosage form.
For example, the TLC distinguishes between coated and uncoated tablets, and we combine
both under the same umbrella. We do retain more significant distinctions that are often
associated with new drug applications and/or patents, such as extended release, chewable,
and orally disintegrating formulations. Fifth, we reclassify products identified as branded
generic in the IMS data using drug approval information from the FDA, when available. As
explained in footnote 26, products associated with a New Drug Application (NDA) and a
brand name are reclassified as brands. Products associated with an Abbreviated New Drug
Application (ANDA) and/or without a brand name are reclassified as generics. Branded
generic products without matching FDA approval information maintain their classification
as branded generics.
   After aggregating the data to the molecule-dosage form level, we convert all monetary
quantities to January 2010 dollars using the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Consumer Price
Index for All Urban Consumers. We identify the first month during which a drug faces
generic competition as the first month in which at least 5 percent of total prescriptions are
accounted for by generics. We then perform the four sample restrictions reported in the text:

   1. Restrict the sample to drugs facing (new) generic entry between June 2007 and De-
      cember 2010, the overlapping period of the coupon and IMS datasets.
   2. Restrict the sample to drugs with only a single brand and no branded generics.
   3. Restrict the sample to drugs for which the timing of generic entry is clear to define
      (e.g., no patent disputes that result in generics moving in and out of the data).47
   4. Restrict the sample to non-Schedule II controlled substances48

    In the coupon data, coupons are linked to brand names. For instance, internetdrug-
coupons shows that there is a copay coupon for Differin, not for branded Adapalene (the
active ingredient in Differin). The IMS data contains fields listing product brand name in
addition to the corresponding molecule(s) and dosage forms. Therefore, we can merge the
two datasets using brand names. We carefully scrub the brand names in both datasets to
ensure a clean match; for instance, a brand name may originally appear as “Allegra D” in
  47
     The 15 drugs dropped according to this restriction are (brand names): Buphenyl, Ceftin, Fibricor,
Flovent, Focalin, Ionamin, Kytril, Phoslo, Ponstel, Pulmicort, Seromycin, Solodyn, Sular, Vesanoid, and
Zerit.
  48
     The 3 drugs dropped according to this restriction are (brand names): Adderall XR, Combunox, and
Opana.



                                                  54
one dataset and “Allegra-D” in another. Since our final sample is restricted to molecule-
dosage form combinations with only a single branded drug, we do not need to worry about
aggregating coupon information for multiple branded drugs into a single measure for the
corresponding molecule-dosage form.

Insurance Claims Data (NHCHIS)

We begin by restricting the data to claims from residents of New Hampshire and Mas-
sachusetts. To identify the same sample of drugs used in the IMS analysis, we merge the list
of drugs in the IMS sample into the NHCHIS data using fields in the NHCHIS data that
list a drug’s name and brand status, again carefully scrubbing the names to ensure a clean
match. In some cases, the drug name in the NHCHIS data also identifies the form. For
example, “Depakote ER” and its generic “Divalproex Sodium ER” are distinguished from
regular “Depakote” and its generic “Divalproex Sodium”.
    In other cases, however, it is not possible to distinguish between forms in the NHCHIS
data. For example, while “Aricept” and “Aricept ODT” are distinct names in the data,
all generics appear under the name “Donepezil HCl”, not indicating if the tablet is orally
disintegrating. In these cases, we combine the different dosage forms, e.g. looking at Aricept
and its generics as a whole rather than separating out the orally disintegrating formulation.
One problem with this approach is that different dosage forms do not necessarily share the
same generic entry dates, or coupons. When same molecule drugs with different dosage
forms cannot be separated due to a lack of information in the NHCHIS drug name field,
and there is a substantial conflict in the generic entry date and/or coupon information, we
drop the drug. As a result, we lose Cleocin (Clindamycin; powder dosage form), Evoclin
(Clindamycin; aerosol dosage form), Prevacid (Lansoprazole; extended release capsule, orally
disintegrating tablet, and powder dosage forms) and Trileptal (Oxcarbazepine; tablet and
suspension dosage forms) from the sample. Jointly, these drugs account for around 10 percent
of total revenue for in-sample drugs (measuring revenue for each drug over the three months
prior to generic entry).




                                             55
