NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UPWARD MOBILITY AND DISCRIMINATION:
THE CASE OF ASIAN AMERICANS
Nathaniel Hilger
Working Paper 22748
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22748

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016, Revised September 2017

I thank Anna Aizer, Sam Asher, Nathaniel Baum-Snow, Patrick Bayer, Leah Boustan, Kenneth
Chay, Pedro Dal Bo, Eleanore Dillon, Price Fishback, Andrew Foster, Oded Galor, Claudia
Goldin, Price Fishback, Rachel Friedberg, Matthew Gentzkow, Justine Hastings, Brian Knight,
Bao Lam, John Logan, Glenn Loury, Robert Margo, Bhashkar Mazumder, Joana Naritomi, Emily
Oster, Jesse Shapiro, Isaac Sorkin, Matthew Turner, John Wallis, David Weil and Danny Yagan,
as well as seminar participants at Brown, Duke, Connecticut, Wesleyan, Harvard, Stanford,
University of Maryland, the “Exposure, Heritability and Opportunity” workshop at Universidad
Carlos III de Madrid, and Development of the American Economy session at the NBER Summer
Institute in 2016. Jenna Anders, Kian Ivey, and Jorge Perez provided excellent research
assistance. Weiwei Zhang provided helpful assistance with the 100% 1940 data. Financial
support from the Russell Sage Foundation (Grant No. 83-16-07) is gratefully acknowledged. All
errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Nathaniel Hilger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Upward Mobility and Discrimination: The Case of Asian Americans
Nathaniel Hilger
NBER Working Paper No. 22748
October 2016, Revised September 2017
JEL No. J15,J31,J62,J7
ABSTRACT
Asian Americans are the only non-white US racial group to experience long-term, institutional
discrimination and subsequently exhibit high income. I re-examine this puzzle in California,
where most Asians settled historically. Asians achieved extraordinary upward mobility relative to
blacks and whites for every cohort born in California since 1920. This mobility stemmed
primarily from gains in earnings conditional on education, rather than unusual educational
mobility. Historical test score and prejudice data suggest low initial earnings for Asians, unlike
blacks, reflected prejudice rather than skills. Post-war declines in discrimination interacting with
previously uncompensated skills can account for Asians’ extraordinary upward mobility.

Nathaniel Hilger
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
nathaniel_hilger@brown.edu

Few white Americans today realize just how pervasive legal anti-Asian discrimination was before 1945.. . . In light of this history, the current problems
of the Asian-American community seem relatively minor, and its success appears even more remarkable. Social scientists wonder just how this success
was possible, and how Asian-Americans have managed to avoid the ’secondclass citizenship’ that has trapped so many blacks and Hispanics.
David Bell, The New Republic, July 15, 1985

1. Introduction
Asian American (“Asian”) history represents a puzzling case study because Asians are a
“non-white” American racial group that experienced long-term, institutional discrimination, yet still achieved mean income levels similar to whites by the late 1960s.1 In this
paper I re-examine and provide a new explanation for this puzzle. Conventional wisdom
often ascribes Asian success to extraordinary investments in children’s educational attainment.2 However, I show that Asian earnings growth stemmed primarily from gains
conditional on education. I then document evidence that extraordinary post-war growth
1

Asians are plausibly unique in this respect. Many other “white” immigrant groups such as Irish
Americans, Italian Americans and Jewish Americans encountered prejudice historically and exhibit
high incomes in the modern period. However, historians overwhelmingly agree that these groups did
not experience the qualitative degree of institutional discrimination reserved for “non-white” groups
including blacks, Native Americans, Asians and Hispanics, and described below in Section 3 and
Table (II) in more detail (Jensen, 2002; Kenny, 2006; Diner, 2006; Mangione, 1993; Chang, 2004;
Page, 2004; Gonzalez, 2011). For example, Kenny (2006) states “The Irish experience of race in the
United States does not belong in the same category as black slavery or Asian exclusion,” while Diner
(2006) states “As women and men considered among the privileged by virtue of their whiteness,
[Jews] enjoyed relative tolerance,” and that they experienced “relatively full political and civil rights”
from the end of the 18th century. While Hispanic Americans have faced substantial institutional
discrimination (e.g. Gonzalez, 2011), I do not focus on them in this paper for several reasons. First,
I do not observe Hispanic Americans directly in my test score data described below. Second, IPUMS
identifies Hispanic Americans in relatively complex ways related to nationality, language, and names
that may be endogenous to some of the outcomes I study.
2
The belief that minorities get ahead by investing in more education, rather than obtaining greater pay
conditional on education, is widespread. Kristof (2015) focuses on high educational attainment of
Asian children, which he partially attributes to “East Asia’s long Confucian emphasis on education.”
President John F. Kennedy implicitly adopted this theory of group progress in 1963 when he told an
assembly of black civil rights leaders, “it seems to me...that we could emphasize. . . which I think the
Jewish community has done, on educating their children, on making them study, making them stay
in school and all the rest” (Branch, 1989).

1

in Asian conditional earnings plausibly reflected high Asian skills that remained uncompensated in pre-war labor markets characterized by greater institutional discrimination.
I argue that Asian history therefore sheds new light on the longstanding question of
whether large earnings gaps driven primarily by prejudice can persist in suﬃciently open
and competitive labor markets (Becker, 1957; Arrow, 1972; Goldberg, 1982).
I build this argument in multiple steps that make use of several recently-available or
new data sources. These sources include 100% 1940 census data (Minnesota Population
Center and Ancestry.com, 2013), Army General Classification Test (AGCT) score data for
over 500,000 WWII enlistees in 1943 (Ferrie et al., 2012; Aaronson and Mazumder, 2011;
Carruthers and Wanamaker, 2016), and a matched sample of test score and earnings data
for over 200,000 individuals.3 Other new and novel data sources include 20th Century
survey data recording white prejudice against various racial and ethnic groups, archival
data on racial composition and inputs of schools in Los Angeles and San Francisco before
1945, and new data on racial composition of firms in the Bay Area. These data, along
with new methods to estimate intergenerational mobility of small groups in census data
(Hilger, 2016), allow me to focus the analysis on California (CA). CA contained a large
majority of all mainland Asians in 1940, and also fortuitously contained a small black
minority that had migrated from the South in pursuit of economic opportunity and
furnishes a valuable comparison group.
As background, I establish that Asians faced similar or plausibly worse prejudice and
discrimination than local blacks in CA through the 1940s. I then show how vastly
diﬀerent historical legacies imported to CA by these two groups—skill-biased immigration
restrictions for Asians vs. multigenerational educational exclusion for Southern blacks—
would tend to predict relatively higher skill levels for Asians, especially among those
selecting into parenthood. Finally, I show that legal discrimination against all nonwhites in CA dramatically declined from 1943-59 due to a combination of court cases
and legislation, culminating in CA’s Fair Employment Practices Act. After establishing
this context, I address three main questions about the economic rise of Asians in CA.
Question 1: Does high Asian income reflect high dynastic income growth,
or compositional eﬀects of new immigration? To my knowledge even this basic
question about Asian American history has not been addressed in prior literature. Using a
pseudo-panel approach that I validate empirically, I develop measures of intergenerational
income growth rates within racial groups that abstract from composition changes due to
immigration flows. I find that Asian dynasties exhibit upward “divergence” from blacks
3

I thank Bhashkar Mazumder for generously sharing his cleaned version of the WWII enlistee test score
data.

2

and upward “reversals of fortune” toward whites in every cohort born in CA since 1920.4
These extraordinary growth rates are inconsistent with neoclassical absolute convergence
(Ramsey, 1928; Solow, 1956), suggesting that Asians embody diﬀerent structural growth
parameters, or a growth process that departs from neoclassical assumptions.
Question 2: Why did Asians achieve more rapid dynastic income growth
than other groups? To shed light on this question I estimate a simple descriptive
decomposition of group earnings in each year into three terms: (1) parental income distributions, (2) children’s educational attainment conditional on parental income, and
(3) children’s earnings conditional on education. I find that all three components favor
Asians over blacks historically, although these diﬀerences shrink dramatically when restricting to the CA-born in earlier years. I quantify the relative importance of these three
components by imputing counterfactual, steady-state black-white earnings gaps for all
children born in CA 1920-1980, assigning blacks each of the three components of Asian
and white earnings separately. Contrary to popular perception, large gains in earnings
conditional on education have played the primary role in Asian earnings growth, alongside a secondary role for greater educational attainment conditional on parental income,
and virtually no role for higher parental income. In CA, the only white advantage over
blacks has been greater white earnings conditional on education; educational mobility
and parental income have played virtually no role.
Question 3: Why were Asians but not blacks able to close their conditional
earnings gap? To shed light on this question, I examine determinants of conditional
earnings gaps in 1940 by comparing AGCT test scores in 1943 for whites, blacks and
Asians in CA. Consistent with their diﬀerent historical legacies, I find that Asians in
1943 already exhibit near-parity with whites in mean test scores both overall and within
all education groups, while analogous black mean test scores lag behind both Asians and
whites by nearly a full standard deviation, as has been found in more recent decades
(Neal and Johnson, 1996; Johnson and Neal, 1998; Dickens and Flynn, 2006; Neal, 2006;
Fryer, 2010).5 Asians’ large earnings gaps in the absence of any observed human capital
gap is, to my knowledge, unique among non-white racial groups in US history (e.g.
Trejo, 1997; Hurst, 1997). I quantify the contribution of these test score gaps to black
conditional earnings gaps by matching white and black test score records to the 100%
4

This upward mobility holds even when restricting to native-born parents of CA-born children, and
therefore is unlikely to reflect weaker English fluency in the parent generation. I place no restrictions
on where CA-born children live later in life.
5
WWII examination data only contain Chinese Americans in CA due to internment of Japanese Americans by 1943, but I discuss other historical research below that documents high test scores of Japanese
American children before WWII (Bell, 1935).

3

1940 census data containing earnings and education, both at the individual level and at
the “labor market” level defined by states and educational attainment. At the individual
level, skills as captured by test scores account for 40% of black-white earnings gaps
nationally, or slightly less than the share of black-white earnings gaps explained by AFQT
scores in the 1990s by Johnson and Neal (1998). At the market level, however, blackwhite mean skill gaps account for nearly 80% of black-white mean earning gaps. These
market-level eﬀects of mean group skills are large enough to explain relative conditional
earnings gains experienced by Asians 1940-70 in CA—and hence Asian upward mobility—
under the assumption that the Asian test score advantage over other non-whites was
uncompensated in 1940 and fully compensated by 1970.
As of the 1940, these findings suggest a relatively larger role for taste-based discrimination or misperception of skills in the Asian conditional earnings gap (Becker, 1957),
and a relatively larger role for discrimination based on skills via pay for productivity
or statistical discrimination in the black earnings gap (Aigner and Cain, 1977). One
explanation for rapid Asian upward mobility is, therefore, that earnings gaps driven by
prejudice rather than productivity could not persist in a post-war labor market that
eliminated most forms of legal discrimination against non-white workers. Another explanation is that de facto discrimination declined more rapidly for Asians than blacks in CA
for reasons unrelated to Asians’ initial skill advantage, though I argue this explanation
is hard to reconcile with the large magnitude of Asians’ post-war relative earnings gains.
And of course, without quasi-experimental variation in group characteristics such as human capital, or precise measures of changing contemporary environments across groups,
I cannot rule out other plausible explanations. Whatever the underlying cause, Asian
history represents a case study in which a large pre-war racial earnings gap almost surely
driven by prejudice failed to survive in the absence of harsh legal discrimination.

2. Prior Literature
This study fits into large prior literatures on human capital, discrimination, and group
earnings gaps in a clear way. Broadly, Asians are consistent with prior work documenting
intergenerationally persistent group human capital gaps, but sharply at odds with prior
work documenting intergenerationally persistent group earnings gaps. One possible reason for this discrepancy is that Asians are the only non-white group with historically high
levels of human capital. This large and persistent human capital stock may have generated anomalous upward earnings mobility once pervasive labor market discrimination
against Asians declined in the decades following WWII.

4

Borjas (1992, 1993, 1994, 1995); Leon (2005); Abramitzky et al. (2014) explore intergenerational convergence in education and earnings among ethnic groups, but due to data
constraints these studies place most empirical emphasis on “white” European immigrants
who were spared most forms of institutional discrimination; do not incorporate test
scores; and do not assure geographic overlap across groups within the US. These studies
find strong persistence of initial group earnings gaps across generations.6 In contrast
with the intergenerational earnings persistence displayed by these predominantly white
ethnic groups, I find that Asians’ large initial earnings disadvantage does not persist, but
rather disappears or reverses in one generation in every cohort of Asians born in CA since
1920. I argue that the severe discrimination faced by Asians before WWII, combined
with their high initial human capital, can account for this contrast with slower earnings
convergence for white ethnic groups.
Another literature documents a major role for human capital in explaining racial wage
and earnings gaps. Higgs (1977) presents evidence that skills play a significant role in
black-white wage gaps in Virginia in 1900 and 1909. Carruthers and Wanamaker (2016)
also find that skills explain a large share of black-white wage and earnings gaps in the
South in 1940. Cutright (1973), in contrast with these other studies finds that test scores
account for only 25% of black-white wage gaps in 1964 using a national sample of Korean
War enlistees.7 Research on labor markets since 1990 typically finds that individual
test scores can account for 50-75% of black-white wage and earnings gaps (Neal and
Johnson, 1996; Johnson and Neal, 1998; Neal, 2006; Fryer, 2010). Other work on data
since the 1980s finds that observable measures of human capital can largely account for
low earnings of Mexican Americans (Trejo, 1997) and Native Americans (Hurst, 1997).
Asians large, unexplained earnings gap in 1940 therefore represents a historical anomaly
and suggests that Asians were in a more advantageous position than other non-white
minorities to increase earnings as labor market barriers in CA declined after WWII.
Prior research on Asian Americans specifically has suggested many qualitative explanations for high Asian incomes in the modern period including selective migration, intragroup spillovers, positive stereotypes, demographic imbalance, portability of human capital, and culture, among others (e.g., see arguments and literature reviews in Hirschman
and Wong, 1986; Sue and Okazaki, 2009; Lee and Zhou, 2015). Suzuki (1995, 2002)
documents a significant role for selection into migration and return-migration among
6

E.g., Borjas (1994, Table 5) estimates group-level intergenerational persistence in mean log occupational earnings around .6 - .7, and Abramitzky et al. (2014, Figure 6) also suggest very strong
persistence for white ethnic groups.
7
Korean War enlistees, like WWII enlistees, may represent a disproportionately positively selected
group of blacks for reasons discussed in Section 4.

5

Japanese Americans in accounting for high and rising Japanese American earnings. Murayama (1984) documents rapid occupational progress by Japanese Americans within
Pacific Northwest railroad corporations in the early 20th century, despite significant prejudice of white employers and coworkers. Consistent with many of these prior strands of
research on Asian history, I document high Asian skills in prewar CA labor markets and
show that the onset of compensation for these high skills after WWII can fully account
for Asians’ high upward intergenerational mobility.
Chiswick (1983) documents advantageous labor market outcomes among Asian American men in the 1970 census, but does not provide the longer-term context of pre-war
discrimination, institutional reform, and high upward mobility described here. Chiswick
(1988) finds that Mincerian returns to schooling are positively correlated with average
schooling across various racial and ethnic groups in the 1970 census and attributes this to
unobserved diﬀerences in the relative prices of child quality and quantity facing diﬀerent
groups. In contrast, when focusing on CA I find a much larger role for conditional pay
levels in explaining group income mobility, and less evidence for important diﬀerences in
group fertility rates or Mincerian returns to schooling.
Duleep and Sanders (2012) document that Asians exhibit a substantial unexplained
earnings gap in 1960 that largely vanishes by 1980, and suggest that this change likely
relates to Civil Rights legislation. Darity Jr. et al. (1997) study impacts of observable
ethnic group characteristics on occupational indices in national samples, and Cooper
(2003) analyzes weekly wage residuals for Chinese, Japanese, Mexican and white males
in CA from 1950-1990.8 These and other authors (Daniels, 1990, pg 314-15) partly anticipate my findings that Asian conditional earnings increased over time. I show the Asian
earnings gap was also not explained by cognitive test scores, and that this earnings convergence conditional on skills played the primary role in overall upward Asian mobility. My
longer timeframe is consistent with a gradual trend in Asian earnings convergence from
1940-80, rather than a sharp increase following major employment anti-discrimination
laws passed by California in 1959 and the US in 1964. However, I lack statistical power
to detect trend breaks within the 1940-80 window.

3. On Comparing Asian and Black Outcomes
To clarify the purpose of group comparisons undertaken below it is useful to write down
a stylized statistical model. Suppose outcome vector Yrt for generation t of group r is
8

Cooper (2003) is forced to drop 1940 from her analysis due to small sample size for Asians in CA in
the 1940 1% sample, and her 1950 census sample for CA contains 109 Asians.

6

determined by “contemporary environment” denoted CErt , “ancestral legacy” denoted
ALrt , the interaction of these two terms, and other factors urt :

Yrt = B0 ·CErt
+B1 · ALrt (CEr,t

1 , ..., CEr,0 )

+B2 · CErt ⇥ ALrt (CEr,t

1 , ..., CEr,0 )

+ urt .

“Contemporary environment” includes factors such as types and degrees of contemporary
social prejudice and discrimination in schooling, housing and labor markets. “Ancestral
legacy” includes intergenerationally transmitted factors such as financial and human capital, location, social networks, preferences, and norms. Crucially, ancestral legacy also
incorporates factors such as migration restrictions that generate non-random selection
into a group’s membership. The parameter B2 reflects the idea that changes in contemporary environments can have diﬀerential impacts on outcomes of groups with diﬀerent
ancestral legacies. I now characterize key aspects of ancestral legacy and contemporary environment for Asians and blacks in the early-mid 20th century, focusing on CA
for reasons described below. While I am unable to credibly estimate the parameters
of this model, it provides a framework for thinking about comparisons of intergenerational mobility across groups with diﬀerent ancestral legacies during periods of change
in contemporary environments.9
Migration, Abduction, and Slavery
Asians and blacks in the US embody very diﬀerent ancestral legacies. Asians in the US
have always represented voluntary migrants and their descendents. These migrants have
arrived from China, Japan and other Asian countries in pursuit of economic opportunity
as prospectors, laborers, merchants, farmers, skilled professionals and students since the
mid-19th Century.10 In contrast, the vast majority of blacks in the US during the 20th
century represent descendents of slaves imported to the US before the Civil War. These
slaves were kidnapped in many parts of Africa, shipped to the US involuntarily, and often
subjected to catastrophic trauma including starvation, torture, rape, and psychological
abuse (e.g., Rediker, 2008).11 Under slavery, the great majority of blacks were legally
9

All tables and figures in this section reflect census data described in Section 4 unless stated otherwise.
Cloud and Galenson (1987, 1991) argue that much of the late 19th century migration from China took
place through extra-legal indentured servitude contracts, but was nonetheless voluntary in the vast
majority of cases.
11
Native Americans, as well as many Hispanics living on land annexed by the US, also “entered” the US
involuntarily under circumstances of violence and material expropriation.
10

7

unable to accumulate education or financial assets, yielding extremely low black literacy
and wealth as of 1870 (e.g., Margo, 2016). Under Jim Crow laws, blacks throughout the
US but especially in the South continued to face segregation and limited access to human
capital and financial markets throughout much of the 20th century.
Geography
Asians and blacks also inherited diﬀerent geographic legacies. Most Asians arrived on
the West Coast while most blacks arrived in the South, and these geographic origins have
persisted over time. Figure I maps the number of native-born Asian and black children
(age 0-18) living in every county in the mainland US in 1940. Panel (a) shows that
Asians in 1940 were heavily concentrated along the West Coast and especially in CA. In
1940, CA had over seven times more native-born Asians than any other mainland state,
and still had six times more native-born Asians than any other state as of 1980.12 Panel
(b) shows that blacks in 1940 were still concentrated in the South and New England.
However, the map highlights that a significant minority of blacks had migrated to CA by
1940. CA therefore represents the only state in which it is possible to conduct detailed
historical comparisons of Asians and blacks in a contemporary environment that was
potentially somewhat similar across groups, and I focus on children born in CA in much
of the analysis below. CA was viewed as a place of racial tolerance and opportunity
relative to the South by many early black migrants (Graaf et al., 2001), and below I
find that restricting to the CA-born greatly increases the similarity of Asian and black
families along several dimensions.13
Racial Prejudice
Prejudice aﬀects the contemporary environment faced by diﬀerent demographic groups.
Despite radically diﬀerent origins and settlement patterns, blacks and Asians both faced
intense prejudice from the white US population in the early 20th century. This can be
inferred using rich historical survey data gathered by social psychologists in the 1920s
and 30s, who asked their subjects—typically white students at universities—to express
preferences over various nationalities and races. These surveys are less likely to suﬀer
from the self-censorship than similar modern surveys because they predate social norms
12

Substantial pre-war Asian populations also lived in New York and Washington. I do not focus on
these states because the test score data is unreliable for Asians in New York and too small to be
useful in Washington. Asians were also concentrated in Hawaii. I do not focus on Hawaii in in this
paper because very few blacks have ever lived in Hawaii, and because Asians in Hawaii probably did
not experience the same kinds of social prejudice or institutional discrimination as mainland Asians
(Takaki, 1998; Daniels, 1990).
13
Black families in 1940 had migrated to CA primarily from Texas and Louisiana, and to a lesser extent
Arkansas, Mississippi and Alabama. A majority of blacks in CA had been born in other states until
2000.

8

proscribing racial prejudice. The two primary methodologies for measuring prejudice
at this time were “social distance” scaling based on how much intimacy with particular
groups a person deemed acceptable (Bogardus, 1926), and pairwise group comparison
scaling based on distributional assumptions about preferences (Thurstone, 1927a,b).
Table I presents the rank of blacks, Chinese and Japanese out of 12-32 total ethnic
groups in 23 diﬀerent samples from 10 published studies spanning 1926-1956. In the
US generally, whites express profound prejudice against Chinese, Japanese and blacks,
with stronger prejudice against blacks and Chinese at the national level. Prejudice in
the two West Coast samples, however, is stronger against both Chinese and Japanese
than blacks, consistent with the central role of CA in historical anti-Asian activism.
Moreover, these racial preferences appear stable over the entire 1926-56 period, with
temporary deviations in 1946 associated with WWII national allegiances. These data
make it diﬃcult to dismiss comparisons of Asians and blacks in CA by claiming that
Asians never experienced comparable degrees of white racial prejudice in the early-mid
20th century.14
Other facts are also consistent with pervasive white prejudice against both Asians and
blacks in pre-war CA. Asians experienced mob violence including lynchings and over 200
“roundups” from 1849-1906 (Pfaelzer, 2008), and hostility from anti-Asian clubs much
like the Ku Klux Klan (e.g., Workingmen’s Party of CA 1877-1880, Asiatic Exclusion
League 1905 - 1940s), to an extent that does not appear to have any counterpart for
blacks in pre-war CA history. Well under 5% of adult Asians or blacks of either gender
living in CA married whites in every census before 1970. In 1920, 75% of CA voters, both
major political parties, and the state Governor all supported a direct ballot initiative to
increase legal discrimination against Japanese farmers by closing loopholes in prior Alien
Land Laws (Daniels, 1990). New archival data on employment of whites and non-whites
14

By presenting ranks, I ignore the cardinal scales employed in the original studies, although these
cardinal scales plausibly contain some information about strength of preferences and reinforce the
ordinal scale patterns. “Social distance” studies include Bogardus (1926), Katz and Allport (1931),
Katz and Braly (1935), Bogardus (1928), Hartley (1946), and Bogardus (1959). These studies ask
individuals to place racial groups on a “social distance scale” containing 7 allegedly ordered categories:
“would marry into group”, “would have as close friends,” “would have as next door neighbors,” “would
work in same oﬃce,” “have as speaking acquaintances only,” “have as visitors only to my nation,”
and finally “debar from my nation.” Respones were shown to be robust to various perturbations of
the survey instrument Bogardus (1959, pg. 92-94). Pairwise comparison studies include Thurstone
(1928), Chant and Freedman (1934), and Guilford (1931). These studies ask individuals “which of
the following two nationalities/ethnicities would you prefer to associate with?” in many pairwise
comparisons, and then construct a scale based on distributional assumptions about individuals’ underlying racial preferences. Young (1927) asks subjects to rank nationalities/ethnicities by “innate
ability”; this study also finds that prejudice does not respond to a semester-long course advancing
more modern, opportunity-based theories of racial outcome diﬀerences.

9

in a sample of 234 firms employing 350,000 workers throughout the Bay Area in 1943 and
1944 indicate that over 50% of firms—including many large firms—employed zero or 1-2
non-whites (including blacks, Asians, Hispanics, and Native Americans), with extreme
concentration of non-whites in a few firms.15
Institutional Discrimination
White voters in CA expressed their prejudice by supporting many forms of legal discrimination against both Asians and blacks. Table II, based on a discussion in Appendix
A, summarizes the broad contours of this discrimination. At various times Asians faced
institutional discrimination in citizenship, ability to testify in court, immigration, taxes
and fees, labor unions, employment, land ownership and leasing, marriage to whites,
WWII internship and expropriation, education, and residential restrictions. Many but
not all of these restrictions also applied to blacks in CA. Here I discuss three key findings.
First, discriminatory US immigration policy generated positive selection of Asians both
into migration and family formation. Second, Asians likely experienced similar or worse
institutional discrimination than blacks living in CA before the 1960s. Third, all of the
harshest forms of legal (though not necessarily de facto) discrimination against racial
minorities in CA disappeared during the period 1943-59.
1. Exclusionary policies selected higher-skilled Asians for migration and
parenthood. Since the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and the Gentlemen’s Agreement
of 1907, US immigration law has screened Asian immigrants on factors highly correlated
with skill such as business ownership and occupational status. Subsequent laws and
practices served to encourage return-migration and deportation of lower-skilled Asians,
while allowing certain higher-skilled and higher-wealth Asians to stay in the US and bring
in wives from Asia to start families (McKenzie et al., 1927; Hutchinson, 1947; Lee, 2005;
Daniels, 1990; Chan, 1991). These policies yielded selection into family formation in
the US as well as migration. Table III confirms selection into migration by showing that
Japanese and especially Chinese American migrants were more highly educated than nonmigrants in their home countries at least as far back as 1940. The table also documents
significant positive educational selection of blacks migrating to CA from other parts of
the US. Table IV presents evidence on occupational selection into fatherhood by race
15

Records on firm employment accessed in Administrative Files of collection RG 228 Committee on Fair
Employment Practice Region XII - San Francisco, HMS Record ID SB-877, held at the San Bruno,
CA branch of the National Archives and Records Administration. Data on white and non-white
employment by firm based on ES 270 forms used by the War Manpower Commission to assess labor
requirements of specific firms and catalogue workforce characteristics, and provided in some cases
to Fair Employment Practices Committee administrators. This sample of ES 270 forms appears to
have been gathered for reasons unrelated to enforcing discrimination law, and is therefore plausibly
representative of the Bay Area labor market. Data available from author upon request.

10

and year, defining fatherhood as co-residence with own children.16 The table shows that
Asians exhibit much stronger positive selection on occupational status into fatherhood
of US-born children than both whites and blacks living in CA, especially before 1960.
While many Asians arriving in the 19th century may well have been lower-skilled, only
a small, positively selected fraction of these early arrivals contribute dynastically to the
rapid economic ascent of Asians after 1940 that I document below. In contrast, CA has
never placed legal restrictions on black migration.
2. Asians experienced similar or worse institutional discrimination than
blacks in pre-war CA. Table II shows that Asians faced similar or greater historical
discrimination than blacks in pre-war CA in citizenship and suﬀrage, due process, employment, labor unions, land ownership and leasing, housing markets, public education,
and of course internment and expropriation during WWII. In Appendix A, I further
discuss how CA permitted de jure educational segregation of Asians and Native Americans but not blacks from 1890 to 1946, and that this did result in a small minority of
Asian children attending segregated “oriental schools” which in some cases were underfunded and in other cases were shown to slightly reduce Asian academic achievement.
Consistent with state law, I have been unable to find evidence of any de jure segregated
black schools in CA after 1890, and Graaf et al. (2001, e.g., pages 14, 137) suggests
that access to relatively high-quality, integrated public schools attracted many Southern
blacks to CA. I also explore de facto segregation using a new archival data set on school
racial composition in Los Angeles in 1938 linked to school financial reports, and find that
blacks, Asians and Hispanics all attended racially diverse schools with significant white
shares and similar per-pupil funding and class sizes. While blacks did attend schools
with fewer whites than Asians, evidence below suggests this could easily have reflected
greater willingness to accept racial groups of similar skill profiles to whites in majoritywhite schools, rather than reflecting greater white prejudice toward blacks than Asians
in the CA school system. Prior research, for example, documents large “school readiness
gaps” between races in the modern period (e.g., Fryer and Levitt, 2013).17 In Appendix
16

The census only asks women, not men, about number of children ever born, and many Asian men
historically were in fact married but did not bring their wives with them to the US. Therefore coresidence is the only available measure of fatherhood. The quality of this proxy for fatherhood likely
deteriorates somewhat in more recent decades as the rate of single motherhood has risen.
17
Hendrick (1975) documents much evidence of early- and mid-20th century CA educators arguing that
racial segregation in schools could be justified by group academic ability diﬀerences, but not by
prejudice. Taylor (1928, p. 84-86), for example, documents that some high-ability Mexican children
in CA were allowed to attend white schools rather than segregated Mexican schools, and that high
schools were typically integrated based on the idea that any children reaching these upper grades no
longer required separate instruction. Both of these sources suggest these arguments often combined
genuine educational principles with covert prejudice.

11

A I also argue that “ethnic organizations” would have been unlikely to provide a more
eﬀective shield against white discrimination for Asians than local CA blacks.
3. Institutional discrimination against all non-whites in CA declined dramatically 1943-59. Finally, Table II and Appendix A show that institutional discrimination against all non-whites in CA declined dramatically between 1943-59. During this
period, legislation and court decisions prohibited racial discrimination in naturalization,
housing, employment and labor unions, education, land ownership, commercial licenses,
marriage, employment, labor unions, and employment agencies. These changes before
1960 all would have tended to increase competition for minority workers in the labor
market by removing legal barriers to employment, induce pre-emptive voluntary integration by firms and unions, and erode social norms of racial exclusion (e.g., Heckman
and Payner, 1989; Donohue and Heckman, 1991). I am not able to pin down causal
eﬀects of any specific change in discrimination on racial outcomes, and I am not able
to measure diﬀerential changes in discrimination across racial groups during this period.
Overall, these changes suggest a significant relaxation of previously severe labor market
restrictions on non-white workers in post-war CA.

4. Data
Here I briefly describe key data sources and empirical decisions, leaving details for Appendix B. I rely on census data 1940-2000 for most key results in the paper, including
recently-available 100% count 1940 census data that permits a detailed examination of
Asians in pre-war CA for the first time (Ruggles et al., 2015). I define “Asians” as Chinese, Japanese and “Other Asian or Pacific Islander,” though most Asians before 1970
were Chinese or Japanese. I combine all Asians for reasons of both simplicity and statistical power, just like most researchers combine all white and black ethnic groups into
broader categories. I focus on log of annual labor earnings (head + spouse) as my key
outcome measure, excluding zeros, and confirm robustness of key results to other choices
in Section 10. I rely on the method in Hilger (2016) to estimate the relationship between
parental earnings and children’s education based on young adult children who co-reside
with parents in census data.18
18

The key assumption of this approach is that dependent and independent children in their late 20s
exhibit similar relationships between final schooling and parental income. This assumption cannot
be verified for Asians due to small samples in panel datasets, but Hilger (2016) shows it is a reasonable
approximation in many other contexts over the 1940-2000 period, yielding mobility estimates that
line up with time trends for both whites and blacks in other data sources over the 1940-80 period, as
well as state income mobility variation for the 2000s from Chetty et al. (2014).

12

I also make use of recently-discovered World War II enlistment data containing Army
General Classification Test (AGCT) scores for a large sample of enlistees in 1943 (Ferrie
et al. 2012; also see Aaronson and Mazumder 2011; Carruthers and Wanamaker 2016).
An important and apparently unrecognized fact is that AGCT data contain a positively selected sample of enlistees due to restrictions on test-taking to individuals who
passed preliminary examinations of physical, educational, and emotional fitness (Bingham, 1946; Ginzberg, 1959, and other references in data appendix). I conclude AGCT
scores likely understate population black-white gaps in education and cognitive skills,
and may likewise understate black-Asian skill gaps documented below. Despite these
selection problems, this extraordinarily large sample of cognitive test scores allows me to
examine skill diﬀerences for small subgroups born in the 1920s, and to assess correlations
of both individual and group-level skills with earnings. For some analysis I make use
of a matched sample of 1940 census data and 1943 AGCT test scores. As described in
Appendix B, the match rate is high relative to similar prior work and yields a broadly
representative sample of 211,000 white and black young men.
Finally, in Section 3 and Appendix A I make use of novel historical data on school
inputs at a Chinese segregated school in San Francisco in the 1920s, school inputs and
racial composition of public schools in Los Angeles in 1938, and racial composition of
individual firms in the Bay Area in 1943 and 1944.

5. Intergenerational Group Mobility
In Appendix C, I plot national aggregate outcomes by race over all available years of data,
reweighted to harmonize age and gender distributions across races.19 These aggregate
national trends characterize Asians as higher-skilled than other non-white US minorities
at every point over the past 150 years. The perception that Asians began their history
in the US disadvantaged by lower skills and earnings could potentially be true relative to
whites, but is not plausible when comparing Asians to blacks or Native Americans at the
national level. In contrast, trends in human capital and earnings among the CA-born are
more consistent with this perception, as shown in Appendix Figures A.4-A.5. Among the
CA-born, Asians and blacks appear similarly disadvantaged in 1940, but Asians rapidly
overtake both blacks and whites in education and earnings over subsequent decades.
However, these aggregate time series trends are not a focus of this paper because they
confound intergenerational group mobility with composition changes from migration flows
19

When reweighting group means on age and sex, I use blacks as the base group because CA-born blacks
are the smallest group in many years.

13

between censuses. These composition changes are potentially very large, as illustrated
in Appendix Figure A.1. For example, in 1960 new Asian immigrants amount to 75% of
all Asians present in the US in 1950, with even greater inflows in subsequent decades.
I therefore use a pseudo-panel approach to compare intergenerational income growth
across races in a way that plausibly eliminates bias from migration flows between censues. I construct pseudo-panels that link adult outcomes to parental characteristics
during childhood, exploiting the fact that most children live with their parents until
age 17. Specifically, consider children age 1-17 in 1940 with known state of birth in
the US. For this 17-year cohort block of children we can observe parental income. We
can then observe outcomes of these children at ten-year intervals in later censuses using self-reported state of birth. This strategy delivers balanced pseudo-panels under
the assumption that individuals report race, age, and place of birth consistently across
decades, and that families with US-born children rarely emigrate. Pseudo-panels permit
calculation of “group mobility” based on comparisons of E [yi,r,t ] and E [yi,r,t

1 ],

where

yi,r,t denotes household earnings of person i in group r in generation t. I construct these
pseudo-panels for 17-year cohort blocks still living with parents in years 1940, 1960, 1970,
and 1980.20 In Appendix D, I test the assumptions required to obtain valid pseudo-panels
by testing for anomalous changes in the size and gender composition of cohorts defined
by place of birth.21 Results show relatively stable size and gender composition of cohorts,
supporting the pseudo-panel approach.
These pseudo-panels yield one mean parental income observation for each 17-year cohort block of children, and one mean earnings observation for these children in each
census starting 20 years after observing parental income when children have entered the
labor market at ages 21-37. This combination of multiple observations on every cohort
serves as a further test of internal consistency. Figure II presents these data for CA-born
black, white, and Asian cohorts reaching ages 1-17 in each decade, configured to assess
speed of Asian intergenerational mobility relative to local whites and blacks. The figure plots parental household earnings ratios with respect to Asians on the X-axis, and
children’s household earnings ratios with respect to Asians on the Y-axis. The 45-degree
line represents the benchmark of identical earnings ratios across generations, and distinguishes two broad families of models. In the “absolute convergence” region, Asian
mobility is consistent with inter-group mean-reversion of groups with identical prefer20

I pool all children ages 1-17 to maximize statistical power, weighting families by number of children in
household. I omit cohorts age 1-17 in 1950 because earnings and education in 1950 are only observed
for one member of each household.
21
These tests are not perfect because consistent cohort size may conceal changes in the composition of
the cohort from migration flows that cancel out on net.

14

ences and technologies from diﬀerent initial conditions (Ramsey, 1928; Solow, 1956).22
In the “Divergence” region, relatively rich Asian parents have children who are relatively
even richer, or poor Asian parents have children who surpass previously richer groups.
Points in this region suggest that Asians are converging to higher steady-state income
levels than comparison groups. Diﬀerential steady states across groups are consistent
with (1) “conditional convergence” models with group variation in preferences and technologies (Barro and Sala-i Martin, 1992), and (2) “new growth” models with identical
groups aﬀected by various externalities or non-convexities. Examples of non-neoclassical
features include human capital externalities (Azariadis and Drazen, 1990; Borjas, 1992),
knowledge spillovers (Romer, 1986), and credit constraints (Galor and Zeira, 1993).
Results in Figure II reject neo-classical absolute convergence with respect to both
blacks and whites in every cohort born in CA since 1920, with the possible exception of
Asian convergence to whites in the 1940 cohort which exhibits “only” full convergence
from a 50% parental earnings disadvantage in one generation. These findings suggest
that Asian dynasties raising children in CA historically benefit from diﬀerent preferences
or technologies, or from some violation of assumptions underlying neo-classical growth.
Importantly, this pattern is not driven by English fluency diﬀerences between parents
and native-born children; 50-80% of Asian parents are native-born in all years 194080, and restricting to native-born parents yields nearly identical results. I now turn
to understanding what factors might account for this unusually rapid dynastic earnings
growth among Asians.

6. Intergenerational Earnings Decomposition
Why have Asian dynasties in CA been converging toward higher group earnings than
blacks and whites? To shed light on this question I estimate a simple, intergenerational
decomposition of group earnings in the spirit of Conlisk (1974). Let yr,t indicate average
adult log earnings in group r in generation t, and hr,t indicate average adult education.
Let fr (yt

1)

indicate the probability density function of parental income in group r.

Mean earnings of group r in generation t can then be written non-parametrically as:
E [yr,t ] =

ˆ

yt

yr,t (hr,t (yt

1 )) fr,t (yt 1 ) dyt 1 .

This decomposition breaks mean group earnings into three terms. The term fr,t (yt
22

(1)

1

1)

Ethnic groups can be thought of approximately as small open economies with mobile labor. Rappaport
(2005) shows that mobile labor has a surprisingly small eﬀect on the rate of convergence predicted
in a standard neoclassical growth model.

15

captures a group’s parental income distribution. The term hr,t (yt

1)

captures educa-

tional attainment conditional on parental income, or “educational mobility.” Educational
mobility can vary across races due to many factors including parental skills or preferences, discrimination in human capital markets, and beliefs about the returns to skill.
This relation could also be nonlinear if families with low incomes face liquidity constraints
on educational investments. The term yr,t (hr,t ) captures children’s earnings conditional
on education. These Mincerian earnings functions can diﬀer across races due to skill
diﬀerences stemming from school quality and home environment, or due to labor market
discrimination based on prejudice or misperceptions.23
After examining these terms non-parametrically, I also make use of a linearized version
of this decomposition. This version is easier to work with empirically, and also sheds
light on multigenerational implications of group diﬀerences at any point in time. Write
educational mobility as hf,t (yr,t
yr,t (hr,t ) = ↵r,t +

r,t hr,t ,

1)

= ✓r,t +

r,t yr,t 1

and adult earnings functions as

implying

E [yr,t ] = ↵r,t +

r,t ✓r,t

+

r,t r,t E

[yr,t

1] .

(2)

If I further assume time-invariant parameters for each group, I obtain the steady state
relation
yr,SS =

↵r +
1

r ✓r

(3)

.

r r

These decompositions allow me to state how group outcome gaps would mechanically
be aﬀected by replacing each of these three components for one group with the corresponding component of another group, either in the subsequent generation or in steady
state. For example, I can estimate the share of the black-white earnings gap that would
be closed if blacks adopted Asian educational mobility hasian,t
income fwhite,t

1 (yt 1 ).

1 (yt 1 )

or white parental

These counterfactuals provide a simple way to quantify the

“importance” of group diﬀerences in three broad components of group mean earnings.24
I estimate these three components in each year for whites, blacks and Asians born in
23

I omit a direct eﬀect of parental income on children’s income because the method in Hilger (2016)
only permits estimation of children’s education by parental income, not children’s income by parental
income. Fortunately, prior research in sociology based on data back to the 1960s suggests that the
remaining descriptive impact of parental income on children’s income, after conditioning on children’s
education, is small (Torche, 2015).
24
It is also straightforward to solve for the transition path of the linear decomposition for any generation
T as
T
X
( )j 1 + ( )T E [y0 ] .
(4)
E [yT ] = (↵ + ✓)
j=1

16

CA.25 Estimation of parental income distributions and adult earnings functions in census
data is straightforward. I rely on the method developed in Hilger (2016) to estimate
children’s final education conditional on parental income, addressing the longstanding
problem that many children can no longer be linked to their parents at ages following
school completion (e.g., Cameron and Heckman, 1993).26
Even as a purely descriptive, reduced-form exercise, this decomposition has many limitations. For example, two-generation mobility statistics likely overstate multi-generational
mobility (e.g., Solon, 2015), and annual group earnings variation likely understates lifetime group earnings variation (Rothstein and Wozny, 2014). Nonetheless, the exercise
provides a useful tool for exploring potential causes of variation in group earnings mobility.

6.1. Estimates
Figure III plots parental income distributions by race in 1940 for children born in the
US and CA. Parental incomes are grouped into population deciles. Panel (a) shows that
Asian and black children in 1940 grew up with extremely diﬀerent parental income distributions at the national level, with black children concentrated in the bottom deciles.
Panel (b) shows this contrast is much milder when restricting to black and Asian children
born in CA, either due to positive selection into migration or better earnings opportunities for black parents in CA.
Figure IV plots educational attainment conditional on parental income, and again
illustrates the key role of geography in Asian American history. Panel (a) shows that
among all native-born in 1940 Asians exhibit greater educational mobility than whites,
who in turn exhibit greater educational mobility than blacks, both in terms of intercepts
and slopes. However, panel (b) shows that as of 1940 these diﬀerences disappear when
restricting to the CA-born. Among the CA-born, all races display very high educational
mobility in terms of both intercepts and slopes, relative to the national pattern. Panel
(c) shows that CA-born Asians once again exhibit a higher greater educational mobility
than other CA-born groups in later years, while white and black educational mobility
remain virtually identical.
25

In practice it is important to estimate these relationships over bounded regions of income and education
variables, because the linearity assumptions break down outside the main support. I therefore drop
children with education below the bottom 2% of the population education distribution in each year
as in Card and Krueger (1992a), and I use mean log of parental income within population parental
income deciles in each year, bounding income at the mean of the top and bottom deciles. Therefore
in practice I estimate E [yr,t ] = ↵r,t + r,t ✓r,t + r,t r,t E [yr,t 1 ]
r r ymin
r hmin and yr,SS =
↵ r + r ✓r
r r ymin
r hmin
,
where
y
and
h
are
as
described.
min
min
1
r r
26
See footnote 18 or Hilger (2016) for more detailed discussion of this method.

17

Finally, I estimate group earnings as a function of educational attainment. Figure V
displays mean log earnings of men by educational attainment in 1940 and 1980, restricting
to the CA-born. In 1940, Asians and blacks both received about 0.4 0.6 log points lower
pay than whites at every level of education. By 1980, Asians have closed or slightly
reversed this large gap, pulling ahead of blacks by about 0.4 log points in the meat of
the education distribution. Note this relative gain in Asians’ conditional earnings over
blacks is extremely large, equivalent to something like 4 years of additional educational
attainment.

27

In Appendix Table A.4, I present estimated intercepts and slopes for linearized versions
of educational mobility gradients and earnings functions, restricting to the CA-born.28
Estimates are consistent with lessons from the above discussion. Asians begin to display an advantage in educational mobility after 1940, while white and black educational
mobility gradients remain nearly identical in all years. Earnings function parameter estimates lack suﬃcient precision to pin down exact timing of Asian earnings convergence
before 1980. Earnings function slopes, i.e. Mincerian returns to schooling, rise rapidly
after 1980 for all groups, especially for blacks.

6.2. Counterfactual Black-White Earnings Gaps
After 1940, all three elements of the decomposition—parental income, educational mobility, and earnings functions—favor Asians relative to blacks historically in CA. In order
to assess the relative contribution of these three components I construct counterfactual
estimates of the black-white earnings gap over time. I consider counterfactuals in which
I assign to black dynasties each of these three components from whites and Asians, one
component at a time, based on estimates for the CA-born in Appendix Table A.4.
Table V reports actual and counterfactual log earnings by race based on Equation
(2), which takes only one generation of transmission into account. Appendix Table
A.5 reports similar estimates extrapolating to steady state based on Equation (3). As
these estimates are very similar, I focus on next-generation predictions which have the
advantage of permitting eﬀects of counterfactual parental income. Figure VII displays
27

The same pattern of similarly low Asian and black conditional earnings in 1940, followed by rapid
convergence of Asian but not black conditional earnings to that of whites, also emerges in the other
two mainland states with significant pre-war Asian populations, New York and Washington. Occupational diﬀerences can account for about half of the Asian-white earnings gap in CA. However,
these occupational diﬀerences themselves, like many other labor market outcomes such as hours and
employment rates, could reflect either labor market discrimination or skill diﬀerences and therefore
shed little additional light on the underlying sources of Asian-white earnings gaps.
28
These functions cannot be estimated in 1950 due to collection of census data from only one member
of each household.

18

resulting counterfactual black-white earnings gaps constructed from estimates in Table
V.. Panel (a) shows that the overwhelmingly most important black disadvantage relative
to whites among in CA is lower earnings conditional on education; lower parental income
and diﬀerential educational mobility play almost no role. Panel (b) repeats this exercise
but imputes Asian components to black dynasties. Once again, conditional earnings gaps
are the most important factor, with high educational mobility playing a large secondary
role. However, even this secondary role for high Asian educational mobility is largely
driven by conditional earnings gains of blacks with some college education after 1940,
as shown in Figure V.b. Without these conditional earnings gains of blacks, imputing
higher educational mobility of Asians to blacks yield much smaller eﬀects on blackwhite earnings gaps.29 Therefore convergence of group earnings conditional on education,
rather than educational mobility, has been the primary driver of diﬀerential upward
mobility across Asians, blacks, and whites in California’s post-war history.
High educational mobility of CA-born Asian children reaching adulthood after 1940
could be driven by a number of mechanisms, including higher unobserved parental skills,
group-level human capital externalities (Borjas, 1992; Lee and Zhou, 2015), or Asian
cultural preferences for education Brandt et al. (2014). However, in the next section I
discuss potential explanations for the more important driver of Asian upward mobility:
earnings growth conditional on education.

7. Why Did the Asian Conditional Earnings Gap Disappear?
Why did Asians, but not blacks, close their conditional earnings gaps with whites? Understanding causes of the initial earnings gaps for each group may shed light on this
question. A large literature distinguishes two broad explanations for group earnings
gaps: (1) productivity diﬀerences observed by firms but not researchers and (2) prejudice. Group productivity diﬀerences not observed by researchers can account for group
earnings gaps if firms reward individual productivity, or if firms accurately observe mean
group productivity and use group membership to proxy for individual productivity, i.e.
“statistically discriminate” (Aigner and Cain, 1977). Because these types of discrimination are profit-maximizing, they can yield stable group earnings gaps as long as group
skill gaps persist.
Explanations for group earnings gaps based on prejudice, rather than productivity, can
take the form of “taste-based” discrimination stemming from racial preferences of employers, workers, or customers (Becker, 1957; Arrow, 1971), or employer misperceptions of
29

Results available from other upon request.

19

group skill diﬀerences (e.g. exaggerated stereotypes as in Bordalo et al. 2016). They can
also take the form of “institutional” discrimination based on laws and customs that restrict employment of certain groups. Models of individual or “neoclassical” discrimination
predict that markets will attenuate prejudice-based earnings gaps by segregating minority workers into firms with unprejudiced employers, workers, and customers. Earnings
gaps driven by taste-based discrimination are more likely to emerge when prejudice is
more widespread and minorities represent a larger share of the labor force. These models
imply lower profits for discriminating firms and hence, in some cases, long-run elimination
of group earnings gaps as nondiscriminating firms increase market share (Becker, 1957;
Arrow, 1971, though see Goldberg, 1982). However, discrimination can persist in these
models if there are suﬃcient barriers to segregation of minority workers or expansion of
nondiscriminating firms. In contrast, earnings gaps driven by institutional discrimination
can persist with few limitations. For example, if minorities are legally excluded from all
high-income occupations, sorting and arbitrage mechanisms no longer reduce earnings
gaps.
As discussed in Section 2, empirical work using data from more recent decades has
indicated that cognitive test scores—interpreted as measures of productivity not captured by educational attainment—can account for a large share of black-white wage and
earnings gaps (Neal and Johnson, 1996; Johnson and Neal, 1998; Fryer, 2010; Carruthers
and Wanamaker, 2016). These black-white test score gaps are zero at infancy but emerge
before school entry (Fryer and Levitt, 2013), widen in school Fryer and Levitt (2006), and
do appear to reflect productive skills rather than racial bias in the test (Neal and Johnson, 1996).30 However, some evidence suggests that taste-based discrimination against
blacks may account for the remaining share of black-white earnings gaps not accounted
for by observed skills (Charles and Guryan, 2008; Lang and Lehmann, 2012).
One reasonable conjecture, therefore, is that Asian earnings gaps in 1940 reflect a diﬀerent type of problem than black earnings gaps in CA, namely prejudice or misperceptions
rather than skill deficits. If this were true, we might expect skill gaps even conditional
on educational attainment to account for a large share of black but not Asian conditional earnings gaps as of 1940. Prior research documenting high academic achievement
of Japanese American children attending school in CA in the 1930s appears promising
for this theory (Ichihashi, 1932; Bell, 1935).31 Flynn (1991) finds that both Chinese and
30

Observed aspects of the home environment can account for a substantial share of these modern score
gaps in children (Neal, 2006; Fryer and Levitt, 2006; Fryer, 2010), which likely relate to multigenerational suppression of black skills under slavery and Jim Crow regimes (e.g., Margo, 2016).
31
Interestingly, Bell (1935) also claims that white anti-Japanese attitudes in the early 20th century
acknowledge high Japanese skill levels, citing as “typical” the following quote of V.S. McClatchy,

20

Japanese Americans have very similar IQ scores to whites for the generation attending
school in the 1960s. I am not aware of similarly rich published evidence on cognitive
or academic achievement for early 20th century cohorts of Chinese or black Americans
in CA, overall or conditional on educational attainment. Fortunately, AGCT test score
data from 1943 are large enough to fill these gaps.
Figure VI plots the distribution of normalized test score residuals by race from an
OLS regression of test z-scores on dummies for education and age.32 Chinese Americans
and whites have strikingly similar conditional skill distributions, while the black skill
distribution lags behind by nearly a full standard deviation. Table VI shows that this
pattern holds separately within broad educational categories. These high test scores of
Chinese Americans provide strong evidence that the AGCT was not hopelessly biased
against non-whites, as Neal and Johnson (1996) also find for the AFQT (the successor
to the AGCT) in more recent cohorts.
Can these black-white test score gaps account for a large share of conditional earnings
gaps in 1940, as they do in the more recent period? To address this question I turn to the
matched national sample of AGCT scores linked to earnings and educational attainment
in census data, restricting to individuals over age 23 in 1940 to allow school completion
and labor market entry. Table VII reports estimates from regressions of log earnings on a
dummy for black and AGCT scores, replicating specifications in Johnson and Neal (1998)
on data fifty years earlier in time. Column (1) documents a large 0.633 log point raw
black-white earnings gap controlling for age. Column (2) indicates that AGCT scores
reduce this gap by 38% to 0.39 log points, or somewhat less than the 50% share of blackwhite earnings gaps accounted for by AFQT scores in the early 1990s in Johnson and
Neal (1998). Given that these data likely understate black-white skill diﬀerences due to
the lower pass rate of blacks in pre-AGCT examinations, results suggest that skills as
measured by one test explain a substantial share of black-white earnings gaps at this
time. Column (3) shows that educational attainment is likely an important channel by
which AGCT scores increase earnings, but does not further reduce the unexplained share
of the black-white earnings gap. Columns (4)-(7) show that, relative to whites, blacks
exhibit lower returns to AGCT scores, age and education.33
Secretary of the CA Joint Immigration Committee during a 1920 hearing: “It will be agreed...that
the facts now before us conclusively establish that the Japanese are undesirable as immigrants and
as citizens, not because they are of inferior race, but because they are superior in certain characteristics....Their racial characteristics would soon give them economic control of this country if they
secured a foothold....”
32
I restrict to residence rather than birth in CA in this exercise due to some documentation or coding
anomalies in the state of birth variable in the test score data, but results are similar using state of
birth.
33
Formal tests reject equality of coeﬃcients on age and AGCT in columns (4) and (6) and in analogous

21

Taken as a lower bound on the eﬀect of individual skills on earnings, these results
can explain a substantial share of black-white earnings gaps nationally and in CA in
1940. They also imply that full, belated compensation of individual Asian skills after
WWII could account for a substantial share of the decline in the Asian-white conditional
earnings gap by 1970. A rapid change in factor prices for non-white groups with very
diﬀerent factor endowments is therefore one potential explanation for Asians’ divergent
growth.

8. Social Multipliers in Skill
The above results suggest an important potential role for compensation of individual skill
in explaining group earnings dynamics in CA. There are also many reasons to suppose
that group skills at the market level may have additional eﬀects on group earnings. For
example:
• Employers may find it more costly to exclude higher-skilled groups if firms earn

greater profits on higher-skilled workers due to pay compression (e.g., Frank, 1984;
Acemoglu and Pischke, 1999), or if labor markets for higher-skilled workers are
tighter (Biddle and Hamermesh, 2013; Baert et al., 2015).34

• Racial prejudice may represent exaggerated stereotypes causally dependent on a
“kernal of truth” about lower-skilled groups (Bordalo et al., 2016).35

regressions (not shown) replacing AGCT with education. I also reject equality of coeﬃcients on age in
columns (5) and (7), as well as joint equality of both AGCT and education across races. Additional
controls for hours and weeks worked in these regressions are highly significant but do not reduce
the black-white earnings gap further in my sample. Using levels rather than logs, and imputing low
earnings for observations with missing earnings, do not change any of the qualitative results discussed
here. Quadratic terms in AGCT scores are underpowered so I omit them.
34
An anecdote in Bain (2000) illustrates this theory. Apparently, railroad employers were highly prejudiced against Asians in the late 19th century and dismissed them as potential workers, but immediately changed their hiring policy upon observing credible evidence of Asians’ high productivity.
Booker T. Washington can also be interpreted as advocating this theory, stating that “...as the Negro learned to produce what other people wanted and must have, in the same proportion would he
be respected” Washington (1901). Formalizing this theory would be an interesting task for future
research.
35
This story is very diﬀerent from statistical discrimination, which does not require any racial prejudice.
There are many examples in US history of higher-skilled individual members of minority groups
expressing concern about white prejudice inspired by perception of low skills in their broader group.
Caro (1975, p. 31) claims that higher-skilled German Jews in New York “realized that non-Jews were
lumping them all together, taking the behavior of the newcomers as the stereotype by which they
thought of all Jews,” and reacted by seeking to “make the shabby immigrants ’respectable’...” Taylor
(1928, p. 82) refers to “"the social ostracism by Americans to which middle and upper-class Mexicans
are subject in common with their fellow-nationals,” and claims “[Upper-class Mexicans] profess to
understand why [white] Americans do not want Mexican laborors as neighbors; but that the same

22

• Higher-skilled groups may contain more managers and business owners who may
act as unprejudiced employers of their own group members.

All of these theories suggest “social multiplier” eﬀects in which a group’s market-wide
or aggregate skill distribution can aﬀect group members’ earnings more than would be
predicted by eﬀects of individual skills. Unlike statistical discrimination, these theories
predict that group mean earnings gaps typically exceed group mean producitivity gaps.
36

This point can be demonstrated using a standard linear-in-means peer eﬀects framework (e.g., Borjas, 1992; Glaeser et al., 2003). For log earnings yijr and test score xijr
of individual i in market j and race r 2 {w, b}, let log earnings be determined by the
true relation

yijr = ↵ +
where

b

b 1 {r

= b} + xijr + x̄jr,

i

(5)

+ eijr ,

denotes the residual black-white log earnings gap, and x̄jr,

i

⌘ E [xijr |j, r, i]

or mean test scores of an individual’s own-race peers within a market. I assume eijr ? j, r

˜ + ˜b +
to abstract from endogenous sorting. Consider the “short” linear predictor yijr = ↵
˜xijr + ẽijr , as estimated above in Table VII and in Neal and Johnson (1996); Johnson

and Neal (1998) on national samples. If blacks tend to have lower-skilled peers such that
Cov (1 {r = b} , x̄jr, i ) < 0, then the short regression understates the share of black-white

earnings gaps accounted for by black-white skill gaps (˜b < b  0) and the predicted
earnings gains associated with group skill improvements ( ˜ < + ). Two approaches can

recover

b

and

+ . First, I can include x̄jr,

i

in the regression on matched microdata

to estimate equation (5) directly. Second, I can run a version of the short regression on
ˇ + ˇb + ˇx̄jr + ějr , which yields
data aggregated to the level of market and race, ȳjr = ↵
ˇb =

b

and ˇ =

+

b.

This approach does not require microdata, and therefore allows

me to use the full, unmatched versions of the test score and earnings data, which may
be more representative.
I am unable to test for social multiplier eﬀects in a causal sense due to a lack of exogenous variation in group skills, implying potential violations of the assumption eijr ? j, r.
However, I can assess whether non-experimental correlations suggest a large potential
role for social multipliers. I first divide the US into “labor markets” defined by state and
four broad education categories: no high school, some high school, high school degree,
36

ostracism should be extended to them is bitterly resented.”
These mechanisms also diﬀer from the “ethnic capital” concept in Borjas (1992, 1995); Leon (2005).
Borjas suggests that a person’s own human capital may depend on the aggregate human or financial
capital of her ethnic community during childhood. I am suggesting that the compensation a person
receives for her previously-accumulated human capital may depend on the human capital of her
contemporary peers in the labor market.

23

and any college. I then aggregate earnings by markets and race for men ages 23-38 in
the 1940 100% census, and WWII enlistment test z-scores based on the national score
distribution for men ages 23-38. Figure VIII plots earnings gaps against test score gaps
across all labor markets along with the estimated regression line. Strikingly, the implied
relationship predicts small black-white earnings gaps in hypothetical markets without
black-white skill gaps, although this prediction is far out of sample. To my knowledge,
even this cross-sectional correlation has not been documented previously due to data
limitations.37
Table VIII presents fixed eﬀects regressions of log earnings on a black dummy variable
and AGCT scores in a variety of specifications. In Columns (1)-(3), I estimate a simplified
version of the regression in Table VII in the matched microdata. Column (1) documents
a slightly larger black-white earnings gap without age controls. Column (2) controls for
market fixed eﬀects (state ⇥ broad education group), and shows that black-white earnings
gaps fall slightly. Column (3) once again shows that AGCT scores account for a slightly
smaller share of black-white earnings gaps in this simpler specification: about 25% rather
than the 38% reported above. Column (4) adds mean peer test scores to the specification.
Consistent with important social multipliers, the black dummy declines dramatically
and the coeﬃcient on peer scores is large conditional on own scores. Columns (5)-(7)
replicate columns (1)-(3) on matched data aggregated to the level of race and market.
Again consistent with an important role for intra-group spillovers, the coeﬃcient on
AGCT score nearly triples in the aggregate specification, and now accounts for over 60%
of black-white earnings gaps. However, these specifications are limited by the smaller
and potentially less representative nature of the matched sample, which only contains
a subset of all potential markets due to missing data. Therefore, in columns (8)-(10) I
once again estimate specifications from columns (1)-(3), but now on the full samples of
test score and earnings data without restricting to the matched sample. These columns
strengthen the findings from the matched sample: the coeﬃcient on group-level AGCT
in column (10) is now well over three times its microdata analogue in column (3) and
eliminates nearly 80% of the black-white earnings gap.
These results have interesting implications for interpreting Asian upward mobility.
Suppose CA labor markets failed to recognize Asians’ skill advantage over local CA
blacks in 1940. And suppose that once institutional discrimination declined in the postwar economy, labor markets gradually and fully compensated Asians for this persistent
37

The NLSY is too small to estimate black-white test score gaps by state. NAEP data are large enough to
estimate black-white test scores by state, but does not contain final educational attainment. Project
Talent data contain educational attainment at ages 23 and 29 but only for subsets that responded to
voluntary followup surveys.

24

skill advantage over CA blacks at the rate of 0.44 log earnings points per standard
deviation in group test scores (as in Column 10 of Table VIII). This would account for
virtually all of Asians’ extraordinary upward mobility.
Of course, these findings could also be driven by measurement error in individual
human capital, whereby market-level mean test scores proxy for individual skills (Borjas,
1992, 1995); this would represent a diﬀerent mechanism, but would still be consistent
with the idea that skills largely explain Asians’ upward mobility. The patterns here could
also be driven by unobserved variables that merely correlate with mean group test scores,
such as white prejudice. Distinguishing these theories would require long-term, quasiexperimental variation in peer skills combined with credible measures of labor market
discrimination across diﬀerent markets.

9. Other Explanations for Asian Economic Divergence
So far I have emphasized a key role for Asians’ high initial skills, and the fact that these
skills appear to have been uncompensated in pre-war CA labor markets, in accounting
for Asians’ rapid economic ascendance in the post-war atmosphere of declining discrimination. In terms of the conceptual model in section (3), I emphasize the interaction
between Asians’ ancestral legacy of high skill on the one hand, and improvements in the
post-war contemporary environment for non-whites in CA on the other. However, I have
only examined non-experimental variation in skills across racial groups and broad, descriptive variation in discrimination across groups and over time. Therefore I am not able
to exclude important roles for other aspects of these groups’ ancestral legacies that correlate with skills, or more subtle variation in these groups’ contemporary environments.
Despite this uncertainty, I argue that my interpretation has important advantages over
competing explanations.
One alternative explanation is that harsher pre-war discrimination against Asians than
blacks in CA left more room for improvement in Asians’ contemporary environment after
1940, and that these larger improvements could have increased Asian earnings even in
the absence of large, previously uncompensated stocks of human capital. Given that
Asians exhibit very similar earnings to blacks in 1940 despite their much higher skills,
it is plausible that Asians experienced larger subsequent reductions in discrimination.
However, recall that Asian conditional earnings increased after WWII by a sensational
0.4 log points relative to CA-born blacks. This is equivalent to something like 4 years
of educational attainment—an entire college degree! While not impossible, it is hard to
imagine that discrimination fell so much more for Asians than local blacks over the 1940-

25

70 period that labor markets awarded Asians but not blacks the equivalent of a college
degree. It is also implausible that relative improvements in Asian school quality account
for these gains, which are four times larger than the 0.1 log point relative earnings
gains achieved by black high school graduates born in the segregated South between
the 1910s and the 1940s due to (surely much larger) relative school quality gains (Card
and Krueger, 1992b). Moreover, I am not aware of any candidate historical forces that
would have generated such a seismic reduction in discrimination toward Asians but not
other CA non-white groups.

38

Given the evidence presented above, it seems more

likely that post-war labor markets in CA opened up in some roughly similar way for all
non-whites, and this gave Asians the room they needed for competitive labor markets to
finally reward their skills. It would be a remarkable coincidence if special post-war gains
in labor market access for Asians specifically, unrelated to high Asian skills, happened to
generate relative gains in Asian conditional earnings that lined up so nicely with returns
to market-level group skill in 1940.
In Section, 6 I argue that factors increasing Asians’ educational mobility, such as
diﬀerent group preferences for education, have played a significant but secondary role
among the CA-born compared to factors aﬀecting how Asians received compensation
for their skills, and played no role at all for CA-born young adults in 1940. English
fluency is also unlikely to play a significant role given my focus on CA-born Asians, the
vast majority of whom attended integrated schools with many other US-born children
of other races starting early in childhood (Wollenberg, 1978); I also find nearly identical
results when I restrict to US-born Asian parents as well as CA-born children.
Table IX displays many additional outcomes for black and Asian parents ages 25-55
with CA-born co-residing children in every 20th century census year.39 Some factors are
roughly similar for blacks and Asians in most years, including marital status and fertility,
casting doubt on any central role for quantity-quality tradeoﬀs in children (e.g., Becker
and Tomes, 1976; Chiswick, 1988). Asians have slightly greater labor supply, total family
income in 1950, and likelihood of collecting non-labor income in 1940. However, these
diﬀerences in non-human capital do not appear large enough to explain Asians’ sharp
38

All of the important legislation and court cases overturning legal discrimination against native-born
Asians in CA applied to all non-whites generally (i.e. residency, marriage, employment, and labor
unions); removal of Alien Land Laws and special anti-Asian taxes only applied directly to foreignborn Asians. Almost no Asians ever attended segregated “Oriental” schools. Meanwhile, the US had
just completed a major war against Japan, and China had become a communist dictatorship—not
obviously auspicious tidings for white American views toward Asians.
39
This sample becomes less comparable across races in more recent decades as rates of single parenthood
have risen, implying greater exclusion of lower-SES fathers from my sample in groups with higher
rates of single parenthood. Unfortunately, the census only asks women about fertility, and therefore
co-residence remains the only method for restricting the sample to parents.

26

subsequent divergence. The largest diﬀerences are that Asian parents have been more
likely to live outside cities, self-employ, and rent rather than buy their own homes. It is
possible that something about rural, renting, self-employed lifestyles chosen by Asians in
the early-mid 20th century set their children on a path to greater income growth, and that
these adult economic choices were not related to Asians’ large cognitive skill advantage
over blacks. For example, Asians could have made diﬀerent choices due to diﬀerent
preferences, rather than diﬀerent skill endowments, and it may be that these preferences
themselves or the choices they enabled gave their children economic advantages.
While I cannot reject this explanation conclusively, it is less attractive than explanations based on human capital endowments. Living outside cities in rented homes has
not previously been considered a major advantage for children. Bates (1997) provides
evidence suggesting that self-employment among immigrants often reflects an absence
of more-preferred labor market opportunities, rather than a preference for entrepreneurship or a desire to expose children to distinct skills associated with running one’s own
business. Indeed, Asians’ self-employment rate fell dramatically as their labor market
opportunities expanded and no longer exceeded that of whites by 1980, suggesting selfemployment was not a deep cultural preference or deliberate child-rearing strategy but
rather a high-skilled group’s temporary response to discriminatory constraints.

10. Robustness
Throughout the analysis I have excluded households with zero and missing total earnings
(head + spouse) from the analysis. Many of these zeros represent self-employed families
with positive labor supply and business income, and many others likely represent measurement error or transitory earnings shocks. An alternative approach is therefore to
impute positive household earnings for these households and include them in the analysis. I implement this by calculating average household earnings among all individuals
with non-zero earnings in cells defined by year, race, age, sex, education, marital status,
and state or country of birth. I assign cell means to individuals with zero and missing
earnings based on this set of characteristics, roughly following Autor et al. (1998). In
households with two earners I take the maximum of these two predictions. For households with zero earnings I follow Neal (2006) and adjust for selection by multiplying
imputed household earnings by 0.6. While this method is ad hoc, it provides a rough
check on whether households with zero and missing earnings are likely to be driving the
main results. Using this new income variable I re-estimate the main results from pseudopanels in Section 5 and counterfactual black-white earnings gaps in Section 6. Appendix

27

Figures (A.10)-(A.11) document that the main results are largely unchanged.
Focusing on household earnings may confound group variation in earnings with group
variation in rates of single parenthood. To examine this I re-estimate group dynastic
growth rates as in Section 5 using fathers’ and sons’ individual earnings rather than
total household earnings. Appendix Figure A.12 documents that the results are virtually
unchanged.
Duncan and Trejo (2016) document that 20% of second-generation Asian Americans in
the 2000s report their race to census enumerators as “white,” and that these Asians tend
to have lower schooling than other Asians. However, I find that Asians exhibit unusually
high dynastic growth rates in pseudo-panels for every cohort born in the CA after 1920,
and that Asians experienced rapid declines in conditional earnings gaps by the late 1960s.
While I cannot rule out a role for endogenous ethnic identification in these results, it seems
likely that a very low share of Asians would have identified themselves as white to census
enumerators in these earlier decades. Note that intermarriage of Asians with whites
increased dramatically only after 1970, suggesting widespread cultural assimilation took
place after the main results documented in this paper.

11. Conclusion
In this paper I have set up a context and framework for understanding the remarkable
economic ascendance of Asian Americans, a “non-white” racial group that experienced
severe, long-term institutional discrimination yet emerged with incomes similar to whites
by the 1970s. I focus on Asian, black and white children born in CA, which is by far the
primary mainland destination of Asians historically and also the only state with large
enough populations of both Asians and blacks to conduct detailed historical comparisons.
As context, I show that US immigration policy generated positive selection of Asians
both into migration and family formation, that Asians likely experienced similar or worse
prejudice and legal discrimination than blacks living in CA before the 1960s, and that
all of the harshest forms of legal (though not necessarily de facto) discrimination against
non-white minorities in CA disappeared during the period 1943-59. I then address three
main questions.
Question 1: Does high Asian income reflect high dynastic income growth, or
compositional eﬀects of new immigration? I exploit pseudo-panels linking parental
income to future income of CA-born children to distinguish group intergenerational income mobility from compositional eﬀects of migration. I find that Asian dynasties exhibit
extraordinary upward intergenerational mobility. Asian children embody “divergence” in

28

the form of a “rich getting richer” pattern toward local blacks and a “reversal of fortune”
pattern toward local whites, in every cohort born in CA since at least the 1920s.
Question 2: Why did Asians achieve more rapid dynastic income growth
than other groups? To explore potential mechanisms underlying Asians’ rapid upward
mobility, I estimate an intergenerational decomposition of group earnings into parental
income distributions, educational mobility, and children’s earnings conditional on education. I quantify the importance of these three components by permuting them across
groups to construct counterfactual black-white earnings gaps in the next generation.
Contrary to public perception, gains in Asian earnings conditional on education have
played the dominant role in Asian upward mobility, with a significant but secondary role
for higher educational mobility, and no significant role for higher parental income.
Question 3: Why were Asians but not blacks able to close their conditional
earnings gap? I exploit a large sample of WWII enlistee cognitive test scores from
1943, along with prior research, to assess the contribution of skill gaps to Asian and
black conditional earnings gaps in 1940 in CA. I find large test score gaps for blacks
conditional on education, but not for Asians. Asians’ large earnings gaps in the absence
of any observed human capital gap is, to my knowledge, unique among non-white racial
groups in US history (e.g. Trejo, 1997; Hurst, 1997). In national samples combining
data on test scores, earnings, and education, I find that individual AGCT test scores
can account for 40% of black-white earnings gaps, and that mean group skill gaps across
labor markets can account for 80% of black-white mean earning gaps. These marketlevel eﬀects of mean group skills are large enough to explain relative conditional earnings
gains experienced by Asians 1940-70 in CA—and hence Asian upward mobility—under
the assumption that the Asian group-level test score advantage over other non-whites
was uncompensated in 1940 and fully compensated by 1970.
I conclude that Asian history can be interpreted as a case study in which a large
pre-war racial earnings gap almost surely driven by prejudice, rather than productivity,
failed to survive post-war removal of harsh legal discrimination. I argue that Asians’ high
initial skills—an ironic byproduct of America’s anti-Asian exclusion policies—interacted
with declining discrimination against all non-whites in CA during the 1943-1959 period
to generate faster Asian economic progress. While this explanation is consistent with
the large magnitude of Asians’ early skill advantage and subsequent earnings gains, it is
possible that aspects of Asian and black ancestral legacies other than skills, or diﬀerential
post-war changes in the contemporary environment facing these groups, could also have
played important roles in Asian economic progress. Distinguishing these theories more
conclusively represents a challenging task for future research.

29

NOT FOR PUBLICATION

A. Institutional Discrimination Against Asians and Blacks in
California
Asians have long faced severe political discrimination. Foreign-born Asians were barred
from naturalization by the Naturalization Act of 1790. This Act excluded Asians from
citizenship and voting except by birth, and created the important new legal category of
“aliens ineligible for citizenship” that would prove useful in crafting future discriminatory
laws. Both Asians and blacks in CA could not testify against a white witness in court
from 1853-73 (People v. Hall, 1853, see McClain, 1984), limiting Asians’ legal defense
against white aggression. The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and the “Gentlemen’s Agreement” in 1907 barred further immigration of all “laborers” from China and Japan, with
exceptions for Asian “merchants,” diplomats, students, and teachers and in some cases
the wives of prior Asian residents. Subsequent laws and practices served to encourage
return-migration and facilitate deportation of lower-skilled Asians, while still allowing
certain higher-skilled and higher-wealth Asians to stay in the US and bring in wives and
children from Asia (McKenzie et al., 1927; Hutchinson, 1947; Lee, 2005; Daniels, 1990;
Chan, 1991).40 Below, I show direct evidence on skill-biased positive selection of Asians
into both migration and parenthood, consistent with these institutional constraints. In
contrast, CA has never screened black migrants on occupation, skill, wealth, or any other
characteristics.
Asians have also faced intense economic discrimination. Many cities and states levied
discriminatory taxes and fees on Asians (1852 Foreign Miner’s Tax, 1852 Commutation
Tax, 1860 Fishing License, 1862 Police Tax, 1870 “queue” ordinance, 1870 sidewalk ordinance, and many others). Many professional schools and associations in CA excluded
Asians (e.g., State Bar of CA), as did most labor unions (e.g., Knights of Labor, American Federation of Labor), and many employers declined to hire Asians well into the 20th
century (e.g., Mears, 1928, p. 194-204). From 1913-23, virtually all western states passed
increasingly strict Alien Land Acts that prohibited foreign-born Asians from owning land
40

Amendments to the Chinese Exclusion Act from 1882-1932 excluded many other smaller-scale merchants from exempted classes, eventually requiring proof of international trade with one’s country
of origin (Lee, 2005, pg. 90-91). The Scott Act of 1888 deported over 20,000 Chinese laborers who
happened to be abroad at time of the law’s passage. The Geary Act of 1892 required all Chinese to
prove lawful status on demand or face punishment and deportation. The US Supreme Court case
United States v. Ju Toy 1905 restricted due process and habeas corpus petitions for anyone entering the US including Chinese with US citizenship. The Gentlemen’s Agreement of 1907 caused the
Japanese to screen potential migrants on wealth, occupation, and other characteristics, implemented
in part through the Japanese Associations of America (Daniels, 1990). The Immigration Act of 1917
created an “Asiatic Barred Zone” excluding other East Asian countries (not Japan) with broader
exceptions for some highly-skilled workers (lawyers, physicians, chemists, civil engineers, etc.), introduced literacy requirements for any immigrant over age 16, and expanded discretionary powers
of US immigration oﬃcials to reject immigrants on these and other grounds. The National Origins
Act of 1924 barred immigration of all foreign-born Asians, including Japanese, as “aliens ineligible
for citizenship,” yet continued exceptions for wives and children of Chinese merchants.

30

or leasing land for extended periods.41 Asians also faced laws against marriage to whites
(1905 amendment to Section 60 of the CA Civil Code) and US citizens (Expatriation Act
1907, Cable Act 1922). From 1942-46, the US forcibly relocated over 100,000 mainland
Japanese Americans to military detention camps, in practice destroying a large share of
Japanese American wealth. In contrast, blacks in CA were eligible for citizenship and
suﬀrage, were oﬃcially (though often not de facto) included in CA professional associations and labor unions that excluded Asians, were not covered by the Alien Land Acts,
and were not confined or expropriated during WWII.
In education as well, Asians in CA faced legal disadvantages relative to blacks after
1890, when the CA Supreme Court ruled in Wysinger v. Crookshank (83 California 593,
1890) that CA school laws allowed de jure segregation of Asians and Native Americans
but not blacks or other racial groups (Stephenson, 1910; U.S. Commission on Civil Rights,
1977; Wollenberg, 1978). In keeping with this decision, after 1890 a small minority of
Asians in CA did attend de jure segregated schools in San Francisco and Sacramento
(Kersey, 1933, pg. 429;Wollenberg, 1978). Evidence suggests that these few cases of
formal segregation did reduce school quality for aﬀected students. In district financial
reports, the Commodore Stockton “Oriental school” segregating Chinese students in San
Francisco ranked near the bottom of 106 district elementary schools in per-pupil spending during the 1920s, with spending around 80% of the median school (San Francisco,
California, 1924, and other years through 1929).42 Likewise Bell (1935) finds slightly
worse outcomes for Japanese students segregated into Oriental schools in Sacramento
County. In contrast, there is no documentation of any de jure segregated black schools
in CA after 1890. Indeed, Graaf et al. (2001, e.g., pages 14, 137) suggests that access to
relatively high-quality (Ayres, 1920), racially integrated public schools attracted many
Southern blacks to CA.43
De facto educational segregation of non-white minorities did take place in CA, though
less comprehensively than in the South (Hendrick, 1975; U.S. Commission on Civil Rights,
1977; Wollenberg, 1978; Graaf et al., 2001; Torres-Rouﬀ, 2012). The primary instruments
of segregation were “restrictive covenants” excluding non-whites from residential neigh41

Higgs (1978) argues that Alien Land Laws had little practical eﬀect on Asians due to a variety of
loopholes, though Azuma (1994) provides a case study suggesting otherwise.
42
Japanese students in San Francisco were not segregated. An attempt to segregate Japanese students
in San Francisco at the start of the 20th Century led to the Gentleman’s Agreement in 1907, in which
CA agreed not to segregate Japanese students, and Japan agreed to prevent further immigration of
Japanese laborers to the US (e.g., Wollenberg, 1978).
43
Consistent with the cited references, I find no documentation of any formally “black” schools in CA
in the following additional sources: “Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States” from every
available year 1928-1944 in which “Negro schools” are indicated with superscripts (Phillips and United
States Oﬃce of Education, 1929; Carr and United States Oﬃce of Education, 1930; United States
Oﬃce of Education, 1933; Carr and United States Oﬃce of Education, 1934; United States Oﬃce
of Education, 1937; Carr and of Education, 1939; United States Oﬃce of Education, 1943; Carr
and of Education, 1944), the “Directory of Secondary Day Schools” from years 1949 and 1952 (Rice
and United States Oﬃce of Education, 1949, 1952), the Sears Sacramento School Survey Volume
II (1928), Auditor’s annual financial reports 1924-42 for Los Angeles, Annual Report of the Fresno
Public Schools 1900-37, and Annual report of the public schools of the City and County of San
Francisco 1906-29.

31

borhoods along with “manipulation of school boundaries, the location of new schools, and
a selective transfer policy” (Hendrick, 1975, pg. 190-191). Los Angeles contains the only
pre-war survey of racial composition across de jure integrated schools, including Asians
and blacks, of which I am aware. This survey was conducted confidentially in 1938 by
the School Board and discussed in Hendrick (1975, pg. 194). I digitize and link this
survey to data on school inputs from annual financial reports (Board of Education of the
City of Los Angeles, 1938). Table A.1 characterizes schools attended by whites, blacks,
Hispanics and Asians (predominantly Japanese Americans) in these data. All minorities
attended schools containing many whites. While Asians attended schools with higher
white shares than blacks, group variation in class size and spending per pupil is minimal.
Why might Asians have gained greater access to predominantly white schools than other
minorities, despite similarly strong white prejudice against Asians? Evidence below suggests one reason: Asian and white children would have tended to possess similar cognitive
preparation for schooling, while blacks would have tended to lag behind and potentially
pose greater problems of classroom management.
Beyond San Francisco and Los Angeles, it is not likely that Asians faced dramatically
more favorable educational environments than blacks in pre-war CA. Asian and black
school-age children lived largely in the same counties in CA for most of the 20th century.44 And within counties Asians and blacks likely faced similar residential restrictions.
Two unverified sources report that 80% of homes in Southern CA were unavailable for
occupancy by blacks (U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 1973, pg. 4) or Asians (Lotchin,
2011, pg. 174, footnote 57); Mangum (1940, pg. 149) asserts that restrictions in CA
“generally include [Asians] as well as the Negro”; and many covenants quoted in publications exclude both blacks and Asians or all non-whites (e.g., Shelley v. Kraemer (334
US 1, 1948)). In San Francisco, Chinese apparently faced harsher residential restrictions
than blacks before WWII (Broussard, 1993, p. 31-32), though in Los Angeles residential restrictions appear to have aﬀected all non-whites from the early 20th century Sides
(2004, p. 17-18).
Finally, minorities tend to face more harsh educational segregation in places where
they compose a larger share of the local school-age population (e.g., Margo, 1990; Card
and Krueger, 1992b), and this factor would have disadvantaged Asians relative to blacks
in CA up through the 1940s.45
Many aspects of institutional discrimination against minorities in CA weakened after
1940 and well before the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964. In 1941, President Roosevelt
issued Executive Order 8802 prohibiting discrimination by race among government agen44

Over the 1920-40 period, Asians were slightly more concentrated in San Francisco and Sacramento,
and blacks were slightly more concentrated in Los Angeles, Alameda (Oakland) and San Diego. In
future research, it would be useful to compare exact residential patterns for blacks and Asians in CA
1900-1940, but processing residential address in the 100% census data for CA is beyond the scope of
this paper.
45
While Asians in CA were a larger share of local populations than blacks before 1940, they were still
very sparse compared to blacks in the South at this time. For example, black and white school
resource gaps were very large in Southern states in 1920 where black population shares exceeded
50%, but were nearly equal in states with black population shares under 10% (Card and Krueger,
1992b, Figure II). For comparison, in 1920 CA was 3.4% Asian.

32

cies and their contractors in defense industries, and related antidiscrimination Executive
Orders were issued by Presidents Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson. In 1943,
Congress overturned the Chinese Exclusion Acts and granted Chinese Americans eligibility for naturalization. In 1946, CA Governer Earl Warren repealed state laws permitting
segregated schooling of Asians and Native Americans after federal courts declared de jure
school segregation for Mexican Americans illegal under CA state law (Wollenberg 1974,
Mendez et al v. Westminister [sic] School District of Orange County, et al, 64 F.Supp.
544 (S.D. Cal. 1946), aﬃrmed, 161 F.2d 774 (9th Cir. 1947)). Also in 1946, 59% of CA
voters opposed strengthening the anti-Japanese Alien Land Law through Proposition
15, contrasting with only 25% of CA voters who had opposed a similarly anti-Japanese
proposition in 1920. In 1948 the US Supreme Court invalidated restrictive covenants
(Shelley v. Kraemer 334 US 1) and extended equal protection to “aliens ineligible to citizenship” in cases such as access to commercial licenses (Takahashi v. California Fish and
Game Commission, 334 US 410), while the CA Supreme Court struck down all state laws
barring inter-racial marriage (Perez v. Sharp, 32 Cal.2d 711). In 1952, the CA Supreme
Court declared all prior Alien Land Laws unconstitutional (Fujii v. California 38 Cal
2nd 718). CA legislators began introducing bills to prohibit racial and religious discrimination in employment starting in 1945, and in 1959 CA passed the Fair Employment
Practices Act prohibiting discrimination by employers, labor unions, and employment
agencies on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, or ancestry.
These changes before 1960 all would have tended to increase competition for minority
workers in the labor market by removing legal barriers to employment; by inducing
voluntary racial integration by firms and unions anticipating future legal developments
or seeking excuses to end costly exclusionary policies only valued by some whites; and
by eroding broad social norms required to sustain high levels of racial exclusion (e.g.,
Heckman and Payner, 1989; Donohue and Heckman, 1991). I am not able to pin down
causal eﬀects of any specific change in legislation or social norms on racial outcomes.
Rather, I argue that all these changes suggest a relaxation of previously severe labor
market restrictions on minority workers over the decades after 1940.
Asians may have had one advantage in their contemporary environment over blacks
in CA: ethnic community organizations such as the Chinese Six Companies and family
“clans,” and the Japanese Associations of America Daniels (1990). These organizations
lobbied on behalf of their communities at all levels of governments to curtail discriminatory legislation, with limited success. They also provided some social insurance and law
enforcement services, at points helped to screen potential migrants to comply with US
exclusion laws and home countries’ national interests, and in the Japanese case openly
advanced a cultural agenda of high educational attainment and model citizen behavior. It is diﬃcult to quantify the advantages imparted to Asians by these organizations.
However, blacks in CA also had many organizations serving similar purposes, including NAACP chapters, community groups, churches, and media outlets. Moreover, while
Asians may have benefitted from political support of their home countries, blacks in CA
benefitted more directly from the right to vote, which CA fully granted to black citizens
both de jure and de facto unlike many Southern states (Graaf et al., 2001).

33

B. Data Appendix
The decennial census is the only data set large enough and extending back far enough
in time to conduct detailed historical comparisons of Asians with other groups.46 I rely
primarily on census data from 1940-2000, when income and education are both available,
though also make limited use of censuses back to 1850 (Ruggles et al., 2015). I rely on
recently digitized 100% sample 1940 census data, making it possible to examine minorities
in pre-war CA and to match census data with test score data. I define “Asians” broadly
as Chinese, Japanese, and “Other Asian or Pacific Islander”, though most Asians up
through 1970 were Chinese or Japanese. Asians have been identified in the census race
variable through “enumerator observation” (1850-1950) and self-reporting (1960-2000) in
every year back to 1850.47
I focus on household annual labor earnings (head + spouse) as my primary measure of
income for several reasons: non-labor income is not available in the 1940 census, hourly
wages suﬀer from measurement error in reported hours48 (Baum-Snow and Neal, 2009);
both earnings of head and hourly wages do not capture total resources available for investments in children’s education; and household wages allow pooling of male and female
children on a comparable footing in order to maximize sample size. I confirm robustness
of my main results to all these decisions in Section 10. I estimate the relationship between
parental earnings and children’s education using the subset of children co-residing with
parents in their late twenties after most children have completed schooling, and adjust
for missing independent children using the method developed in Hilger (2016).49
I also make use of recently-discovered World War II enlistment data containing Army
General Classification Test (AGCT) scores for a large sample of enlistees in 1943 (Ferrie et al. (2012); also see Aaronson and Mazumder (2011); Carruthers and Wanamaker
(2016)). The AGCT was intended to measure “ability to learn” in the army environment
(not “innate” abilities) and contained 140-150 multiple-choice questions on vocabulary,
46

The Current Population Survey is another large, long-standing survey. For this paper, census data
are preferable to CPS data because the March CPS begins in 1962, only introduces “Asian/Pacific
Islander” to its racial classification in 1988, and excludes military and incarcerated individuals from
its sample.
47
Carter (2015) documents significant over- and under-counts of Chinese Americans in the 1940 full
count data at the national level, but not in California (she reports a 3% under-count of Chinese
Americans in California). The over-count problem is generally much more severe. I adjust for
this problem in the 1940 full count data by setting the race variable to missing for individuals
identified as Chinese (Japanese) in states where fewer than 30% of Chinese (Japanese) report “mother
tongue” of Chinese (Japanese). This results in dropping all Chinese Americans in Delaware, Ohio,
Kansas, Missouri, Alabama, North Carolina, Oklahoma, and Tennessee and all Japanese Americans in
Michigan, Minnesota, North Dakota, Alabama, Oklahoma, and Tennessee in 1940. This adjustment
has very little impact on national statistics because these states are a small share of all Asians in the
US at this time.
48
Neal (2006) imputes hours from CPS data, but the CPS does not separately identify Asians in its race
variable before 1988 and is too small to provide useful imputations for Asians in later years.
49
In Hilger (2016), I show that the method generates educational mobility statistics that match diﬀerent
mobility patterns across blacks and whites and time trends before the 1980s as measured in several
other survey datasets with complete parent-child linkages, and that correlate strongly with income
mobility variation across states after 1980 using tax data from Chetty et al. (2014).

34

arithmetic, and block counting. The test correlated strongly with IQ scores, displayed
high reliability and validity, strongly predicted in-service and post-service occupations,
and strongly correlated with satisfactory completion of military assignments. Importantly, the AGCT sample contains a positively selected sample of enlistees because the
test was only administered to individuals who passed brief preliminary examinations of
physical, educational, and emotional fitness (Bingham, 1946; Ginzberg, 1959). Overall,
only 73% of white enlistees and 53% of black enlistees took the AGCT.50 Low educational attainment and quality, roughly associated with sub-4th grade levels of literacy in
spoken and written English, accounted for most of this racial discrepancy, though discrimination by white examiners and possibly greater ambivalence toward military service
by blacks also played some role (Ginzberg, 1959; Smith, 2013).51 Despite lower initial
pass rates for blacks, the military and hence the AGCT test score sample deliberately
maintained racial balance by increasing the number of initial black enlistees (Ginzberg,
1959, p. 120).52 Therefore AGCT scores likely understate black-white gaps in education
and cognitive skills in the broader population, and this should be kept in mind when
discussing results below.
Despite these selection problems, this extraordinarily large sample of cognitive test
scores allows me to conduct three novel empirical exercises. First, I separately examine
test scores of Chinese, black and white enlistees born in the 1920s and living in CA in
1943, during a period when many Jim Crow laws were still in eﬀect.53 Second, I match
these test score data to 100% individual census data in 1940 to assess cross-sectional
eﬀects of individual test scores on earnings of young men. Third, I use test score and
earnings data separately on full unmatched samples to compare black-white test score
and earnings gaps across labor markets defined by state of residence and broad education
category.
I match AGCT and census data on exact state of birth, race, first name and last
name, and year of birth plus or minus one year.54 I obtain a match rate of nearly
40%, which is high by the standards of census matching, perhaps due to the short time
interval between the two datasets.55 Summary statistics for men in the 1940 census
50

Previous work making use of these test scores does not appear to recognize this selection problem.
Malcolm X, for example, claims to have feigned a mental disorder during his psychological examination
to avoid military service (X et al., 1992).
52
Pre-AGCT preliminary exams took place on one-day visits of potential enlistees to “induction stations.”
Only individuals passing these tests would return several weeks later to “reception centers” for multiple
days of more detailed testing including the AGCT intended to guide their occupational assignment in
the military (Hershey 1943, pg. 52-53 shows order of events, pg 50-51 documents share of whites and
blacks reaching reception centers for AGCT testing, also seeLew 1944; Ginzberg 1959). I have been
unable to obtain the rejection rate for Chinese enlistees; Ginzberg (1959, p. 120 footnote) claims the
military only published rejection rates for blacks and non-blacks separately.
53
Japanese Americans are almost entirely unrepresented among WWII enlistees in 1943 due to the
Japanese Internment policy following Pearl Harbor.
54
I drop individuals who would be under age 23 in 1940 to assure that most individuals are no longer
in school, and individuals with reported education under 5 years, which is the 2nd percentile of
education in this year.
55
For example, Long and Ferrie (2013); Abramitzky et al. (2014) match males across multiple decennial
censuses and obtain match rates around 10-15%.
51

35

sample, the 1943 enlistment records sample, and the matched data, for both US and
CA residents are presented in Table A.2. Chinese American men ages 18-38 represent
0.8% of all CA residents in both the 1940 census and the test score data, consistent with
overall composition of WWII servicemen (Smith, 1947). Blacks are over-represented in
the test score data among CA residents, but under-represented at the national level as
among servicemen generally (Smith, 1947). Some of this discrepancy between US and
CA samples may reflect rapid migration of blacks to CA between 1940 and 1943 (Graaf
et al., 2001). Overall, the test score data contain about 3% of men ages 18-38 in the
1940 census, both for the US and CA. Table A.2 also indicates that the matched sample
is fairly representative of the AGCT data. Test scores are slightly higher in the matched
sample, but similarly dispersed. Age, education, and race are also similar in the matched
sample, with the exception that I match almost no Chinese Americans, most likely due
to diﬃculties matching Chinese names. I therefore only examine Asians in unmatched
test score data.
Finally, in Section 3 and Appendix A I make use of novel historical datasets on school
inputs at a Chinese segregated school in San Francisco in the 1920s, data on school inputs
and racial composition of public schools in Los Angeles in 1938, narratives of workplace
discrimination contained in complaints filed to the federal Fair Employment Practices
Committee in CA during WWII, and new data on racial composition of individual firms
in the Bay Area in 1943 and 1944 gathered by the War Manpower Commission during
WWII and shared with the Fair Employment Practices Commission in CA.

C. Basic Historical Trends: Aggregate Time Series
In this appendix I plot national aggregate outcomes by race over all available years of
data, reweighted to match the white age and gender distribution in each year and restricting to ages 25-65. I focus on national trends with no further restrictions, rather
than trends restricting to those born in the US or in CA, because national trends may
have informed broader perceptions of Asian American history. To further illustrate the
importance of ancestral legacy, results in this section incorporate Native Americans as a
second “involuntary immigrant” group that has undergone multiple centuries of institutional discrimination in both human capital and labor markets (e.g., Page, 2004).
As discussed in the paper, these comparisons furnish useful historical context, but they
confound intergenerational group mobility with compositional changes from migration
(Borjas, 1987; Chen, 2011; Suzuki, 1995, 2002). Figure A.1 illustrates the magnitude
of this problem by plotting gross immigration flows into the US from various Asian
countries since 1820. The Chinese Exclusion Act, the Gentlemen’s Agreement, and the
1965 Immigration Act are all discernable. On the right-hand axis, the dashed line labeled
“Share” plots total Asian immigrant flows as a share of the total Asian population stock
in the US in the previous decade, and indicates that migration flows were large relative
to stocks even before the 1965 Immigration Act, and much larger thereafter. Returnmigration flows also aﬀect the composition of Asians between censuses (Suzuki, 1995).
Below I develop comparisons that partly address these problems.

36

Figure A.2a plots basic literacy rates (ability to read and write in any language) by
race and year, which captures some low minimum level of schooling.56 Asians had much
higher literacy rates than blacks and Native Americans in 1870, but this gap had closed by
1900. Figure A.2b plots average educational attainment by race and year. In every year
1940-2000, Asians exhibit significantly higher education than all other groups, followed
by whites, followed by blacks and Native Americans.
Figure A.3 plots log earnings of men 1940-2000. All three minorities reduce their
earnings gaps with whites after 1940. I also impute log earnings in earlier periods based
on occupation.57 Figure A.3b displays imputed log earnings of men from 1880-2000. All
minorities exhibit convergence toward whites over most of the last 150 years. However,
blacks and Native Americans do not display any clear convergence toward Asians in
actual or imputed earnings.
Table A.3 presents the most common occupation for each race by year, and sketches
out the diﬀerent occupational trajectories underlying Figure A.3b. In 1860-80, many
Asians were “mine operatives and laborers.” Later Asians tended to work on farms as
wage laborers, rather than tenants, again reflecting diﬀerences in regional economies.
Asians then worked in restaurants, laundries and other service industries before shifting
into more white-collar positions in late 20th century. In comparison, blacks and Native
Americans tended to work on farms as tenants after the Civil War, and have remained
in lower-skilled agriculture and manufacturing throughout the 20th century.
Unsurprisingly given the diﬀerent ancestral legacies discussed above, these aggregate
national trends characterize Asians as higher-skilled than other longstanding US minorities at every point over the past 150 years. The perception that Asians began their
history in the US disadvantaged by lower skills and earnings could potentially be true
relative to whites, but is not plausible when comparing Asians to blacks or Native Americans at the national level. In contrast, trends in human capital and earnings among the
CA-born are more consistent with this perception, as shown in Appendix Figures A.4A.5. Among the CA-born, Asians and blacks appear similarly disadvantaged in 1940,
but Asians rapidly overtake both blacks and whites in education and earnings over subsequent decades. Unfortunately, these figures also confound eﬀects of intergenerational
group mobility with time-varying selective migration, now to an even greater extent due
to inter-state migration of blacks and whites in addition to international migration of
Asians.

56

Only free blacks were asked about literacy by census enumerators through 1860, and only “taxed”
Native Americans were asked about literacy up through 1870. I therefore drop these observations
from the figure due to concerns about selection. A fire destroyed the 1890 census.
57
I follow Smith (1984) and Margo (1990) and impute earnings back to 1860 based on earnings in
occupations in 1940, allowing earnings to diﬀer by native-born status and restricting to men ages
25-65. I do not allow earnings to diﬀer by race within occupations in this imputation. By fixing
earnings within occupation the imputation provides a simple index of occupational quality. To
harmonize occupations across years I rely on the IPUMS variable OCC1950.

37

D. Testing Validity of Pseudo-Panels
I test the assumptions required to obtain valid pseudo-panels by testing for anomalous
changes in the size and gender composition of cohorts defined by place of birth.58 Appendix Figures A.6-A.7 plot log frequencies for these cohort-blocks born in the US and
CA, respectively. In a truly balanced pseudo-panel, cohort size weakly declines over
time due to death and out-migration. While I find this restriction is approximately satisfied in most cases, cohort size does increase between some censuses for some races.
These violations may reflect inconsistencies in census sampling techniques or individuals’
self-reported age, place of birth or race. However, the violations are typically small in
comparison to the large changes in Asian population size and composition displayed in
Figure A.1.59
I also assess the validity of these pseudo-panels by tracking their gender composition
over time. Earlier cohorts of Asians reporting US birth exhibit “excess” males due to
mass falsification of US nativity records by largely male Asian migrants after the destruction of immigration records in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, and possibly due
to widespread incentives to avoid restrictions on foreign-born Asians through false nativity papers (Bureau of the Census, 1914; Chang, 2004). If this “paper sons” phenomenon
somehow continued into later cohorts we would expect to see excess men or excess volatility of gender ratios. Appendix Figures A.8 and A.9 plot the share of men in each of these
cohorts and races for native-born and CA-born cohorts, respectively. The figures document a male share very close to 50%, falling slightly as cohorts age, which is exactly
the pattern that would arise from valid pseudo-cohorts due to the greater longevity of
women. While there are some anomalies for certain cohorts in certain years, the selected
pseudo-cohorts appear reasonable based on both stable frequencies and gender balance
over time.

58

These tests are not perfect because consistent cohort size may conceal changes in the composition of
the cohort from migration flows that cancel out on net.
59
Reweighting the pseudo-cohorts to maintain an internally-consistent age distribution over time has no
significant eﬀect on the results.

38

References
Aaronson, D. and B. Mazumder (2011): “The Impact of Rosenwald Schools on Black
Achievement,” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 821–888.
Abramitzky, R., L. P. Boustan, and K. Eriksson (2014): “A Nation of Immigrants: Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration,” Journal
of Political Economy, 122, 467–506.
Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (1999): “The Structure of Wages and Investment
in General Training,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 539–572.
Aigner, D. J. and G. G. Cain (1977): “Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor
Markets,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 30, 175–187.
Arrow, K. (1972): “Some Mathematical Models of Race in the Labor Market,” in Racial
Discrimination in Economic Life, ed. by A. H. Pascal, Lexington, MA: Lexington
Books.
Arrow, K. J. (1971): “Some Models of Racial Discrimination in the Labor Market,”
Rand Memorandum 6253-RC.
Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and A. B. Krueger (1998): “Computing Inequality:
Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113,
1169–1214.
Ayres, L. P. (1920): An Index Number for State School Systems, Department of education, Russell Sage foundation.
Azariadis, C. and A. Drazen (1990): “Threshold Externalities in Economic Development,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 501–526.
Azuma, E. (1994): “Japanese Immigrant Farmers and California Alien Land Laws: A
Study of the Walnut Grove Japanese Community,” California History, 73, 14–29.
Baert, S., B. Cockx, N. Gheyle, and C. Vandamme (2015): “Is There Less
Discrimination in Occupations Where Recruitment Is Diﬃcult?”
ILR Review,
0019793915570873.
Bain, D. H. (2000): Empire Express: Building the First Transcontinental Railroad, New
York: Penguin Books.
Barro, R. J. and X. Sala-i Martin (1992): “Convergence,” Journal of Political
Economy, 100, 223–251.
Bates, T. (1997): Race, Self-Employment, and Upward Mobility: An Illusive American
Dream, Woodrow Wilson Center Press.

39

Baum-Snow, N. and D. Neal (2009): “Mismeasurement of Usual Hours Worked In
the Census and ACS,” Economics letters, 102.
Becker, G. (1957): [1971] The Economics of Discrimination, Chicago: University Of
Chicago Press, 2nd edition ed.
Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1976): “Child Endowments and the Quantity and
Quality of Children,” Journal of Political Economy, 84, 143–162.
Bell, R. (1935): Public school education of second-generation Japanese in California,
California: Stanford University press.
Biddle, J. E. and D. S. Hamermesh (2013): “Wage discrimination over the business
cycle,” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 2, 7.
Bingham, W. V. (1946): “Inequalities in Adult Capacity From Military Data,” Science,
104, 147–152.
Board of Education of the City of Los Angeles (1938): “Controller’s Annual
Financial Report For the FIscal Year Ending June 30, 1938,” Tech. rep.
Bogardus, E. S. (1926): “Social Distance: A Measuring Stick,” The Survey, 169–171.
——— (1928): Immigration and race attitudes, D.C. Heath, google-Books-ID:
OdK5f9e6tukC.
——— (1959): Social distance, Los Angeles, Calif: The Antioch Press, oCLC: 611745527.
Bordalo, P., K. Coffman, N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2016): “Stereotypes,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Forthcoming.
Borjas, G. J. (1987): “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants,” The American
Economic Review, 77, 531–553.
——— (1992): “Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 107, 123–150.
——— (1993): “The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants,” Journal of Labor Economics, 11.
——— (1994): “Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skill DIﬀerentials: The Children and
Grandchildren of the Great Migration,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47,
553–573.
——— (1995): “Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human-Capital Externalities,” The
American Economic Review, 85, 365–390.
Branch, T. (1989): Parting the Waters : America in the King Years 1954-63, New
York: Simon & Schuster, reprint edition ed.

40

Brandt, L., D. Ma, and T. G. Rawski (2014): “From Divergence to Convergence:
Reevaluating the History Behind China’s Economic Boom,” Journal of Economic Literature, 52, 45–123.
Broussard, A. S. (1993): Black San Francisco: The Struggle for Racial Equality in the
West, 1900-1954, University Press of Kansas, google-Books-ID: jgwVAAAAYAAJ.
Bureau of the Census (1914): “Bulletin 127: Chinese and Japanese in the United
States, 1910,” Tech. rep.
Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (1993): “Comment on Trends in College Entry
among Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics by Robert M. Hauser,” in Studies of Supply and
Demand in Higher Education, ed. by C. T. Clotfelter and M. Rothschild, University
of Chicago Press, January, 61–120.
Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1992a): “Does School Quality Matter ? Returns to
Education and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States,” The Journal
of Political Economy, 100, 1–40.
——— (1992b): “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct Assessment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 151–200.
Caro, R. (1975): The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York, New
York: Vintage Books.
Carr, M. J. S. and U. S. O. of Education (1939): Accredited Secondary Schools in
the United States. Bulletin, 1939, No. 2, Oﬃce of Education, United States Department
of the Interior.
——— (1944): Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States, 1944. Bulletin, 1944,
No. 4, US Oﬃce of Education, Federal Security Agency.
Carr, M. J. S. and United States Office of Education (1930): Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States. Bulletin, 1930, No. 24, Oﬃce of Education, United
States Department of the Interior.
——— (1934): Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States. Bulletin, 1934, No.
17, Oﬃce of Education, United States Department of the Interior.
Carruthers, C. K. and M. H. Wanamaker (2016): “Separate and Unequal in the
Labor Market: Human Capital and the Jim Crow Wage Gap,” Journal of Labor Economics.
Carter, S. B. (2015): “A Note on the Classification of Chinese in the IPUMS Full-Count
Data Sets for 1880 and 1940,” Unpublished Note.
Chan, S. (1991): “The Exclusion of Chinese Women, 1870-1943,” in Entry Denied: Exclusion and the Chinese Community in America, 1882-1943, Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press, 94–146.

41

Chang, I. (2004): The Chinese in America: A Narrative History, London: Penguin
Books, reprint edition ed.
Chant, S. N. F. and S. S. Freedman (1934): “A quantitative comparison of the
nationality preferences of two groups,” The Journal of Social Psychology, 5, 116–120.
Charles, K. K. and J. Guryan (2008): “Prejudice and Wages : An Empirical Assessment of Becker’s The Economics of Discrimination,” Journal of Political Economy,
116, 773–809.
Chen, J. (2011): “Chinese Immigration to the United States: History, Selectivity and
Human Capital,” Working Paper.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014): “Where is the land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1553–1623.
Chiswick, B. R. (1983): “An Analysis of the Earnings and Employment of AsianAmerican Men,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1, 197–214.
——— (1988): “Diﬀerences in Education and Earnings Across Racial and Ethnic Groups:
Tastes, Discrimination, and Investments in Child Quality,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 103, 571.
Cloud, P. and D. W. Galenson (1987): “Chinese immigration and contract labor in
the late nineteenth century,” Explorations in Economic History, 24, 22–42.
——— (1991): “Chinese immigration: Reply to charles McClain,” Explorations in Economic History, 28, 239–247.
Conlisk, J. (1974): “Can Equalization of Opportunity Reduce Social Mobility?” The
American Economic Review, 64, 80–90.
Cooper, M. M. (2003): “Japanese American Wages, 1940-1990,” Ph.D. thesis, The
Ohio State University.
Cutright, P. (1973): Achievement, mobility, and the draft: their impact on the earnings
of men, U.S. Social Security Administration, Oﬃce of Research and Statistics.
Daniels, R. (1990): Asian America: Chinese and Japanese in the United States since
1850, Seattle: University of Washington Press, reprint edition ed.
Darity Jr., W., J. Dietrich, and D. K. Guilkey (1997): “Racial and Ethnic
Inequality in the United States: A Secular Perspective,” The American Economic
Review, 87, 301–305.
Dickens, W. T. and J. R. Flynn (2006): “Black Americans Reduce the Racial IQ
Gap Evidence From Standardization Samples,” Psychological Science, 17, 913–920.

42

Diner, H. R. (2006): The Jews of the United States, 1654 to 2000, Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Donohue, J. and J. Heckman (1991): “Continuous versus Episodic Change : The
Impact of Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks,” .
Duleep, H. O. and S. G. Sanders (2012): “The Economic Status of Asian Americans
Before and After the Civil Rights Act,” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2089668, Social
Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.
Duncan, B. and S. J. Trejo (2016): “The Complexity of Immigrant Generations:
Implications for Assessing the Socioeconomic Integration of Hispanics and Asians,”
Working Paper 21982, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ferrie, J. P., K. Rolf, and W. Troesken (2012): “Cognitive disparities, lead
plumbing, and water chemistry: Prior exposure to water-borne lead and intelligence
test scores among World War Two U.S. Army enlistees,” Economics & Human Biology,
10, 98–111.
Flynn, J. R. (1991): Asian Americans: Achievement Beyond IQ, Psychology Press,
google-Books-ID: H1lC6Dﬀ8y8C.
Frank, B. R. H. (1984): “Are Workers Paid their Marginal Products ?” The American
Economic Review, 74, 549–571.
Fryer, R. G. (2010): “Racial Inequality in the 21st Century : The Declining Significance
of Discrimination,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4.
Fryer, R. G. and S. D. Levitt (2006): “The Black-White Test Score Gap Through
Third Grade,” American Law and Economics Review, 8, 249–281.
——— (2013): “Testing for Racial Diﬀerences in the Mental Ability of Young Children,”
American Economic Review, 103, 981–1005.
Galor, O. and J. Zeira (1993): “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” The
Review of Economic Studies, 60, 35–52.
Gao, P. (2016): “The rise of education in China through the 20th century,” .
Ginzberg, E. (1959): The Lost Divisions, Columbia University Press, google-Books-ID:
ZXtijgEACAAJ.
Glaeser, E. L., J. A. Scheinkman, and B. I. Sacerdote (2003): “The Social
Multiplier,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1, 345–353.
Goldberg, M. S. (1982): “Discrimination, Nepotism, and Long-Run Wage Diﬀerentials,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 97, 307–319.
Gonzalez, J. (2011): Harvest of Empire: A History of Latinos in America, New York:
Penguin Books, revised edition ed.

43

Graaf, L. B. D., K. Mulroy, and Q. Taylor, eds. (2001): Seeking El Dorado:
African Americans in California, Los Angeles : Seattle: University of Washington
Press, first edition ed.
Guilford, J. P. (1931): “Racial Preferences of a Thousand American University Students,” Journal of Social Psychology, 2, 179–204.
Hartley, E. (1946): Problems in Prejudice, King’s Crown Press, google-Books-ID:
vsRODQEACAAJ.
Heckman, J. J. and B. S. Payner (1989): “Determining the Impact of Federal Antidiscrimination Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of South Carolina,”
The American Economic Review, 79, 138–177.
Hendrick, I. G. (1975): “Public Policy Toward the Education of Non-White Minority
Group Children in California, 1849-1970. Final Report.” Tech. rep., California University Riverside School of Education and National Institute of Education (DHEW),
Washington D.C.
Hershey, L. B. (1943): Selective service in wartime, 2d report of the Director of Selective Service, 1941-42., United States Selective Service System.
Higgs, R. (1977): “Firm-Specific Evidence on Racial Wage Diﬀerentials and Workforce
Segregation,” The American Economic Review, 67, 236–245.
——— (1978): “Landless by Law: Japanese Immigrants in California Agriculture to
1941,” The Journal of Economic History, 38, 205–225.
Hilger, N. G. (2016): “The Great Escape: Intergenerational Mobility in the United
States Since 1940,” Working Paper 21217, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hirschman, C. and M. G. Wong (1986): “The Extraordinary Educational Attainment of Asian-Americans: A Search for Historical Evidence and Explanations,” Social
Forces, 65, 1.
Hurst, M. (1997): “The determinants of earnings diﬀerentials for indigenous Americans:
Human capital, location, or discrimination?” The Quarterly Review of Economics and
Finance, 37, 787–807.
Hutchinson, E. P. (1947): “The Present Status of Our Immigration Laws and Policies,”
The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 25, 161.
Ichihashi, Y. (1932): Japanese in the United States, Arno Press, google-Books-ID:
aUznnQEACAAJ.
Jensen, R. (2002): “’No Irish Need Apply’: A Myth of Victimization,” Journal of Social
History, 36, 405–429.

44

Johnson, W. R. and D. Neal (1998): “Basic skills and the black-white earnings gap,”
The Black-White test score gap, 480–497.
Katz, D. and F. H. Allport (1931): Students’ attitudes, a report of the Syracuse
university reaction study, Syracuse, N.Y.
Katz, D. and K. W. Braly (1935): “Racial prejudice and racial stereotypes,” The
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 30, 175–193.
Kenny, K. (2006): “Violence, Race, and anti-Irish Sentiment in the Nineteenth Century,” in Making the Irish American: History and Heritage of the Irish in the United
States, ed. by J. J. Lee and M. Casey, New York: NYU Press, 289–301.
Kersey, V. (1933): “Biennial report of the California State Department of Education
for the school years ending June 30, 1931 and June 30, 1932, Part II,” .
Kristof, N. (2015): “The Asian Advantage,” The New York Times.
Lang, K. and J.-Y. K. Lehmann (2012): “Racial Discrimination in the Labor Market:
Theory and Empirics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 50, 959–1006.
Lee, E. (2005): At America’s Gates: Chinese Immigration during the Exclusion Era,
1882-1943, UNC Press.
Lee, J. and M. Zhou (2015): The Asian American Achievement Paradox, New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Leeuwen, B. v. (2007): Human Capital and Economic Growth in India, Indonesia,
and Japan: A Quantitative Analysis, 1890-2000, Box Press shop, google-Books-ID:
JAxpCWzpDuQC.
Leon, A. (2005): “Does ’Ethnic Capital’ Matter? Identifying Peer Eﬀects in the Intergenerational Transmission of Ethnic Diﬀerentials,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Lew, E. A. (1944): “Interpreting the Statistics of Medical Examinations of Selectees,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 39, 345–356.
Long, J. and J. Ferrie (2013): “Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Great
Britain and the United States Since 1850: Reply,” American Economic Review, 103,
2041–2049.
Lotchin, R. W. (2011): “Japanese Relocation in World War II and the Illusion of
Universal Racism,” Journal of The Historical Society, 11, 155–181.
Mangione, J. (1993): La Storia: Five Centuries of the Italian American Experience,
New York: Harper Perennial.
Mangum, C. S. (1940): The legal status of the Negro, Chapel Hill: The University of
North Carolina press.

45

Margo, R. A. (1990): Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic
History, Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 1 edition ed.
——— (2016): “Obama, Katrina, and the Persistence of Racial Inequality,” The Journal
of Economic History, 76, 301–341.
McClain, C. J. (1984): “The Chinese Struggle for Civil Rights in Nineteenth Century
America: The First Phase, 1850-1870,” California Law Review, 72, 529–568.
McKenzie, R. D., Institute of Pacific Relations. American Council, and
H. Institute of Pacific Relations. Conference (2nd : 1927 Honolulu
(1927): Oriental exclusion : the eﬀect of American immigration laws, regulations,
and judicial decisions upon the Chinese and Japanese on the American Pacific coast,
New York : American Group, Institute of Pacific Relations.
Mears, E. G. (1928): Resident Orientals on the American Pacific coast; their legal and
economic status, Chicago, Ill. : The University of Chicago Press.
Minnesota Population Center and Ancestry.com (2013): “IPUMS Restricted
Complete Count Data: Version 1.0 [Machine-readable database],” Tech. rep., University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
Murayama, Y. (1984): “Contractors, collusion, and competition: Japanese immigrant
railroad laborers in the Pacific Northwest, 1898-1911,” Explorations in Economic History, 21, 290–305.
Neal, D. (2006): “Chapter 9: Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?” in
Handbook of the Economics of Education, Elsevier, vol. 1, 511–576.
Neal, D. A. and W. R. Johnson (1996): “The Role of Premarket Factors in BlackWhite Wage Diﬀerences,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(5): 869–895.
Nordyke, E. C. and Y. S. Matsumoto (1977): “Japanese in Hawaii: a Historical
and Demographic Perspective,” .
Page, J. (2004): In the Hands of the Great Spirit: The 20,000-Year History of American
Indians, New York: Free Press, new edition edition ed.
Pfaelzer, J. (2008): Driven Out: The Forgotten War against Chinese Americans,
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Phillips, F. M. and United States Office of Education (1929): Accredited
Secondary Schools in the United States. Bulletin, 1928, No. 26, Bureau of Education,
Department of the Interior.
Ramsey, F. P. (1928): “A Mathematical Theory of Saving,” The Economic Journal, 38,
543–559.

46

Rappaport, J. (2005): “How does labor mobility aﬀect income convergence?” Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 29, 567–581.
Rediker, M. (2008): The Slave Ship: A Human History, New York: Penguin Books,
reprint edition ed.
Rice, M. C. and United States Office of Education (1952): Directory of secondary day schools, 1951-52: showing accredited status, enrollment, staﬀ, and other
data, Washington, D.C.: Federal Security Agency, Oﬃce of Education.
Rice, M. F. C. and United States Office of Education (1949): Directory of secondary schools in the United States, Circular (United States. Oﬃce of Education)250,
Washington: U. S. Govt. Print. Oﬀ.
Romer, P. M. (1986): “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy, 94, 1002–1037.
Rothstein, J. and N. Wozny (2014): “Permanent Income and the Black- White Test
Score Gap,” Journal of Human Resources, 48, 509–544.
Ruggles, S. J., K. Genadek, R. Goeken, J. Grover, and M. Sobek (2015): Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable database]., Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
San Francisco, California (1924): “Annual Report of the Public Schools of the City
and County of San Francisco,” Tech. rep.
Sides, J. (2004): L.A. City Limits: African American Los Angeles from the
Great Depression to the Present, University of California Press, google-Books-ID:
De1uGmvpw30C.
Smith, M. (1947): “Populational Characteristics of American Servicemen in World War
II,” The Scientific Monthly, 65, 246–252.
Smith, P. J. (1984): “Race and Human Capital,” The American Economic Review, 74,
685–698.
Smith, T. L. (2013): “4-F: The Forgotten Unfit of the American Military in World War
II,” Ph.D. thesis, Texas Woman s University.
Solon, G. (2015): “What Do We Know So Far about Multigenerational Mobility?”
Working Paper 21053, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Solow, R. M. (1956): “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70, 65–94.
Stephenson, G. T. (1910): Race distinctions in American law, New York: Association
Press.

47

Sue, S. and S. Okazaki (2009): “Asian-American educational achievements: A phenomenon in search of an explanation.” Asian American Journal of Psychology, S, 45–55.
Suzuki, M. (1995): “Japanese Immigrant Economic Achievement and Return Migration,
1920-1930,” The Journal of Economic History, 55, 889–901.
——— (2002): “Selective Immigration and Ethnic Economic Achievement: Japanese
Americans before World War II,” Explorations in Economic History, 39, 254–281.
Takaki, R. (1998): Strangers from a Diﬀerent Shore: A History of Asian Americans,
Updated and Revised Edition, Boston: Little, Brown and Company, revised and updated edition ed.
Taylor, P. S. (1928): Mexican labor in the United States Imperial Valley, Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Thurstone, L. L. (1927a): “A law of comparative judgment,” Psychological Review,
34, 273–286.
——— (1927b): “Psychophysical Analysis,” The American Journal of Psychology, 38,
368–389.
——— (1928): “An Experimental Study of Nationality Preferences,” The Journal of
General Psychology, 1, 405–425.
Torche, F. (2015): “Analyses of Intergenerational Mobility An Interdisciplinary Review,” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 657,
37–62.
Torres-Rouff, D. (2012): “Becoming Mexican: Segregated Schools and Social Scientists in Southern California, 1913-1946,” Southern California Quarterly, 94, 91–127.
Trejo, S. J. (1997): “Why Do Mexican Americans Earn Low Wages?” Journal of
Political Economy, 105, 1235–1268.
United States Office of Education (1933): Accredited Secondary Schools in the
United States. Supplement to Bulletin, 1930, No. 24, Oﬃce of Education, United States
Department of the Interior.
——— (1937): Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States. Supplement to Bulletin, 1934, No. 17, Oﬃce of Education, United States Department of the Interior.
——— (1943): Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States. Bulletin, 1942, No. 3.
Supplement to Bulletin, 1939, No. 2, US Oﬃce of Education, Federal Security Agency.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (1973): “Understanding Fair Housing,” Tech.
Rep. 42.
——— (1977): A generation deprived: Los Angeles school desegregation, Washington.

48

Washington, B. T. (1901): Up from Slavery: An Autobiography, Garden City, New
York: Doubleday & Company, Inc.
Wollenberg, C. (1974): “Mendez v. Westminster: Race, Nationality and Segregation
in California Schools,” California Historical Quarterly, 53, 317–332.
——— (1978): All Deliberate Speed: Segregation and Exclusion in California Schools,
1855-1975, University of California Press.
X, M., A. Haley, and A. Shabazz (1992): The Autobiography of Malcolm X: As Told
to Alex Haley, Ballantine Books, reissue edition ed.
Young, D. (1927): “Some eﬀects of a course in American race problems on the race
prejudice of 450 undergraduates at the University of Pennsylvania,” The Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 22, 235–242.

49

50
Table I: Racial Prejudice Against Blacks and Asians, 1926-56
Notes: Table presents ranking of blacks, Chinese and Japanese in various published studies exploiting survey data on racial
attitudes to construct measures of prejudice against groups. Ranking of 0 indicates minimum prejudice, and ranking of 1
indicates maximum prejudice. Where not otherwise noted, subjects in surveys are predominantly white Americans.
a Katz and Allport (1931) only include an abridged social distance survey reflecting willingness to accept various
nationalities/ethnicities into one’s fraternity/sorority at a college.
b Rankings for Hartley (1946) exclude fictional placebo nationalities (e.g. “Wallonian”), and groups that are not nationalities
(e.g., “Nazis”).
c Averages exclude New York University because sample is disproportionately Jewish American, and Howard University because
sample is disproportionately Black.

Table II: Institutional Discrimination Against Asians and Blacks in California
Notes: See Appendix A for discussion and sources underlying this table.

51

52
Table III: Educational Selection into Migration by Nationality/Race, 1940-2000
Notes: Numbers in table represent years of schooling rather than highest grade attained for both Chinese in China and
Japanese in Japan. Education of Chinese in China taken from Table 3 of Gao (2016). Education of Japanese in Japan taken
from Table A.7.1 of Leeuwen (2007). Education of all groups in US reflect highest grade attained. Chinese and Japanese “In
US” restrict to foreign-born to identify migrants who likely received education in country of origin. Blacks and whites “In
US” exclude residents of CA, while blacks and whites “In CA” include residents of CA who were born outside of CA in order
to identify “migrants” to CA.

53

Notes: Presents OCCSCORE for men living in CA, and men living in CA co-residing with their own children. “Percent
Diﬀerence” indicates the percent diﬀerence in average OCCSCORE between these two groups of men within race and year.
“Percent of Men in CA with Kids” indicates the share of men living in CA who are co-residing with own children.

Table IV: Occupational Selection into Fatherhood by Race, 1900-2000

54

Notes: Presents estimated log household earnings in steady state using parameter estimates in Table (A.4) and equation (2).
“Asian Education” assigns blacks the estimated intercept and slope of Asians’ conditional expectation of children’s education
with respect to parental income. “Asian Earnings” assigns blacks the estimated intercept and slope of Asians’ conditional
expectation of children’s earnings with respect to their education. “Asian Parental Income” refers to Asian mean parental
income. Estimates based on sample restricted to children born in CA.

Table V: Implications of Intergenerational Decomposition for Next Generation, Born in CA

Table VI: Mean WWII Enlistee Test Scores by Race and Schooling in 1943, CA
Notes: Table presents raw means of WWII enlistment test scores by race and broad
education category, restricting to enlistees reporting CA residence. Standard errors of
means in parantheses, sample sizes in brackets.

55

56

Notes: Dependent variable is log of annual earnings in all regressions. Sample matches AGCT data from 1943 WWII
enlistment records to earnings data from 1940 census 100% sample. Restricts to men over age 22 in 1940; almost all men in
sample between ages 22 and 35. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

Table VII: Log Earnings Regressions on AGCT Scores in 1940

57

Notes: Dependent variable is log of annual earnings in all regressions. “Market FE” indicates whether market fixed eﬀects are
included in the regression, where “market” is defined by state of residence and broad educational category (no high school,
some high school, high school graduate, any college). “Data Level” indicates whether regression is run on individual
microdata or data that has been collapsed to the level of market ⇥ race. “Dataset” indicates whether earnings and AGCT
scores taken from subsample of WWII enlistment records matched to 1940 100% census microdata, or whether earnings and
AGCT scores taken from complete unmatched datasets separately. All regressions restricts to men over age 22 in 1940;
almost all men in sample between ages 22 and 35. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

Table VIII: Earnings Regressions on AGCT Scores for State-Education Aggregates in 1940

Table IX: Various Outcomes for Parents of CA-Born Children by Race, 1900-2000
Notes: Sample restricts to parents ages 25-55 co-residing with CA-born children. All
cells reweighted within year to match age and sex distribution of black parents of
CA-born children. Total family income deflated with CPI-Urban for 2000. Missing
values indicate unavailability of variable in IPUMS census year.

58

59

Notes: Data on racial composition of schools obtained from 1938 survey described in text. Data on school inputs in 1938
obtained from Board of Education of the City of Los Angeles (1938). Spending per pupil converted into 2016 dollars using
the Consumer Price Index - Urban.

Table A.1: Average School Characteristics by Race in Los Angeles, 1938

Table A.2: Summary Statistics
Notes: Table presents summary statistics for three samples for all US residents and CA
residents. All samples restrict to men. “AGCT Sample” is the sample of WWII
enlistment records from 1943. “Census Sample” is 100% IPUMS census microdata for
1940. “AGCT-Census Match” is a match of these two prior datasets on first name, last
name, state of birth, race and year of birth plus or minus one year.

60

Table A.3: Top Occupation by Race, 1860-2000
Notes: Occupation shares calculated for men age 25-65, excluding residents of Alaska
and Hawaii. Each race reweighted to match age distribution of blacks in each year.

61

62

Notes: “Education Mobility” intercepts and slopes estimated from linear regressions of children’s highest grade attained by
ages 22-29 on parental log income, using data grouped at the year by race by parental log income decile level. No adjustment
is made for independent children. “Earnings” intercepts and slopes estimated from linear regressions of log household
earnings for heads age 25-65 on highest grade of schooling attained in cells defined by year, race, and highest grade attained.
Restricts to children born in CA. Probability weights are used to construct cell means, but no weights are used in the
regressions. All races reweighted to age and sex distribution of CA-born blacks in each year. Earnings deflated to 2011
dollars using CPI-Urban before taking logs. “Earnings” regressions drop bottom 2% of education distribution by race and
year. Intercepts reflect estimated values at minimum observed value of independent variable in collapsed, restricted sample,
as opposed to estimated values at zero.

Table A.4: Linear Decomposition Estimates, Born in CA

63

Notes: Presents estimated log household earnings in steady state using parameter estimates in Table (A.4) and equation (3).
“Asian Education” assigns blacks the estimated intercept and slope of Asians’ conditional expectation of children’s education
with respect to parental income. “Asian Earnings” assigns blacks the estimated intercept and slope of Asians’ conditional
expectation of children’s earnings with respect to their education. Estimates based on sample restricted to children born in
CA.

Table A.5: Implications of Intergenerational Decomposition in Steady State, Born in CA

800 − 13,194
446 − 800
300 − 446
100 − 300
37 − 100
No data

(a) Asian

20,000 − 81,403
5,000 − 20,000
1,500 − 5,000
500 − 1,500
54 − 500
No data

(b) Black

Figure I: Population of Native-Born Children Across US Counties, 1940
Notes: Children age 0-18, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

64

Child HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians
.6
.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6

Absolute
Convergence

21-37

21-37
21-37
21-37
21-37
31-47
21-37
41-57
31-47

.4

.6

31-47

21-37
31-47
41-57

51-67
41-57
31-47

Divergence:
Rich getting richer

.4

21-37

31-47
51-67
41-57

Divergence:
Reversals of Fortune

.8
1
1.2
Parental HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians

1.4

1.6

Whites, 1940 Cohort

Whites, 1960 Cohort

Whites, 1970 Cohort

Whites, 1980 Cohort

Blacks, 1940 Cohort

Blacks, 1960 Cohort

Blacks, 1970 Cohort

Blacks, 1980 Cohort

Figure II: Intergenerational Change in Household Earnings Ratios: Born in CA
Notes: Figure plots earnings ratios for parents of children age 1-17 in 1940, 1960, 1970
and 1980 on the x-axes, and earnings ratios for children in these 17-year cohort blocks
at later ages in subsequent censuses starting 20 years in the future when children are
ages 21-37, up to maximum ages of 51-67. All earnings ratios are plotted with respect
to Asians of the same ages in the same parent and child groups. Household earnings
plots earnings of head and spouse, counting absence of spouse as zero spousal earnings.
Households with zero total earnings excluded from estimates. Points above 1 on the
x-axis imply parents of age 1-17 year olds in a group are richer than Asian parents of age
1-17 year olds in the same year, and points above 1 on the y-axis imply a group’s children
in later censuses are richer than Asian children in later censuses. Points in the shaded
area indicate that a group’s children’s income has converged toward Asian children’s
income from larger group income gaps of parents. Points below the shaded area indicate
that a group is either falling further behind Asians intergenerationally (“Rich getting
richer”) or has been overtaken by Asians intergenerationally (“Reversal of fortune”).

65

.3
.2
Mass
.1
0

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
Household Earnings Decile
White

Black

8

9

10

9

10

Asian

0

.05

Mass
.1

.15

.2

(a) Born in US

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
Household Earnings Decile
White

Black

8
Asian

(b) Born in CA

Figure III: Parental Income Distribution for Native-Born by Race, 1940
Notes: Figures plot the probability mass functions for total parental income deciles of
native-born children under age 18 in 1940. Deciles calculated over full US population,
and therefore held fixed across races and locations.

66

14
13
Highest Grade Completed
7
8
9 10 11 12
6
5

7

8

9
Log Parental Income
White

10

Black

11
Asian

5

6

Highest Grade Completed
7
8
9 10 11 12

13

14

(a) Born in US, 1940

7

8

9
Log Parental Income
White

10

Black

11
Asian

8

9

Highest Grade Completed
10 11 12 13 14 15

16

17

(b) Born in CA, 1940

8

9

10
Log Parental Income
White

Black

11

12
Asian

(c) Born in CA, 1980

Figure IV: Educational Attainment by Log Parental Income
Notes: Hawaii and Alaska excluded. Figure adjusts for independent children and pools
ages 22-29. Log parental income calculated as sum of head and spouse earnings over full
population age 25-65.

67

Average Log Household Earnings
8.8
9
9.2 9.4 9.6 9.8 10 10.2
8.6

5

6

7

8

9
10
11
12
13
Highest Grade Completed
White

14

Black

15

16

17

Asian

9.4

Average Log Household Earnings
9.6 9.8 10 10.2 10.4 10.6 10.8

11

(a) 1940

9

10

11

12
13
14
Highest Grade Completed
White

Black

15

16

17

Asian

(b) 1980

Figure V: Log Household Earnings by Highest Grade Attained: Born in CA
Notes: Restricts to CA-born ages 25-65. Reweights all groups to age and sex distribution
of CA-born blacks in each year. Earnings deflated using CPI-Urban to 2011 dollars.

68

.6
.5
.4
Density
.3
.2
.1
0

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
Z-Score on Enlistment Test

White

Black

2

3

4

Asian

Figure VI: WWII Enlistment Test Score Distributions by Race in 1943, CA
Notes: Figure plots distributions of residuals from regression of normalized test scores
on complete sets of education and age dummies. Restricts to native-born men ages 25-38
living in CA.

69

.2
0
-.2
-.4
-.6

Black-White Log Earnings Gap

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Actual

White Parental Income

White Educational Mobility

White Earnings

0
-.2
-.4
-.6

Black-White Log Earnings Gap

.2

(a) Imputing White Earnings Components to Blacks

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Actual

Asian Parental Income

Asian Educational Mobility

Asian Earnings

(b) Imputing Asian Earnings Components to Blacks

Figure VII: Counterfactual Black-White Log Earnings Gaps in CA, 1940-2000
Notes: Figure presents simulated black-white log earnings gaps using estimates of the
four parameters in Equation (2) for each race r and each generation t, ↵r,t , r,t , r,t , ✓r,t as
shown in Table V, as well as mean parental income E [yr,t 1 ]. “Earnings” refers to log of
household earnings (head + spouse). “Actual” predicts black-white earnings gaps using
estimated parameters for each racial group. “White Parental Income” assigns to blacks
the white parental income distribution. “White Educational Investments” assigns to
blacks the white conditional expectation of children’s education with respect to parental
income. “White Earnings” assigns to blacks the white expectation of household earnings
condional on education. Panel (b) repeats this but assigns these respective components
from Asians to blacks. All estimates restrict to “children” born in CA.
70

.2
-.2
-.4
-.6
-1

-.8

Log Earnings Gap

0

Earnings_Gap =
-.083 [.086] + .46 [.087] * Score_Gap

-2

-1.6
No High School

-1.2
-.8
Test Score Gap
Some High School

-.4

High School Degree

0
Any College

Figure VIII: Black-White Earnings and Skill Gaps by State and Education Level in 1940
Notes: Figure plots log earnings gaps by skill gaps at the level of broad educational
group and state of residence for men ages 23-45. Earnings gaps defined as log earnings of
whites minus log earnings of blacks. Cells with fewer than 30 individual blacks omitted
from figure. Education groups are no high school, some high school, high school degree,
and any college. Test scores normalized into z-score in microdata before construction of
score gaps at the state-education level.

71

2

800

0

0

.5

1
Share

1.5

Immigration (1000s)
200
400
600

1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
Year
China

Japan

Hong Kong

Korea

Philippines

Vietnam

Other Asia

Share

Figure A.1: Gross Immigration into US from Various Asian Countries, 1821-1991
Notes: Data on immigration flows taken from Department of Homeland Security, Yearbook of Immigration Statistics 2003. “Share” divides number of new Asian immigrants
arriving between year T-10 and year T by total number of Asians present in the US in year
T-10. Data on stock of Asians from census data, adjusted to include Japanese in Hawaii
as reported in Table I in Nordyke and Matsumoto (1977). Immigration totals include
“foreign nationals who, during a fiscal year, were granted lawful permanent residence
(i.e., admitted as immigrants or became legal permanent residents), were admitted into
the United States on a temporary basis (e.g., tourists, students, or workers), applied for
asylum or refugee status, or were naturalized.” No adjustment made for undocumented
immigration.

72

1
.8
Percent Literate
.6
.4
.2

1870

1880

1890

White

1900
Year

Black

1910
Asian

1920

1930

Native American

7

8

Highest Grade Attained
9 10 11 12 13

14

15

(a) Percent Literate, 1880-1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year
White

Black

Asian

Native American

(b) Highest Grade Attained, 1940-2000

Figure A.2: Human Capital by Race, 1880-2000
Notes: Literacy defined as ability to read and write in any language. Figure restricts to
ages 25-65 and excludes residents of Alaska and Hawaii. All races reweighted to match
age and sex distribution of blacks in every year.

73

10.5
10
9.5
8.5

9

Log Earnings

1940

1950
White

1960

1970
Year

Black

1980
Asian

1990

2000

Native American

9.8
9.6
9.4
9.2
9

Imputed Log of Earnings

10

(a) Log Earnings, 1940-2000

1880

1900
White

1920

1940
Year

Black

1960
Asian

1980

2000

Native American

(b) Imputed Log Earnings, 1880-2000

Figure A.3: Log Earnings of Men, 1880-2000
Notes: Panel (a) plots average log male earnings age 25-65 by race and year. Panel
(b) plots average imputed log male earnings age 25-65 by race and year, with imputation based on earnings in 1940 averaged by cells defined by OCC1950 and native-born
status, excluding observations with zero earnings or missing occupation, and restricting
to household heads. Residents of Hawaii and Alaska excluded and races reweighted to
match age distribution of blacks in every year.

74

1
.8
Percent Literate
.6
.4
.2

1870

1880
White

1890

1900
Year

Black

1910
Asian

1920

1930

Native American

7

8

Highest Grade Attained
9 10 11 12 13

14

15

(a) Percent Literate, 1880-1930

1940

1950
White

1960

1970
Year

Black

1980
Asian

1990

2000

Native American

(b) Highest Grade Attained, 1940-2000

Figure A.4: Human Capital by Race, CA-Born 1880-2000
Notes: Restricting to individuals born in California. Literacy defined as ability to read
and write in any language. Figure restricts to ages 25-65 and excludes residents of Alaska
and Hawaii. All races reweighted to match age and sex distribution of blacks in every
year.

75

10.5
10
9.5
8.5

9

Log Earnings

1940

1950
White

1960

1970
Year

Black

1980
Asian

1990

2000

Native American

9.5
9
8.5

Imputed Log of Earnings

10

(a) Log Earnings, 1940-2000

1880

1900
White

1920

1940
Year

Black

1960
Asian

1980

2000

Native American

(b) Imputed Log Earnings, 1880-2000

Figure A.5: Log Earnings of Men, CA-Born 1880-2000
Notes: Restricting to individuals born in California. Panel (a) plots average log male
earnings age 25-65 by race and year. Panel (b) plots average imputed log male earnings
age 25-65 by race and year, with imputation based on earnings in 1940 averaged by cells
defined by OCC1950 and native-born status, excluding observations with zero earnings or
missing occupation, and restricting to household heads. Residents of Hawaii and Alaska
excluded and races reweighted to match age distribution of blacks in every year.

76

18
17.8

1-17

11-27
1-17

21-37

11-27

11-27

21-37
1-17

31-47

41-57

21-37
31-47
11-27

31-47
41-57
21-37

51-67
61-77

16.8

17

Log of Frequency
17.2 17.4 17.6

1-17

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

16

(a) White
11-27
1-17
1-17
1-17

21-37

Log of Frequency
15
15.5

11-27

1-17

11-27
21-37
31-47

31-47
21-37
41-57

11-27
21-37

41-57
31-47

51-67

14.5

61-77

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

13.5

(b) Black

13

11-27

Log of Frequency
12
12.5

21-37
31-47

11-27
1-17
21-37
1-17

11.5
1-17

1940

11-27

31-47
41-57

11-27

31-47

11

21-37

1-17

41-57

51-67

21-37

61-77

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

(c) Asian

Figure A.6: Log Frequencies of Pseudo-Cohorts: Born in US
Notes: Figure plots log of frequencies by race for cohorts of native-born individuals age
1-17 in in 1940, 1960, 1970, 1980.

77

15.5
14

Log of Frequency
14.5
15

1-17
1-17

11-27

21-37

31-47

11-27
1-17
21-37

21-37
11-27
31-47

31-47
21-37
41-57

1-17
11-27

41-57

51-67

13.5

61-77

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

1-17

1-17

1-17
11-27

11-27
21-37

21-37
31-47

11-27

21-37

31-47

41-57

31-47
41-57
1-17

11-27

21-37

51-67
61-77

9.5

Log of Frequency
10 10.5 11 11.5 12 12.5 13 13.5

(a) White

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

12.5

(b) Black

11-27
21-37

Log of Frequency
11.5
12

1-17
21-37

31-47

11-27
1-17
31-47
21-37

1-17

41-57

11

11-27

11-27

31-47

21-37

41-57

51-67
61-77

10.5

1-17

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

(c) Asian

Figure A.7: Log Frequencies of Pseudo-Cohorts: Born in CA
Notes: Figure plots log of frequencies by race for cohorts of individuals born in CA ages
1-17 in 1940, 1960, 1970, 1980.

78

.6
.55
Share Male
.5

1-17
11-27
31-47

1-17
11-27

21-37
1-17

1-17
11-27
21-37
41-57

11-27
21-37
31-47

21-37
31-47
41-57

51-67

.4

.45

61-77

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

Share Male
.5

.55

.6

(a) White

1-17

1-17

1-17

11-27

11-27

11-27
11-27

1-17

21-37

.45

21-37
31-47

21-37
31-47

21-37
31-47
41-57

41-57
51-67

.4

61-77

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

1-17

11-27

1-17
11-27
31-47

21-37
1-17

1-17
11-27
21-37

11-27
21-37
31-47
51-67

21-37
31-47
41-57

41-57
61-77

.4

.45

Share Male
.5

.55

.6

(b) Black

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

(c) Asian

Figure A.8: Male Share in Pseudo-Cohorts: Born in US
Notes: Figure plots male share by race for cohorts of native-born individuals age 1-17 in
1940, 1960, 1970, 1980.

79

.6
.55

11-27

1-17
11-27

21-37
1-17

31-47

1-17
11-27
21-37
41-57

11-27
31-47
21-37
51-67

21-37
31-47
41-57
61-77

.4

.45

Share Male
.5

1-17

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

1-17

1-17
11-27

1-17
11-27

1-17
41-57
11-27
21-37

21-37

.45

Share Male
.5

.55

.6

(a) White

11-27
21-37
31-47

21-37
31-47
41-57
61-77

51-67

.4

31-47

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

1-17

11-27
1-17

11-27

31-47

21-37
1-17

1-17
11-27
41-57
21-37

11-27
21-37
31-47

21-37
31-47
41-57

51-67
61-77

.4

.45

Share Male
.5

.55

.6

(b) Black

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Age 1-17 in 1940
Age 1-17 in 1970

Age 1-17 in 1960
Age 1-17 in 1980

(c) Asian

Figure A.9: Male Share in Pseudo-Cohorts: Born in CA
Notes: Figure plots male share by race for cohorts of individuals born in CA ages 1-17
in 1940, 1960, 1970, 1980.

80

Child HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians
.6
.8
1
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

31-47
21-37

21-37

21-37
31-47

21-37
31-47
41-57

41-57
51-67

.4

21-37
31-47
21-37
41-57
31-47
51-67
21-37
21-37
41-57
31-47

.4

.6

.8
1
1.2
1.4
Parental HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians

1.6

1.8

Whites, 1940 Cohort

Whites, 1960 Cohort

Whites, 1970 Cohort

Whites, 1980 Cohort

Blacks, 1940 Cohort

Blacks, 1960 Cohort

Blacks, 1970 Cohort

Blacks, 1980 Cohort

Child HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians
.6 .8
1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2

(a) Born in US

21-37
31-47

21-37
21-37
21-37
31-47
21-37
41-57
31-47

.6

.8

21-37
31-47
21-37

51-67
41-57

21-37
31-47
41-57

31-47
51-67
41-57

1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Parental HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians

2

2.2

Whites, 1940 Cohort

Whites, 1960 Cohort

Whites, 1970 Cohort

Whites, 1980 Cohort

Blacks, 1940 Cohort

Blacks, 1960 Cohort

Blacks, 1970 Cohort

Blacks, 1980 Cohort

(b) Born in CA

Figure A.10: Intergenerational Change in Earnings Ratios, with Imputations
Notes: Replicates Figure II using household earnings with imputations for zero and
missing values as described in text.

81

.2
0
-.2
-.4

Black-White Log Earnings Gap

-.6

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Actual

White Parental Income

White Educational Mobility

White Earnings

0
-.2
-.4
-.6

Black-White Log Earnings Gap

.2

(a) Assign White Components to Blacks

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year
Actual

Asian Parental Income

Asian Educational Mobility

Asian Earnings

(b) Assign Asian Components to Blacks

Figure A.11: Counterfactual Black-White Log Earnings Gaps in CA, 1940-2000
Notes: Replicates Figure VII using household earnings with imputations for zero and
missing values as described in text.

82

Child HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians
.6
.8
1
1.2
1.4

21-37
21-37

21-37
31-47
41-57
31-47

21-37
31-47
41-57
51-67

21-37
21-37
21-37

.4

41-57
51-67
31-47
21-37
31-47
41-57 31-47

.4

.6

.8
1
1.2
Parental HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians

1.4

Whites, 1940 Cohort

Whites, 1960 Cohort

Whites, 1970 Cohort

Whites, 1980 Cohort

Blacks, 1940 Cohort

Blacks, 1960 Cohort

Blacks, 1970 Cohort

Blacks, 1980 Cohort

Child HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians
.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8

(a) Born in US

21-37
21-37
21-37
31-47
41-57
31-47
21-37

.6

21-37
31-47
41-57 31-47

.6

.8

31-47
51-67
21-37
41-57

51-67
21-37
41-57
31-47

1
1.2
1.4
Parental HH Earnings Ratio w.r.t. Asians

1.6

1.8

Whites, 1940 Cohort

Whites, 1960 Cohort

Whites, 1970 Cohort

Whites, 1980 Cohort

Blacks, 1940 Cohort

Blacks, 1960 Cohort

Blacks, 1970 Cohort

Blacks, 1980 Cohort

(b) Born in CA

Figure A.12: Intergenerational Change in Individual Earnings Ratios
Notes: Replicates Figure II using fathers’ and sons’ earnings rather than total household
earnings.

83

