                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    MINIMUM PAYMENTS AND DEBT PAYDOWN IN CONSUMER CREDIT CARDS

                                      Benjamin J. Keys
                                        Jialan Wang

                                     Working Paper 22742
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22742


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2016




This research was conducted while Jialan Wang was an employee at the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the United States, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper would not have been possible without the tireless efforts of
Stefano Sciolli in building the CCDB. We also thank Marla Blow, Marieke Bos, Sebastien
Bradley, James Choi, Jane Dokko, Eric Johnson, Damon Jones, Neale Mahoney, David
Silberman, Victor Stango, Jeremy Tobacman, and numerous seminar and conference participants
for helpful comments and suggestions. Tim Fang and Becky Spavins provided outstanding
research assistance, while Zach Luck provided valuable legal research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Benjamin J. Keys and Jialan Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer Credit Cards
Benjamin J. Keys and Jialan Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 22742
October 2016
JEL No. D14,G02,G21,G28

                                          ABSTRACT

Using a dataset covering one quarter of the U.S. general-purpose credit card market, we
document that 29% of accounts regularly make payments at or near the minimum payment. We
exploit changes in issuers' minimum payment formulas to distinguish between liquidity
constraints and anchoring as explanations for the prevalence of near-minimum payments. Nine to
twenty percent of all accounts respond more to the formula changes than expected based on
liquidity constraints alone, representing a lower bound on the role of anchoring. Disclosures
implemented by the CARD Act, an example of one potential policy solution to anchoring,
resulted in fewer than 1% of accounts adopting an alternative suggested payment. Based on back-
of-envelope calculations, the disclosures led to $62 million in interest savings per year, but would
have saved over $2 billion per year if all anchoring consumers had adopted the new suggested
payment. Our results show that anchoring to a salient contractual term has a significant impact on
household debt.


Benjamin J. Keys
Department of Real Estate
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
benkeys@wharton.upenn.edu

Jialan Wang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Department of Finance
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street MC-706
Champaign, IL 61820
jialanw@illinois.edu
                                                                                                                 2


I    Introduction

Borrowing and repayment choices have significant impacts on the path and level of consumption

over the lifecycle, but relatively little is known about how consumers make these decisions in many

large debt markets. With $712 billion in total outstanding balances as of May 2016, credit cards

represent one of the largest sources of liquidity for household consumption in the United States.

In this paper, we examine the drivers of debt repayment in a dataset covering 25% of the U.S.

general-purpose credit card market.

    In particular, we focus on the role of minimum payments. Minimum payments indicate the

smallest payment necessary to remain current on an account in a given month, and are dictated

by formulas under the discretion of credit card issuers.1 Anecdotal and experimental evidence

suggest that minimum payments may affect payment choices due to anchoring, a bias toward

salient (but sometimes irrelevant) cues.2 Because the minimum payment is a lower bound on

the optimal payment amount for the vast majority of consumers, anchoring would downwardly

bias payment amounts and lead to suboptimally high debt levels, lower average consumption, and

greater consumption volatility for affected consumers. To our knowledge, ours is the first empirical

study to estimate the economic significance of anchoring in the credit card market.

    We analyze the effect of minimum payments on payment decisions using the CFPB credit card

database (CCDB), which contains the near-universe of credit card accounts for a number of large

U.S. credit card issuers.3 The CCDB includes monthly account-level data from 2008 through 2013,

and is merged to credit bureau data that provides an overview of each borrower’s credit portfolio on

a quarterly basis. We observe the exact amounts of minimum and actual payments in each month,
   1
     Regulatory rules and guidance set some boundaries on the disclosure and amortization schedule of minimum
payments, but issuers exercise substantial discretion within these boundaries. Typical minimum payments are between
1-4% of the balance. Alongside the full statement balance, minimum payments are prominently featured at the top
of credit card statements, in the payment slip, and on online and mobile payment interfaces.
   2
     Thaler and Sunstein (2008) write that minimum payments “can serve as an anchor, and as a nudge that this
minimum payment is an appropriate amount.” Stewart (2009) shows that including a minimum payment on hypo-
thetical credit card statements significantly decreases payment size. Navarro-Martinez, Salisbury, Lemon, Stewart,
Matthews and Harris (2011) find that hypothetical statements with higher minimum payments result in lower average
payments, and Hershfield and Roese (2014) find evidence that including both a minimum payment and three-year
payment amount disclosure similar to that required by the CARD Act leads to lower payments than presenting only
one payoff scenario.
   3
     The CCDB is confidential supervisory information, and the statistics in this paper have been aggregated to
maintain the confidentiality of both issuers and consumers in the underlying data. We omit information about the
total number of issuers and exact samples sizes included in the analysis to preserve confidentiality. Confidential
supervisory information has only been shared in aggregated form with Benjamin Keys.
                                                                                                  3


and can track accounts over time. Thus, the database allows us to estimate the high-frequency

effects of policy changes and control for both account fixed effects and a rich set of time-varying

characteristics.

   We divide our empirical analysis into three sections. First, we describe consumer payment

behavior by classifying accounts based on their history of payments relative to the minimum pay-

ment and the full balance. We find that 29% of accounts pay exactly or close to (i.e. within $50

of) the minimum in most months. The remainder either pay in full most of the time or make a

mix of intermediate payment amounts. Neither individual income nor age strongly correlate with

payment behavior, but both credit score at origination and account balance are correlated with

the propensity to make near-minimum payments. The large fraction of accounts paying close to

the minimum provides prima facie evidence that either many consumers are liquidity constrained

at amounts that happen to be near the minimum, or that repayment decisions are influenced by

anchoring.

   A key challenge with interpreting the role of minimum payments is that they are both a potential

anchor and a corner solution. Consumers who fail to pay the minimum incur substantial late fees

and can also face penalty interest rates, credit score damage, and credit supply reductions. These

penalties provide strong incentives for liquidity-constrained borrowers to pay at least the minimum.

Nonetheless, some consumers whose optimal repayment is higher than the minimum may underpay

due to anchoring. Without detailed information on consumers’ wealth and income dynamics, it is

difficult to disentangle these two effects.

   We address this challenge in the second part of our empirical analysis, which takes advantage of

the fact that several issuers changed their minimum payment formulas during the sample period. We

start with a simple framework for interpreting how formula changes should affect the distribution

of payments. Our identifying assumption is that liquidity-constrained borrowers should respond to

a formula increase by either bunching mechanically at the new minimum or becoming delinquent if

they are sufficiently constrained. In contrast, some anchoring borrowers may choose to always pay

a certain amount more than the minimum regardless of changes in its dollar value. This framework

allows us to estimate the fraction of anchoring consumers by measuring the degree of bunching at

the minimum payment before and after formula changes.
                                                                                                             4


      We implement our estimates using a difference-in-differences approach based on the four in-

creases and one decrease in minimum payment formulas observed in our sample, including accounts

from several issuers that did not change their formulas as controls. Consistent with the presence of

anchoring, we find a 9 to 20% gap in the degree of observed bunching at the new minimum payment

compared to what is expected based on liquidity constraints alone. This estimate is a lower bound

for the fraction of anchoring accounts, since it does not include consumers who move from exactly

the old to exactly the new minimum in strict adherence to the anchor. Most of the anchoring effect

occurs immediately when the formulas change, and the effect is observed for both formula increases

and decreases. A significant fraction of accounts anchor to the minimum payment across the credit

score spectrum and within each quartile of income and age. Changes in the minimum payment are

not associated with changes in card usage or delinquency in our sample.

      One potential way to de-bias anchoring consumers while preserving liquidity for constrained

consumers is through disclosures or “nudges” that encourage higher payments. The third and final

part of our empirical analysis explores the effect of one such disclosure required by the Credit Card

Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (CARD) Act of 2009. The disclosure was mandated

on more than half of all statements, and presents a calculation of the payment needed to amortize

the outstanding balance in three years. Exploiting regulatory rules that exempt some consumers

from receiving the disclosure, we estimate the effects of this policy change using a difference-in-

differences framework.4

      In contrast to the large fraction of accounts that anchor to the minimum payment, we find

that fewer than 1% of accounts adopt the three-year repayment amount, and the effect decays by

one-third within one year. The modest effects we observe could be due to a number of factors.

First, the substantial fraction of consumers who make online or mobile payments without opening

their statements never observe the new disclosure. Second, those who do view the disclosure may

not find it to be salient among other information present on statements, and it may not have

remained salient during the lag between viewing the statement and making a payment.5 Finally,
  4
     In related work, Agarwal, Chomsisengphet, Mahoney and Stroebel (2015) compare repayment patterns across
personal and small business cards, which were differentially impacted by the CARD Act, to analyze the impact of
this three-year payment calculation.
   5
     Based on conversations with industry participants, many consumers who continue to receive paper statements
make payments online. Thus, consumers may not remember the information on the disclosures by the time they
make their payments.
                                                                                                                  5


the minimum payment, which is still present on all statements, may continue to exert a stronger

influence than the three-year repayment amount. Although we cannot disentangle the relative

importance of these potential explanations, the results show that a prominent policy change aimed

at de-biasing consumers failed to yield a large economic effect relative to the influence of anchoring.

       We conduct a back-of-envelope estimate of the economic significance of anchoring by comparing

the observed effects of the disclosure to the counterfactual effect if all anchoring consumers had

adopted the new suggested payment. We estimate that in steady-state, the disclosures reduced

interest payments by a total of $62 million per year marketwide, given the distribution of customers

in 2013. In contrast, if the disclosures had caused all anchoring consumers to move from the

minimum payment to the three-year repayment amount, total interest costs would have declined

by between $2.7 and $4.7 billion.

       Our findings contribute to and build connections between three strands of literature, which focus

on the regulation of consumer financial markets, the role of anchoring in real-world decision-making,

and the effects of default options on household balance sheets. In particular, Campbell (2016)

presents a framework for consumer financial regulation based on the observation that a sizable share

of households behave suboptimally when interacting with retail financial markets. The literature

on behavioral biases and credit use proposes a number of factors that could lead consumers to take

on too much debt relative to rational benchmarks, including hyperbolic discounting, naivete, and

cost misperception.6 Our paper outlines one source of suboptimal decision-making, highlights the

importance of the repayment margin of credit use, and estimates several of the key parameters laid

out by Campbell (2016) as applied to the optimal regulation of payment structures for revolving

debt.7

       Although a substantial psychological literature starting from Tversky and Kahneman (1974)

shows that anchoring can significantly affect individual responses in laboratory experiments, ours
   6
     On naivete and hyperbolic discounting, see Ausubel (1991), Angeletos, Laibson, Repetto, Tobacman and Wein-
berg (2001), Della Vigna and Malmendier (2004), Shui and Ausubel (2004), Skiba and Tobacman (2008), Heidhues
and Kőszegi (2010), and Kuchler (2015). On cost misperception, see Stango and Zinman (2009) and Bertrand
and Morse (2011). A related literature examines the role of adverse selection in consumer choices (e.g. Agarwal,
Chomsisengphet, and Liu 2010).
   7
     The key parameters are the fraction of behavioral households who are misusing a credit product, the benefits of
the product when properly used, the deadweight cost of intervention, and the effectiveness of an intervention that
encourages proper usage. Zinman (2015) also highlights the need for more empirical research on the relationship
between borrowing and consumer preferences, beliefs, and cost perceptions.
                                                                                                                    6


is one of surprisingly few studies that provide evidence of anchoring in the real world.8 While our

paper is one of the first to analyze the role of anchoring in credit use, related effects have received

careful study in the literature on household savings. Seminal work by Madrian and Shea (2001)

showed that default options in employer-sponsored retirement savings plans have dramatic effects

on employee enrollment, contribution rates, and portfolio choice. Subsequent studies confirm that

default effects and consumer passivity are widespread across different types of retirement savings

decisions, and that passive decisions pass through to overall savings and consumption levels.9

Despite the influence of this literature in both research and policy, few papers have applied its

insights to the liabilities side of household balance sheets. Minimally-amortizing loan contracts

exist in many credit markets (e.g. adjustable-rate mortgages, home equity lines of credit, and

payday loans), so anchoring to minimum payments and other salient contract features may well

extend beyond credit cards to other types of liabilities.

       Interest-only loans and other “risky” loan structures have received significant attention from

policymakers in recent years, and a number of papers have analyzed the effects of regulations

that restrict the types of loans that can be offered to consumers.10 However, we know of few

that attempt to disentangle the effects of restrictions on the contract space from the reduced-form

effects of changes in credit supply. In particular, our paper is one of the first to study the effects

of regulatory guidance that encourages higher minimum payments on credit cards.11 Recent work

has also examined a number of dimensions of the CARD Act.12 Our identification strategy for the

impacts of the CARD Act disclosures complements the approach taken by Agarwal et al. (2015),

and yields a new estimate of the demand response to information disclosure.
   8
     Notable examples include Simonsohn and Loewenstein (2006) and Beggs and Graddy (2009).
   9
     See, for example, Choi, Laibson, Madrian and Metrick (2002), Choi, Laibson, Madrian and Metrick (2004), Choi,
Laibson, Madrian and Metrick (2006), Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2009), and Carroll, Choi, Laibson,
Madrian and Metrick (2009) for evidence on default effects, passive decision-making, and related effects in retirement
savings in the U.S. Chetty, Friedman, Leth-Petersen, Nielsen and Olsen (2014) use comprehensive Danish data to
show that the majority of individuals are passive savers, and automatic contributions to retirement savings are almost
fully passed through to total savings. While anchoring can potentially explain some of the effects documented in
this literature, the savings literature has thus far not attempted to distinguish the role of anchoring from other
psychological factors.
  10
     See, for example, Di Maggio and Kermani (2014), Ding, Quercia, Reid and White (2012) and Bond, Musto and
Yilmaz (2009) on the effects of anti-predatory loan provisions in the mortgage market.
  11
     A concurrent paper by d’Astous and Shore (2014) finds evidence of liquidity constraints in the context of a
increase in minimum payments at a single financial institution. Seira and Castellanos (2010) explore the role of
minimum payments in credit card choice in Mexico.
  12
     On the impacts of the CARD Act, see Agarwal et al. (2015), Debbaut, Ghent and Kudlyak (2013), and Jam-
bulapati and Stavins (2014). On consumer financial regulation, see Campbell (2006), Bar-Gill and Warren (2008),
Barr, Mullainathan and Shafir (2013), and Campbell (2016).
                                                                                                                  7


     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides background on credit

card minimum payments and describes our dataset. Section III presents a descriptive analysis

of consumer payment patterns. Sections IV and V estimate the prevalence of anchoring and the

impact of the CARD Act disclosures, respectively. Section VI discusses the economic significance

of anchoring, Section VII provides a discussion of the theoretical explanations and implications of

our findings, and Section VIII concludes.



II     Data and Background on Minimum Payments

II.A     Minimum Payments and Government Policy

Minimum payments are a universal feature of credit cards, and indicate the lowest payment neces-

sary to remain current on an account in a given month. In the 1970s, typical minimum payments

were about 5% of the outstanding balance.13 By the 2000s, the average minimum payment had

fallen to 2% (Kim 2005). While this decline could have resulted from competitive pressure to at-

tract customers and maintain customer loyalty, industry insiders also report that issuers lowered

minimums in order to extend repayment periods and increase interest revenue.14

     Beginning in the mid-2000s, minimum payments came under increasing scrutiny of regulators

and consumer groups for their role in high interest costs and debt burdens. Most notably, in

2003 the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and other prudential regulators issued

guidance on minimum payments, stating that they “expect lenders to require minimum payments

that will amortize the current balance over a reasonable period of time.”15 Several issuers have

raised their formulas in the years since the guidance was issued, and our identification strategy

exploits these changes.

     Regulatory interest in the credit card industry continued throughout the 2000s, culminating
  13
     Testimony of Travis B. Plunkett, Legislative Director of the Consumer Federation of America, in U.S. Congress,
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, Examining the Current Legal and Regulatory Require-
ments and Industry Practices for Credit Card Issuers With Respect to Consumer Disclosures and Marketing Efforts,
hearings, 109th Cong., 1st sess., May 17, 2005, p.8.
  14
     Interview with Andrew Kahr, credit card industry consultant, “Secret History of the Credit Card,” Frontline,
PBS, 2004.
  15
     The other regulators issuing the interagency guidance were the Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, and Office of Thrift Supervision. See Office of the Comptroller of the Currency et al. (2003).
                                                                                                                        8


in the passage of the CARD Act in May 2009.16 The CARD Act instituted dramatic changes to

industry practices, including restrictions on fees, interest rate re-pricing, payment allocation, and

billing practices. In addition, the CARD Act and its implementing regulation instituted disclo-

sures aimed at warning consumers about the costs of making only the minimum payment. These

disclosures were mandated starting in February 2010, and introduced a new payment suggestion

on many consumers’ monthly statements equalling the amount that would amortize the existing

balance over the next three years.

    During our sample period, we observe four increases and one decrease in issuers’ minimum

payment formulas. Issuers have discretion to set their own formulas in compliance with regulator

guidance, and we do not know the exact reasons why they made these changes.17 From an is-

suer’s perspective, the optimal formula balances interest revenues, credit risk, and regulatory risk.

Based on news reports and conversations with regulators and industry insiders, direct and indirect

regulatory concerns are likely to be the main reason for the formula changes. Some issuers report-

edly changed their formulas when changing regulators (e.g. when moving from state to national

charters), potentially under the direct guidance of their new regulators.18 Even without direct

advice from regulators, issuers whose formulas are below the market norm may elect to voluntarily

increase them in anticipation of future regulatory action (Knittel and Stango 2003, Stango 2003).

Finally, issuers may also have business reasons to modify their formulas. The CARD Act changed

the payment hierarchy such that payments in excess of the minimum must be applied to balances

with the highest interest rates first. Thus, increasing minimum payments may yield higher interest

revenue for some issuers. Increasing the minimum could also help issuers mitigate default risk, an

area of concern for both banks and regulators during our sample period.

    The formulas used for determining minimum payment amounts can be found on issuer websites,

in credit card agreements, and on a number of commercial comparison-shopping websites. Minimum

payment formulas generally follow a consistent format, with a flat “floor” region for lower balances
   16
      In December 2008, the Federal Reserve Board, Office of Thrift Supervision, and National Credit Union Admin-
istration amended their regulations to parallel many aspects of the CARD Act, and were later modified to have
concurrent effective dates as the CARD Act provisions.
   17
      To protect the confidentiality of the identities of the issuers included in our analysis, we omit the details of the
exact timing of the formula changes and the circumstances of the issuers that changed their formulas.
   18
      Although all of the major bank regulators jointly issued the 2003 interagency guidance, individual regulators
may have different standards of compliance and provide different feedback to supervised entities.
                                                                                                     9


and sloped regions based on a percentage of the balance for higher balances. Figure 1 shows a

simplified version of a typical minimum payment formula and illustrates the two types of formula

changes we observe in our sample. Under the “old” formula in both panels, the minimum payment

is given by the following:


      minimum = max{f loor, 2% · balance}


Panel A shows the impact of an increase in the floor portion of the formula. In this example, the

floor is raised from $20 under the old formula (solid line) to $40 under the new formula (dashed line).

For a floor increase, only consumers with balances below a given threshold experience changes in

their minimum payments. Thus, for this type of formula change, only some consumers are treated

with changes in their minimum payments, and a given consumer may be treated in some months

and not treated in others depending on their balance.

   Another way to adjust the minimum payment formula is to shift the entire schedule. Panel B

of Figure 1 shows a shift in the schedule from the old formula to a new formula with minimum =

$20 + max{f loor, 2% · balance}. In the case of a schedule increase, all consumers are treated by the

formula change, and experience increases in the minimum payment of a fixed amount (here $20).

Minimum payment formulas could also change in other ways, such as changing the slope (e.g. from

2% of the balance to 3%), but the examples shown in the figure reflect the two types of changes we

observe in our sample.

   Actual minimum formulas are often more complex than those in our simple example. For very

low balances less than the floor amount, the minimum payment is generally equal to the balance

due. While our example shows typical minimum payments for transactors, i.e. consumers who do

not have any interest charges in the current month, actual formulas may have a third component in

the max function that incorporates interest charges (e.g. 1% · balance + interest). Thus, minimum

payments can also depend on whether a consumer is revolving debt and the interest rate they face.

Late and overlimit fees and past due amounts are also typically added to the minimum payment.

Despite these complications, similar intuition about the subsets of accounts that are treated and

the relationship between the minimum and the balance applies to the formulas we actually observe

in our data.
                                                                                                                  10


    Our identification strategy focuses on the sharp changes in consumer payments that occur during

the months around the formula change. Our approach uses two groups of consumers that did not

experience minimum payment changes as control groups to pin down time fixed effects, account

fixed effects, and the coefficients on control variables. The first control group consists of consumers

with accounts at issuers that did not change their minimum payment formulas. The second control

group includes accounts that were not affected by the changes made by their issuer to the minimum

formula, such as high-balance accounts with issuers that increased their formula floors. As long as

consumer characteristics evolve smoothly across the timing of the formula changes, we can identify

causal estimates of consumer responses to these changes, regardless of the precise motivation of

issuers. We discuss this strategy in more detail below.


II.B     CFPB Credit Card Database (CCDB)

This is the first research paper to use data from the CFPB Credit Card Database (CCDB), which

includes account-level data for a number of large credit card issuers in the United States. The data

are collected under the CFPB’s supervisory authority over the credit card market as prescribed by

the Dodd-Frank Act.19 The data used here cover February 2008 to December 2013, and the issuers

in the full dataset comprise over 85% of credit card industry balances.

    The dataset includes information on the near-universe of consumer and small business credit

card accounts from included issuers. The variables include monthly account-level details on bal-

ances, payments, fees, interest rates, and delinquency. For each account-month, we observe the

minimum payment and the actual payment made by the consumer. In addition, the CCDB in-

cludes FICO scores and individual income both at origination and based on periodic updates by

issuers. Each account is linked to credit bureau data that provide a summary of the borrower’s

overall credit portfolio on a quarterly basis. While we cannot link separate accounts to the same

consumer or household, we can observe total credit card activity for each individual (including any

joint accounts with other household members) in the credit bureau variables. The CCDB does not

contain data on individual purchase transactions.

    We apply three restrictions to the full CCDB to arrive at our analysis sample. First, we
  19
     The dataset also includes nine institutions that fall under the purview of the U.S. Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency (OCC). For additional information on the CCDB, see Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2013).
                                                                                                                     11


restrict our analysis to general-purpose cards, so that the cards offered by different issuers can

be considered close substitutes. Unlike cards associated with specific retailers, airlines, or other

affiliates, general-purpose cards are not targeted at highly specific demographics that might not

be representative of the general population of cardholders. Furthermore, general-purpose cards

represent the largest portfolio segments for most issuers, and have only one or at most a few different

minimum payment formulas that are applied across millions of cards. Second, we keep only issuers

that report consistent data on minimum payments due, actual payments made, and matching

cycle-ending balances. This leaves us with a sample of several issuers covering approximately 25%

of total outstandings in the general-purpose card market. Third, in order to observe meaningful

repayment outcomes, we only consider active accounts as flagged by issuers and statement months

with positive balances. Our analysis is based on a 1% random sample of active accounts from

included issuers, leaving us with about 40 million observations.

    Table 1 presents summary statistics on the full analysis sample. The top panel reports basic

statistics about the account and borrower. Account-holders have an average income of $66,000.

Individual income is reported by borrowers at the time they apply for a credit card, and is updated

by lenders periodically (e.g. if the borrower requests an increase in their credit line).20 Throughout

this paper, we use FICO at origination as our measure of a consumer’s credit score. The average

FICO score at origination is 701. Because our credit score measure is based only on past credit

activity prior to account opening, we eliminate any direct causal relationship between FICO and

repayment activity in our analysis.21

    The second panel reports information on all credit cards for each borrower based on credit

bureau data. On average, consumers have three credit cards, with a total balance of $11,000. The

third panel reports balances for the accounts in our monthly dataset. Consistent with a typical

consumer holding several active credit cards simultaneously, the average balance on a given account

is $3,200, and consumers make positive purchases in 63% of account-months. The average account
  20
     Income is generally self-reported and not always verified by lenders. Although it is possible for consumers to
inflate their incomes in an effort to gain more credit access or better terms, income is not used in underwriting and
credit line assignment models by major credit card issuers. Therefore, consumers have little incentive to systematically
mis-represent their income.
  21
     FICO scores at origination would in part reflect borrowers’ past repayment behavior on other credit card accounts.
Thus, within-person persistence in repayment behavior can lead to correlation between FICO at origination and the
payments we observe.
                                                                                                  12


utilization (balance as a fraction of total credit limit) is 45%.

   The final panel presents measures of payment behavior. The average payment is $570, compared

with a minimum required payment of $82. Borrowers pay 42% of balances on average. However,

the median fraction of balances paid is only 11%, suggesting a highly bimodal distribution with

some paying in full and many paying much less of their balance. The actual payments made on

the accounts are less than the minimum payment due in 9% of cases. Any payments less than the

minimum are considered late, and in nearly all of these cases borrowers are assessed late fees that

typically range from $25–$35. Payments are exactly equal to the minimum payment due in 15% of

account-months, and are near the minimum in an additional 20% of account-months. Throughout

the paper, we define near-minimum payments as those within $50 of the minimum. Given the tight

clustering of many payments near the minimum, our results are robust to alternative definitions of

near-minimum payments, and we evaluate this sensitivity in Appendix Figure A-4. At the other

end of the spectrum, payments are equal to or greater than the outstanding balance in 33% of

account-months.



III      Descriptive Analysis

This section presents descriptive evidence of account-level payment behavior. First, we classify

accounts based on their history of payment amounts relative to the minimum payment and full

balance, and the consistency of these payment amounts over time. We then examine whether proxies

for liquidity constraints can explain the prevalence of minimum and near-minimum payments.

   We classify accounts based on whether they pay in full, pay the minimum, or pay near the

minimum in at least 50% of positive-balance months. Those who do not consistently pay within

one of these categories at least half the time are categorized as mixed payers. Figure 2 presents the

composition of accounts and account-months according to this taxonomy. As shown in Panel A, 9%

of accounts pay exactly the minimum in most months, while 20% pay close to, but not exactly, the

minimum in most months. The remainder make full payments in most months or pay a mixture

of intermediate amounts. Appendix Table A-1 provides summary statistics for each of the payer

types.
                                                                                                  13


   Panel B of Figure 2 shows that payment behavior is largely persistent over time within an

account. Full payers pay in full over 90% of the time, and exact minimum payers pay exactly the

minimum 78% of the time. The persistence of payment behavior may be due in part to features such

as automatic payments tied to bank accounts, but are also likely to reflect consistency in the active

choices made by borrowers. While we are not aware of systematic data on how often autopay

features are used to pay credit card bills, discussions with industry representatives suggest that

only a minority of customers use autopay for their credit card bills, and an even smaller minority

use autopay for the minimum payment amount. Thus, we interpret the majority of payments by

minimum and near-minimum payers as the result of active choices.

   Providing further evidence that even those who actively pay more than the minimum tend to

stick relatively close to the minimum amount, Figure 3 shows the distribution of payments as a

fraction of balances for each payer type. The figure shows a highly bimodal distribution. The

majority of payments for exact minimum, near minimum, and mixed payers are less than 10% of

balance, and only 16% of all payments lie between 10% and 99% of the balance.

   We next consider several potential proxies for liquidity constraints and examine their relation-

ship to repayment behavior. Figure 4 presents the distributions of fraction paid (Panel A) and

payer type (Panel B) by income, age, balance, and FICO score. Consistent with the bimodal dis-

tribution presented above, the vast majority of payments across all four distributions in Panel A

are either close to the minimum (between 0-9% of the balance) or at 100% of the balance. In the

discussion below, we compare how the fraction of low payments (those below 10% of the balance)

vary with four potential proxies for liquidity constraints.

   We first examine income and age, which are likely to correlate with the severity of liquidity

constraints in the cross-section of consumers. The top-left figure of Panel A shows that payments

increase only modestly by income, and a substantial fraction of consumers across the income spec-

trum make low payments. Consumers making less than $50,000 per year make low payments about

half of the time, while those making more than $150,000 per year make low payments 38% of the

time. This is a striking result: high-income consumers make near-minimum payments more than

one third of the time, accumulating debt at relatively high interest rates. The top-left figure in

Panel B confirms the weak relationship between income and payment behavior, showing similar
                                                                                                                  14


income distributions for all four payer types.

       The top-right of Figure 4A presents the relationship between borrower age and the composition

of payments. The lifecycle / permanent income hypothesis suggests that while younger consumers

may optimally decide to borrow when their income is below their expected lifetime level, the share

of borrowers should decline significantly as they enter middle and old age.22 Similarly, if the

explanation for the high frequency of minimum payments was simply related to the age profile of

experience with unsecured credit (Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix and Laibson 2009), we would expect

to see a sharp increase in the fraction of full payments as accounts aged through the lifecycle. While

we observe a decrease in the share of low payments with age, even accountholders over age 60 make

low payments 34% of the time. The top right figure of Panel B shows that while full payers skew

toward the higher end of the age distribution, we identify substantial shares of all four payer types

in all age categories.

       Next, we turn to two variables that reflect a combination of potential liquidity constraints and

past credit use behavior. First, the bottom-left of Figure 4A shows that the share of low payments

increases sharply with balance. While low payments are made 20% of the time on accounts with

less than $500, by $1,500 in balance, the majority of payments are low. This pattern results from a

combination of two effects. Greater cashflows are needed to pay off a given fraction of the balance

as balances increase, and high balances arise endogenously due to low prior payments. Consistent

with the second channel, the bottom-left figure of Panel B documents that full payers are most

prevalent at low balances.

       Finally, the bottom-right figure of Panel A shows that consumer payments vary dramatically

by FICO at origination, which takes into account payment behavior on past debts. Consumers

with FICO scores less than 700 make low payments more than 67% of the time, while those with

scores above 800 make low payments only 18% of the time. However, even some consumers with

very high FICO scores display low-payment behavior. Some of these low payments are likely due to

“rate surfing” or exploitation of promotional offers, which we attempt to control for in the analysis

that follows.

       Consistent with Panel A, the bottom-right figure of Figure 4B shows that full payers are clus-
  22
    For a recent example, Kaplan and Violante (2014) present a model in which borrowing occurs early in the lifecycle
and after income shocks, followed by periods of repayment which reduce debt to zero relatively quickly.
                                                                                                  15


tered at FICO scores between 700–850, while minimum and mixed payers span a greater range, with

minimum payers having lower scores on average than mixed payers. FICO scores are a predictive

measure of the probability of future default based on a consumer’s past credit activity, including

measures such as delinquency, account age, and utilization. Many of these measures may indicate

past liquidity constraints that persist into the measurement period. However, the correlation be-

tween FICO at origination and the propensity to make low payments could also be due to other

drivers of persistence such as consumer preferences, beliefs, and decision-making heuristics.

   This section has shown that while payment behavior is highly persistent over time both within

and across accounts, it is only weakly correlated with traditional proxies for liquidity constraints.

The next two sections of the paper explore quasi-experiments intended to disentangle liquidity

constraints from anchoring as potential explanations for the repayment patterns we observe.



IV     Impact of Changes to Minimum Payment Formulas

In this section, we exploit changes in issuers’ minimum payment formulas to estimate the fraction

of accounts that anchor to the minimum payment. We first describe a conceptual framework for

interpreting how changes in the formula should affect the distribution of payments for borrowers

who are liquidity constrained versus those who anchor on the minimum. We then describe our

strategy for testing the key predictions of the framework, and finally, present our estimates of the

parameters that describe the extent of anchoring.


IV.A     Conceptual Framework

We consider the impacts of a change in the minimum payment from an old value M in1 to a new

value M in2 . While all of our notation refers to the case where M in2 > M in1 , the intuition is

analogous for decreases in the minimum. In Figure 5A, we present a stylized illustration of how the

cumulative distribution of payments near the minimum would change if all consumers were fully

rational and chose their payment amounts based on a tradeoff between liquidity constraints and

the costs of borrowing. Before the formula change, a fraction F1 of consumers are delinquent due

to severe liquidity constraints. Consumers choosing to pay as little as possible while remaining in
                                                                                                              16


good standing bunch at the minimum payment, leading to a discontinuity in the CDF at M in1 . For

some consumers, the solution to their intertemporal choice problem is an amount that is greater

than the minimum but still fails to pay off their debt completely, leading to an upward-sloping CDF

above M in1 . Aggregating across consumers with different optimal repayment amounts, a fraction

F2 of consumers pay less than or equal to M in2 under the old formula.

    If all consumers chose their payment amounts optimally under the old formula, then an increase

from M in1 to M in2 would change the payment distribution in two ways. First, some consumers

may suffer from severe liquidity constraints and be unable to afford M in2 . As shown in the figure,

severe constraints may lead to an increase in delinquencies from F1 to F10 . Because delinquency

leads to costly late fees, penalty interest rates, and other negative consequences, most consumers

previously paying less than M in2 would choose to remain current and bunch at M in2 . The amount

of bunching would be determined by the density of payments between M in1 and M in2 and by the

fraction of severely-constrained consumers.23 Overall, we predict that the formula change should

shift the cumulative distribution of payments from the solid to the dotted lines shown in Figure

5A. Our key prediction is that if all near-minimum payments were driven by liquidity constraints,

the fraction of consumers paying less than or equal to M in2 should remain at F2 after the formula

change (i.e. the solid and dotted lines would coincide starting at M in2 ).

    In contrast, if some consumers locate near the minimum due to anchoring, then the formula

change could also affect the distribution of payments greater than M in2 . Figure 5B illustrates

the distribution of payments predicted by classical anchoring-and-adjustment models (Tversky and

Kahneman 1974). Under these models, consumers choosing an interior repayment amount start

with the minimum and adjust upward, leading to an upward shift in the entire distribution of

payments when the minimum payment increases. Following this intuition, the figure shows the

case where a fraction −(F20 − F2 ) of all accounts pay less than M in2 prior to the formula change

and pay strictly more than M in2 after the formula change. Relative to a scenario where all near-

minimum payments are due to liquidity-constraints as shown in Panel A, there is less bunching at

the new minimum M in2 when some consumers anchor.

    By imposing some normalizations, we can translate the change in the distribution of payments
  23
     For an overview of the recent literature that has used settings where consumers are expected to “bunch” at a
point in the distribution for obtaining identification, see Kleven (2016).
                                                                                               17


to estimates of the fraction of anchoring accounts. Let β = F20 − F2 . If θ denotes the fraction

of accounts affected by the formula change that anchor to the minimum payment, then −β/F2 is

a lower bound on θ. This estimate is a lower bound because while it includes all accounts that

move from paying M in2 to paying more than M in2 after the formula change, it does not contain

accounts that move from M in1 to M in2 in strict adherence to the anchor. Here, we define those

“affected” by the formula change as accounts whose payment amounts under the old formula are

less than or equal to M in2 .

   To estimate the fraction of all accounts that anchor to the minimum payment, we need to make

additional assumptions about the payment behavior of anchoring accounts. For simplicity, we

assume that there is some interval (X, X] for which the fraction of anchoring accounts among those

paying between [1, M in1 +x] is approximately constant for x ∈ (X, X], and that anchoring accounts

make no payments above M in1 + X. These assumptions are based on the observation that a large

fraction of accounts make payments close to the minimum, yet few payments are made between $50

above the minimum and the full payment. Furthermore, as described in Section III, accounts that

typically pay close to the minimum very rarely pay in full. Under these assumptions, the fraction

of anchoring accounts among those with payments in the interval [1, M in1 + X] is equal to θ, and

the fraction of all accounts that anchor to the minimum is θ∗ = θδ, where δ = CDF (M in1 + X).

Thus, −βδ/F2 provides a lower bound on θ∗ . Appendix Figure A-1 presents an illustration of the

parameters used in these calculations. We present estimates of the lower bounds on θ and θ∗ in our

empirical results below. We use X̄ = $50 for our main calculations, and show how our estimates

of anchoring vary with different thresholds of X̄ ∈ [1, 200] in the appendix.

   For completeness, Panel C shows the hypothetical case of “excessive” bunching at the new

minimum, which would occur if an increase in the minimum caused some borrowers who were

previously paying more than M in2 to subsequently pay less. While some prior evidence lends

support to this mechanism (Stewart 2009, Navarro-Martinez et al. 2011), our estimates show that

the bunching effects shown in Panel B dominate in practice. The possibility that increases in the

minimum could cause some consumers to move down to M in2 from higher amounts is another

reason why our estimates represent a lower bound on the extent of anchoring.

   As suggested by our framework, we first focus our empirical analysis on estimating β. A finding
                                                                                                 18


that β = 0 would indicate that liquidity constraints alone drive consumer payments, whereas

a negative value indicates that some consumers anchor on the minimum payment and yields an

estimate of the size of this group.24 We then use our estimates of β, along with direct measurements

of F2 and δ, to estimate lower bounds on the fraction of anchoring borrowers near the minimum,

θ, and the fraction of anchoring borrowers overall, θ∗ .


IV.B        Estimation Strategy

We examine the effects of minimum payment formula changes using a difference-in-differences

research design that estimates high-frequency changes in payments in the months surrounding the

formula changes. Our design uses accounts unaffected by minimum payment changes to pin down

the effects of time trends and control variables.

      We measure exposure to the formula changes by computing the minimum payment for each

account-month using both the old and new formulas. We define Iijτ as an indicator for whether

account i in issuer j would experience a change in its minimum payment in month τ due to issuer

j’s formula change. Specifically,
                 
                        if minijτ 6= min0ijτ
                 
                 1
                 
        Iijτ =
                        if minijτ = min0ijτ
                 
                 0
                 


where minijτ denotes account i’s minimum payment based on issuer j’s old formula, and min0ijτ

denotes its minimum payment under issuer j’s new formula. As described above, a given issuer’s

formula change may not affect the minimum payments for all accounts in all months, depending

on the nature of the formula change and characteristics of the account. We define this indicator

for all months both before and after the formula changes in order to test for spurious pre-trends in

minimums and payments. When control issuers are included that did not change their formulas,

Iijτ = 0 for all accounts from these issuers.
 24
      In section VII, we also discuss other potential interpretations of our findings.
                                                                                                                  19


       Our baseline difference-in-differences model takes the following form:

                             6
                             X
         Yijt = αi + ηt +             βτ × Iijτ + ζIijτ + γXijt + ijt                                           (1)
                            τ =−12
                             τ 6=−1


where Yijt is an outcome for account i from issuer j in month t, αi and ηt are account and month

fixed effects, and Xijt is a vector of controls described below. The βτ ’s are the coefficients of

interest, where τ is a measure of “event time” such that τ = 0 denotes the first month after issuer

j implemented a formula change. All periods prior to τ = −12 are absorbed into τ = −12, and all

periods after τ = 6 are absorbed into τ = 6, so β5 can be viewed as an estimate of the “medium-

run” effects of the formula changes.25 The ζ × Iijt term absorbs time-invariant differences between

accounts that would be affected by formula changes versus those that would not.26 The ζ × Iijt

term is included separately and β−1 is omitted, so all of the βτ coefficients can be interpreted as

changes relative to the month prior to the formula changes.

       As described below, we present results both with and without time-varying account-level con-

trols. Our identification relies on discrete changes in issuer formulas that are not related to simul-

taneous sharp changes in underlying consumer characteristics, so the results are similar whether or

not we include these controls. Throughout our analysis, we include time fixed effects, as well as fixed

effects for the interaction of issuer formula type and FICO decile. In the full-controls specification,

we also include a rich set of variables in Xijt : dummies for deciles of balance, account age, credit

limit, FICO score, purchases, and APR, and dummies for 0% APR and nonzero promotional bal-

ance. The full-controls specification also includes control issuers that did not change their formulas

during our sample period to help identify the time fixed-effects. To account for serial correlation

in account outcomes within similar customer demographics, we cluster all standard errors by the

interaction of FICO decile and issuer formula type.27
  25
     We show results for twelve months before and six months after the formula changes because that is the longest
window where we have balanced observations on all treated issuers. As a result, β6 includes the impacts of the
compositional change in issuers, so we use β5 for our medium-run estimate. In results not shown, estimates are
qualitatively similar if we drop one issuer with a post-change window of less the one year and expand post-formula-
change window according to availability.
  26
     Even when account fixed effects are included, this term is needed because an account’s treatment status can vary
each month.
  27
     Despite our millions of account-month observations, our goal using this level of clustering is to conservatively
account for both the joint determination of credit card contract characteristics (Agarwal et al. 2015) and serially
correlated outcomes across similar types of consumers (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004). In all specifications,
                                                                                                                     20


    In practice, due to the large number of observations and rich covariates in some specifications,

we estimate the model on data collapsed into cells by month × issuer formula type × potential

treatment status × deciles of balance, credit limit, FICO score, purchases, and APR × indicators

for 0% APR and nonzero promotional balance. By weighting the regressions by the number of

accounts in each cell, our estimates on the collapsed data yield results that are identical to those

using microdata. One drawback to the collapsed specification is that we cannot include account

fixed-effects. However, we show below that account attributes and activity do not change sharply

around formula changes, and in Appendix Table A-3 that regressions using the microdata that

include account fixed-effects yield very similar results.

    The identifying assumption for our research design is the parallel trends assumption: In the

absence of the changes in minimum payment formulas, consumer payments would have evolved in

parallel over time across treated and control groups. We assess the validity of this assumption by

plotting the βτ coefficients over time both before and after the formula changes to see whether

treated accounts were moving along a different trend before the formula change.

    We also test the robustness of our results by defining the control group in two different ways.

First, we run the difference-in-differences specification using only accounts with Iijτ = 1, so that

the control group includes potentially-treated accounts for other issuers whose formula changes

occurred at different times. Our second approach includes all accounts of our sample issuers.

The two implicit control groups in this specification are accounts with issuers that changed their

formulas but that were outside of the range where the formula change applied (See Figure 1), and

accounts with issuers that never changed their formulas.28

    Column (1) of Table 2 shows the first stage of the specification in equation (1), with the dollar

value of the minimum payment as the dependent variable. The coefficients in Panel A correspond to

a specification with potentially treated accounts only, time and issuer formula type × FICO decile

fixed effects, and no time-varying controls. Panel B shows our preferred specification, including

all accounts from both treated and control issuers, time and issuer formula type × FICO decile

fixed effects, and the full suite of time-varying controls. The average account’s minimum payment
our regression samples for our main results contain at least 40 clusters.
  28
     Our results are robust to a number of other variations such as including all accounts from treated issuers,
separately estimating the coefficients for each issuer individually, and either including or excluding the full suite of
time-varying controls. We only show two sets of representative results for brevity.
                                                                                                           21


increased by $12 to $14 in the month of the change for the pooled positive formula changes, with

similar point estimates under both specifications. While Panels A and B show results that pool the

effects for four different formula changes that increased minimum payments, Panel C applies the

full-controls specification to the one formula change that decreased minimum payments. Accounts

from the issuer that reduced the required minimum payment saw an average decrease of about $30

in the month of the formula change.

   Figure 6A shows graphs of the corresponding difference-in-differences coefficients from Table 2B

and C. Graph a) shows the results for positive formula changes, while graph b) shows the results

for the negative change. These results confirm the absence of pre-trends in minimum payments.

The two figures in Panel A also show that the formula changes occur immediately and are effec-

tively permanent. Lending further credence to our approach, Appendix Figures A-2 and A-3 show

that there is no systematic change in the composition of our sample across account or borrower

characteristics, respectively, around the timing of formula changes.


IV.C     Response to Changes in Minimum Payment Formulas

The framework described above suggests that β, the change in the fraction of accounts paying at

or below the new minimum after a formula change, provides a test for whether some consumers

anchor to the minimum payment. In order to estimate β, we first compute the minimum payments

that an account would face under both the old and new formulas. We construct an indicator Pijτ

that is equal to one if the actual payment amount is less than or equal to the minimum payment

under the larger of the two formulas, and zero otherwise:29


      Pijτ = I(paymentijτ ≤ max{minijτ , min0ijτ })                                                       (2)


   For minimum payment increases, the average value of this indicator is equal to the fraction of

payments at or below the minimum payment under the new formula, and its conditional mean is

analogous to F2 in the pre-period and F20 in the post-period from our conceptual framework. Our

key test is whether the conditional mean of the indicator variable changes when the formula change
  29
     For example, for accounts with balances ≤ $2000 in the example shown in Figure 1A, this variable would be
equal to 1 for payments ≤ $40, and 0 otherwise.
                                                                                                       22


occurs. In our model, this is equivalent to testing whether βτ = 0 for τ ≥ 0 when the dependent

variable is Pijτ . The framework also predicts that if some consumers are so liquidity constrained

that they are unable to afford the new minimum when the formula changes, then we should observe

βτ > 0 when delinquencies are the dependent variable.

   Columns (2) and (3) of Table 2 show the results of regressions for delinquencies and P . The

three rows in each panel report the coefficients β̂0 , β̂3 , and β̂5 from each regression. The samples and

controls included in each panel are the same as those for the first-stage results described above. The

formula changes did not significantly affect delinquencies, which is unsurprising given the significant

late fees triggered by delinquency and the relatively modest changes in the minimums. This result

suggests that severe liquidity constraints are not a major driver of near-minimum payments.

   Subfigure (c) of Figure 6 shows the β̂τ coefficients corresponding to Panel B of the table. The

figure documents a sharp decline in the fraction paying at or below the new minimum when the

minimum payment is increased. Consistent with the presence of anchoring, 3 to 4% of accounts

that were paying less than or equal to the new minimum move to paying strictly more than the

new minimum five months after the formula change occurs. We soundly reject the null hypothesis

that all near-minimum payments are driven by liquidity constraints.

   The intuition is analogous for interpreting the effects for minimum payment formula decreases.

A finding that β̂τ > 0 for τ ≥ 0 implies that some consumers who previously paid more than

the minimum decrease their payments in response to a decrease in the formula. Subfigure (d) of

Figure 6 shows the β̂τ coefficients for the one formula change that decreased the minimum payment.

Instead of continuing to pay the same amount, 12 to 15% of accounts lower their payments when

the minimum payment decreases. The effect for formula decreases is particularly striking because

the incentives for consumers paying more than the old minimum payment are completely unaffected

by the formula change. The behavioral response is immediate and persistent for both positive and

negative formula changes.

   To interpret the magnitudes of these effects, we turn to estimates of the prevalence of anchoring

among accounts close to the minimum, θ, and among all accounts, θ∗ . As described above, −β/F2

and −βδ/F2 are lower bounds for θ and θ∗ . We use the β̂τ coefficients as empirical analogs to β,

comparing the results both for the immediate effect of the formula changes (β̂0 ) and the longer-run
                                                                                                   23


estimates (β̂3 and β̂5 ). We estimate F̂2 using the mean of P among accounts affected by the formula

change (i.e. I = 1), and we estimate δ̂ using the fraction of all accounts paying less than or equal

to min + $50. Both F̂2 and δ̂ are estimated using the 12 months prior to the formula changes, and

we obtain that F̂2 = 0.42 and δ̂ = 0.18 for the pooled positive formula changes, and F̂2 = 0.51

and δ̂ = 0.39 for the negative formula change. We discuss the robustness of our estimates to the

definition of δ in the next section.

   Columns (4) and (5) of Table 2 show the estimated lower bounds for θ and θ∗ . For the pooled

estimates of β̂5 using four positive formula changes in Panel B, we find that at least 22% of accounts

paying close to the minimum and at least 9% of all accounts anchor to the minimum payment.

The results from the formula decrease are larger than the estimates from formula increases, due

both to the larger first stage effect on minimum payments and compositional differences in the

treated population. As shown in Panel C, we estimate lower bounds of 38% and 20% for for θ

and θ∗ , respectively. Notably, the behavioral response is consistent, yielding a significant fraction

of anchoring consumers in response to both minimum payment increases and decreases. In all

specifications, we estimate an upper bound for the fraction of liquidity-constrained accounts at

about one third (LC ∗ , shown in Column (6)).

   In this section, we have established that consumers’ repayment choices are sensitive to changes

in minimum payment formulas. Our identification strategy allows us to rule out that this sensitivity

can be explained solely by liquidity constraints. In the next two sections we explore heterogeneity

in anchoring by borrower characteristics and the robustness of the anchoring result.


IV.D     Heterogeneity and Robustness

IV.D.1     Heterogeneity

To examine heterogeneity in the prevalence of anchoring in the consumer population, Table 3

presents estimates of β̂, θ∗ and LC ∗ stratified by a number of borrower characteristics. Panel A

shows the stratification by credit score at origination. While super-prime borrowers (those with

FICO scores above 720) are relatively unlikely to anchor, the rest of the credit score groups yield

similar estimates of θ∗ ranging from 13% to 15%. In contrast, LC ∗ decreases monotonically with

credit score as expected. This result suggests that the drivers of anchoring are distinct from the
                                                                                                                24


drivers of credit risk, consistent with our main results that distinguish anchoring from liquidity

constraints.

       The estimates in Panel B stratify the sample based on the descriptive payer types defined in

Section III.30 Full payers, who pay in full in more than 50% of account-months, unsurprisingly do

not anchor to the minimum payment. Near-minimum payers are the most likely to anchor, with

a lower bound of θ∗ = 32%. Near-minimum payers are defined as those who actively pay more

than the minimum payment, but nonetheless choose payment amounts that are very close to the

minimum. The prevalence of anchoring in this group suggests that habitual near-minimum payment

behavior is an observable correlate of anchoring and could be used to target consumers who are

more likely to use anchoring heuristics. Panels C and D show that θ∗ decreases only moderately

with income and age. Overall, the results support our descriptive finding that traditional proxies

for liquidity constraints do not seem to be strong drivers of payment behavior near the minimum.


IV.D.2       Robustness

In Appendix Table A-2, we explore the robustness of our results to alternative estimation ap-

proaches. Our baseline specification uses an indicator variable Iijτ to specify accounts that would

experience any change in their minimum payment as a result of issuer formula changes, and esti-

mates the average change in payments across all accounts with Iijτ = 1. An alternative approach

takes into account variation in the intensity of treatment (i.e. the dollar change in the minimum

payment), which we define as


         ∆M inijt = min0ijt − minijt


where minijt denotes account i’s minimum payment based on issuer j’s old formula and min0ijt

denotes the minimum payment under issuer j’s new formula. In Panel A of the table, we present

the results of the following specification:

                             6
                             X
         Yijt = αi + ηt +             βτ × ∆M inijt + ζ × ∆M inijt + γXijt + ijt                              (3)
                            τ =−12
                             τ 6=−1
  30
    To avoid look-ahead bias in the definition of payer types, payer types are defined using only data prior to the
formula changes.
                                                                                                 25


   This approach utilizes both the timing of the formula changes and variation across issuers

in the nature of the formula changes. It also provides evidence on the sensitivity of our results

to the assumption that the fraction of anchoring consumers (θ) remains constant across a range

of payments near the minimum by explicitly imposing the restriction that the change in P scales

linearly with dollar changes in the minimum payment. Columns (4) and (5) show that this approach

leads to similar estimates of anchoring as our baseline model.

   One concern with our findings is that promotional introductory offers (e.g. 0% APR for the first

18 months after opening an account) can drive payment behavior separately from either liquidity

constraints or anchoring. An optimal response to 0% introductory offers for many consumers is

to make the minimum payment for the duration of the introductory period, and then pay off the

balance just before the promotion expires. Several pieces of evidence suggest that promotional

offers cannot account for our results. As shown in Figure A-2(c), 0% APR offers do not change

discretely at the time of formula changes, and do not vary enough to account for our results. Our

baseline specification also includes time-varying controls for accounts with 0% APR and promotional

balances. To provide a further test, Panel B of Table A-2 shows the anchoring estimates when

excluding all observations with positive promotional balances, 0% APR, $0 minimum payment, or

less than 2 years since account opening. The results remain similar to our baseline specification.

   A related concern is that increases in the minimum payment may cause consumers to transfer

their balances or purchases to cards with lower minimum payments. This behavior is unlikely

to explain our results, since we find that most of the effect occurs in the month immediately

following the formula change with no pretrend. In contrast, we would expect consumers to transfer

their balances more gradually over the months just before and after the formula changes to take

advantage of incoming promotional offers. Nonetheless, as further tests, Panels C and D of Table

A-2 re-run the analysis on consumers with only one active credit card account during the entire

sample period, and those with multiple credit cards. Our estimates of θ∗ remain similar in both

of these subsamples, suggesting that our result is not driven by strategic balance-shifting across

existing credit cards in response to minimum payment changes. We examine changes in purchases

and balances around the formula changes in more detail below.

   Appendix Figure A-4 shows the sensitivity of our estimates of θ∗ to the definition of δ. The
                                                                                                                   26


tables and figures thus far have relied on the assumption that all anchoring accounts make payments

within $50 of the minimum payment, i.e. that X̄ = $50 and δ = CDF (M in1 + $50). Subfigure

(a) shows the sensitivity of our results to this assumption for each FICO band, re-estimating the

fraction anchoring for X̄ ∈ [$1, $200]. Subfigures (b), (c), and (d) shows the sensitivity analysis by

payer type, income quartile, and age quartile. The consistent pattern in figures (a), (c), and (d) is

that the share of anchoring accounts increases only moderately above X̄ = $50, because relatively

few payments fall into the range between $50 above the minimum and the full payment.

       In subfigure (b), we show that the estimates of θ∗ converge to 36% for near-minimum payers,

11% for exact minimum payers, and 1% for full payers in the region X̄ ∈ [$1, $200], which are close

to the values obtained with X̄ = $50. However, the estimate for mixed payers increases from 8%

at X̄ = $50 to 19% at X̄ = $200. The steady increase suggests that although many mixed payers

actively choose to pay amounts more than $50 above the minimum, the values they choose may

still be influenced by anchoring. Instead of paying an optimal amount that is invariant to changes

in the minimum payment formula, some mixed payers may start from the minimum and adjust

upward. Since most of the variation we exploit results in minimum payment changes of less than

$50, the sensitivity of θ∗ to X̄ should be interpreted with caution. However, this result suggests an

additional channel through which our main results underestimate θ∗ by potentially undercounting

mixed payers.

       Finally, a natural question is whether the formula changes affect account activity other than

repayment. For instance, as discussed above, borrowers might switch their purchases and balances

to other accounts in order to minimize their overall debt service burden. In Appendix Figure A-

5, we replicate the analysis from Panel A of Figure 2 for other account outcomes.31 We find no

significant or consistent change in purchases and balances on the credit card accounts affected by

formula changes (Panels A and B, respectively). Using the credit bureau data appended to each

account, we find no evidence that consumers systematically open new accounts (Panel C), or change

overall borrowing across accounts (Panel D). While these estimates are relatively imprecise due to

the small size of the minimum payment formula changes relative to overall credit card purchases and

balances, we do not observe any patterns that are consistent with purchase- or balance-switching
  31
    Because purchases and balances are used as control variables in our full-controls specifications, we present these
results using time and account-cell fixed effects only. The results are similar when including time-varying controls.
                                                                                                                 27


behavior.



V      Impact of Changes to Disclosure Requirements

Starting on February 22, 2010, credit card issuers were required by the CARD Act to include a new

disclosure on credit card statements that presented a comparison between the costs and repayment

duration of making the minimum payment versus paying an amount that would amortize the

outstanding balance in three years. An example of this disclosure is shown in Figure 7. In this

case, paying $103 per month (and making no additional charges) instead of the minimum payment

yields a reduction of over $1,000 in total interest payments and allows the borrower to pay off the

debt eight years earlier.

    The impact of this disclosure represents a distinct test of the role of anchoring in repayment

choices. The disclosures present no new information, and no changes were made to the economic

incentives around repayment. Consumers who begin paying the three-year amortization amount as

a result of the disclosure are unlikely to be doing so because of liquidity constraints, since the three-

year payment suggestion is greater than the required minimum (in most cases) and was within their

choice set prior to the disclosure. Perfectly-informed rational consumers would not be expected

to respond to the disclosures, and we interpret the fraction of accounts that adopt the three-year

repayment amount as an estimate of the ability for mandated disclosure to establish new anchors

for consumer payments.32

    To estimate the causal impact of the disclosures, our regression approach exploits the details of

the amendments to Regulation Z that implemented the CARD Act. In particular, the regulation

specified that consumers who paid their balances in full for two months in a row and those whose

minimum payments are higher than the three-year repayment amount are exempt from the disclo-

sures. All of the variables needed to determine an account’s exemption status in a given month and

the amount of the three-year repayment amount are observable in the dataset, and our strategy

compares the payments of exempt accounts with those of accounts exposed to the disclosures.
  32
     While the disclosure does not present any new information that could not be calculated from information already
available, it lowers the costs of calculating the payment needed to amortize the balance in three years. Although
amortization of the existing balance in three years is an arbitrary benchmark which is unlikely to be the optimal
payment for most consumers, part of the observed effect may be driven by lowered information acquisition costs.
                                                                                                       28


       To illustrate our approach, we first run difference-in-differences regressions restricted to three

months before and three months after February 2010. We run the following specification:


         Yijt = αi + ηt + β × RequiredDiscijt × P ostijt + ζ × RequiredDiscijt + γXijt + ijt          (4)


       where RequiredDiscijt is an indicator for observations which would have been required to receive

the disclosures based on the criteria described above, and P ostijt is an indicator for the period after

February 2010. We define RequiredDisc both before and after the actual CARD Act effective date

to account for systematic, time-invariant differences between accounts that are required to receive

the disclosure and those that are not. The coefficient of interest is β, which captures the effect

of the disclosure rules after the law went into effect. The regressions include the same rich set

of controls described in Section IV, as well as an additional control for the level of the minimum

payment. As above, we collapse the microdata into cells by month × issuer × potential treatment

status × deciles of balance, credit limit, FICO score, purchases, and APR × indicators for 0% APR

and nonzero promotional balance and weight each observation by the number of accounts in each

cell.

       Panel A of Figure 8 shows estimates from equation (4) where the dependent variables are

indicators for the payment duration of a consumer’s actual payment rounded to the nearest month.

We restrict our attention to repayment durations between 25 and 45 months to observe changes

around the three-year payment amount.33 The figure shows a clear increase in payments around the

three-year payment amount, with significant bunching at exactly 36 months. Smaller increases are

detected between 31-35 months, which are generally very close in dollar amount to the three-year

repayment amount and likely reflect rounding up. Unlike with minimum payments, there is very

little diffusion of repayment amounts further away from the suggested payment amount.

       Our main difference-in-differences specification for the effects of the CARD Act disclosure mir-
  33
       Repayment periods are calculated using the following formula, rounded to the nearest integer:

         Repayment period = −ln(1 − Balance/P ayment × r)/ln(1 + r)

where r is the monthly interest rate.
                                                                                                    29


rors our approach in Section IV:

                            12
                            X
        Yijt = αi + ηt +             βτ × RequiredDiscijτ + ζ × RequiredDiscijt + γXijt + ijt     (5)
                           τ =−12
                            τ 6=−1


We include αi and ηt representing issuer by FICO decile and month fixed effects in all regressions.

The βτ ’s are the coefficients of interest, where τ = 0 denotes February 2010, the first month during

which the disclosures requirements were in effect. Within our sample period from February 2008

through December 2013, all periods prior to τ = −12 are absorbed into τ = −12, and all periods

after τ = 12 are absorbed into τ = 12.

   Panel B of Figure 8 presents the difference-in-differences results for the share of payments with

repayment durations between 30-36 months over a two-year window around the implementation

date. There are no pre-trends in the period prior to the implementation of the disclosure, in large

part because very few consumers actively chose the three-year repayment amount in the absence of

the disclosure. The absence of pre-trends provides support for our identifying assumption that the

payments of consumers required to receive the disclosures were moving on a parallel trend to those

exempt from receiving the disclosures prior to the CARD Act effective date. The lack of pre-trend

also confirms that no issuers in our sample implemented the disclosures prior to the law’s effective

date.

   In the five months following the CARD Act, we observe a sharp increase in the share of accounts

paying the three-year disclosure amount. Although the economic impact is small, with treatment

effects of less than 1%, the effect is statistically significant. Unlike the immediate effects observed

for changes in the minimum payment, the disclosures take several months to take full effect. This

short lag could reflect issuers missing the deadline to present the disclosure on credit card state-

ments (although we have not heard reports of such incidents), or consumers gradually noticing the

disclosure on their statements and taking time to adopt the new payment amount.

   Another trend visible in the figure is a deterioration of the effect of the disclosure over time.

The coefficient at τ = 12 absorbs all periods starting 12 months after the CARD Act effective

date until the end of 2013, so reflects the medium-run effect of the disclosures. One reason for the

decline in the disclosure’s effect could be habituation as consumers become accustomed to seeing
                                                                                                   30


the disclosure and “tune out” after its novelty wears off. We use this medium-run effect as the

benchmark estimate of the disclosure’s overall impact.

   Panel A of Table 4 presents the coefficient estimates corresponding to the figure. We show the

effects of the disclosures at three different horizons: three months after implementation, six months

after implementation, and the medium-run effect pooling dates that are twelve or more months

after the effective date. The columns report effects for different windows around the disclosed

36-month repayment duration, which from above show smaller increases after the disclosure. For

our most inclusive measure of payments at durations between 30-36 months, we find an immediate

response of 0.7% of accounts at the three-month horizon, with a medium-run effect of 0.5%.

   Panel B of Table 4 stratifies the specification from column (4)A by credit score bin. Panel C

stratifies by payer type as defined in Section III, based only on payments prior to the implementation

date. We find that subprime consumers and exact and near minimum payers are the only account

types that respond significantly to the disclosures. Five percent of exact minimum payers continue

to pay the three-year amount 12 or more months after the disclosure effective date, suggesting

that some consumers who typically made exactly the minimum payment prior to the CARD Act

were not strictly liquidity constrained, choosing to pay more when presented with a new suggested

payment. The significant effect among exact minimum payers provides further evidence that our

estimates of anchoring from Section IV may represent a lower bound.

   In sum, the effects of the CARD Act disclosures were modest overall and within all of the

subgroups we considered. This could be due to a number of factors. Consumers making online

payments without opening their statements were not exposed to the disclosure. Consumers may not

have found the new disclosure to be salient among other information regarding balances, purchases,

fees, and interest rates present on statements. Finally, the minimum payment, which was still

present on all statements, may continue to exert a stronger influence than the new repayment

amount.
                                                                                                               31


VI        Economic Significance

To conduct a back-of-envelope calculation on the economic significance of anchoring, we compare

the realized effects of the CARD Act disclosures with the counterfactual effects if the disclosures

had caused all anchoring consumers to move from the minimum payment to the suggested three-

year payment amount. We conduct this calculation given the distribution of consumers in 2013,

using β̂12 = 0.5% as the estimated steady-state adoption rate of the disclosures. Assuming that

consumers who adopt the three-year payment amount would have otherwise made the minimum

payment, we find that the disclosures led to an $0.18 per month increase in payments averaged

across all accounts.

       Assuming further that affected consumers carry balances at an APR of 16% and scaling up the

average increase in payments by the 44 million active accounts represented by the issuers in our

sample and their market share of 25% in the general-purpose card market, we estimate that the

disclosures saved consumers $62 million (= $0.18 × 12 × 16%× 44 million ×4) in interest charges

in 2013. This estimate is remarkably close to that of Agarwal et al. (2015), who estimate an upper

bound of $57 million per year in interest savings due to the CARD Act disclosures using a different

sample, different control group, and different set of assumptions.

       In contrast, by replacing β̂12 with our estimates of θ, we repeat the calculation to estimate the

interest savings if the disclosures had instead caused all anchoring consumers to move from the

minimum payment to the three-year payment amount.34 Based on the estimated range of θ between

22% and 38% from Panels B and C of Table 2, we find that the interest savings in 2013 would have

been two orders of magnitude larger, between $2.7 and $4.7 billion, if the disclosures had affected all

anchoring consumers. Depending on the costs of implementing the disclosures, even the relatively

modest realized interest savings could make them a cost-effective policy for increasing consumer

payments. Nonetheless the effect of the disclosures is substantially smaller than the economic role

of anchoring.
  34
    We make this calculation under the assumption that the fraction of anchoring accounts among customers affected
by the formula changes and those who were required to receive the disclosures is roughly the same.
                                                                                                                    32


VII         Discussion and Interpretation

In this section, we discuss the implications of our findings for rational and behavioral theories of

consumer financial decision-making.

       Active vs. Passive Choice

       An influential literature on consumer savings decisions shows that consumers tend to follow the

path of least resistance, and are strongly influenced by defaults and salient suggestions. Madrian

and Shea (2001) show that automatic enrollment significantly increases 401(k) participation, and

the majority of consumers stay with default contribution rates and asset allocations even though few

of them chose these values prior to automatic enrollment. Chetty et al. (2014) find that the majority

of consumers are passive savers, accepting employer-specific default retirement contribution rates

instead of adopting individualized savings targets. As an alternative to passive defaults, Carroll et

al. (2009) show that requiring consumers to make active savings choices also substantially increases

the fraction of savers, and present a model showing that active choice can be optimal when consumer

preferences are highly heterogeneous.

       For consumers who carry revolving balances, debt repayment is an inherently active choice;

heavy penalties for delinquency make inaction an unattractive option. While autopay features are

available through most checking accounts and credit cards, conversations with issuers suggest that

their use remains limited among revolvers. One reason for limited adoption of autopay is that

consumers who borrow at substantial interest rates are likely to have limited liquid wealth (Stango

and Zinman 2013). Automatic Clearing House (ACH) bank transactions typically require several

days to clear, so consumers with low liquidity must actively manage their checking account balances

in order to avoid costly overdraft and insufficient-funds fees.35 As a result, automatic repayment is

largely confined to transactors who use credit cards for convenience and rewards instead of as debt

instruments.

       Our results suggest that despite making active choices, consumers nonetheless follow the path of

least resistance when making repayment choices. The minimum payment is a salient and attractive

option for those carrying revolving debt, with nearly one in three accounts paying exactly or close
  35
    See, e.g., the advice given on automatic bill payments, including credit card payments, on financial advice website
creditcards.com: http://www.creditcards.com/credit-card-news/pros-cons-automatic-payments-1580.php.
                                                                                                     33


to the minimum payment amount on a regular basis. Within this group, twice as many accounts

consistently pay close to but more than the minimum as pay exactly the minimum. Despite actively

choosing to repay more than the minimum, at least one third of near-minimum payers anchor to

the minimum payment amount. In contrast to retirement savings instruments where defaults and

active choice may serve as substitute choice architectures, our results suggest that many consumers

rely on defaults even when forced to make active debt repayment choices.

   Liquidity Constraints and Lifecycle Borrowing

   A novel aspect of our approach is that we use exogenous variation in minimum payment formulas

to distinguish between anchoring and liquidity constraints. Liquidity constraints are an important

reason for consumers to make minimum or near-minimum payments on their credit cards. Tradi-

tional drivers of liquidity constraints include transitory income or expenditure shocks and lifecycle

income dynamics (Hayashi 1985, Deaton 1991). However, we show that the role of anchoring in

the propensity to make near-minimum payments varies surprisingly little with income and age.

   Previous work related to credit cards and liquidity constraints, most notably Gross and Souleles

(2002), has found evidence that consumers are overly-sensitive to the credit limit. While consumers

near the credit limit are likely responding to the relaxation of a binding (or near-binding) constraint,

this work also suggests that consumers who are not especially close to the limit still respond

to raises in credit limits by increasing their borrowing. Beyond the traditional interpretation of

precautionary behavior, consumers may alternatively be targeting a certain credit utilization rate

or certain dollar amount of balances relative to the limit, even if such heuristics fail to approximate

the optimal consumption path. In other words, the credit limit may also serve as an anchor when

considering how much to borrow.

   One explanation for the lack of correlation between minimum payments and income is that

“wealthy hand-to-mouth” households persist over the lifecycle due to investment in illiquid assets

(Kaplan, Violante and Weidner 2014). However, this hypothesis does not explain why consumers

would voluntarily choose to pay more than the minimum and continue to pay more when the

formula increases. Investments in illiquid assets also do not explain why some consumers begin

paying the three-year repayment amount after the CARD Act mandated the provision of new

disclosures. Our results suggest that in the spirit of the spender-saver model of Campbell and
                                                                                                  34


Mankiw (1989), a significant share of consumers behave as if liquidity-constrained because they

follow simple heuristics.

   Present bias and Inattention

   One explanation that has been proposed for the amount of revolving consumer debt in the

economy is impatience and time-inconsistency (Laibson 1997). Present-biased individuals over-

consume in the absence of commitment devices, leading to an accumulation of credit card debt.

Kuchler (2015) and Shui and Ausubel (2004) explore this phenomenon empirically, and Angeletos

et al. (2001) calibrate a model to reconcile credit card indebtedness and income over the lifecycle.

Present bias is unlikely to explain the repayment patterns we observe, although it may contribute

to the choice of borrowing in the first place. We would expect present-biased consumers to repay

as little as possible to increase consumption in the short term. Instead, we observe consumers

continuing to pay more than the minimum when minimum payments increase.

   Our results are also unlikely to be driven by temporary attention effects. We find that anchoring

consumers immediately adjust to increases in the minimum payment formula, and we find no

evidence of reversal. Thus, our evidence of anchoring to the minimum payment is unlikely to be

driven by novelty or “Hawthorne” effects. In contrast to the changes in minimum payment formulas,

we find that the effects of disclosures attenuate over time, and are only 60-70% as large 1-2 years

after the disclosures went into effect as they were immediately after implementation. These findings

provide suggestive evidence of a novelty effect and consumer inattention with respect to the CARD

Act disclosures.

   Anchoring and Rules of Thumb

   Tversky and Kahneman (1974) first introduced the notion of anchoring and insufficient adjust-

ment in the psychology literature. When presented with irrelevant numerical cues, individuals’

answers to general knowledge questions (such as the percentage of African countries in the United

Nations) are biased in the direction of the starting value. More recent psychological research on

anchoring has been skeptical of the adjustment mechanism, and has instead supported a view that

the initial value “activates” or “primes” information that is consistent with the starting value when

the value is relevant or salient to the question at hand (Chapman and Johnson 1999, Epley and

Gilovich 2006). Some studies, such as Jacowitz and Kahneman (1995), explore the idea that the
                                                                                                                     35


anchor can be perceived as a suggestion, and becomes a potential option in the choice set as an

answer to the question. Although the initial value only temporarily enters the choice set, this can

distort the individual’s final answer toward the anchor.

    We find some evidence consistent with both adjustment and activation in credit card repayment

decisions. Our finding that many consumers index their payments to the minimum regardless

of arbitrary changes in its dollar value is consistent with the classical anchoring-and-adjustment

theory. One example of behavior that could generate our finding is the use of rules of thumb such

as paying the minimum plus $20 each month. The consumer may adopt this rule of thumb because

paying more than the minimum is desirable, but still use the minimum as a starting point for

upward adjustment, a form of classical anchoring. In contrast, the CARD Act disclosure causes

some consumers to adopt the three-year payment amount when there was no bunching at this

amount beforehand, suggesting that the disclosure increases the salience of this payment amount

and emphasizes it in the choice set.36 This behavior is more in line with the modern literature on

anchoring as activation.37

    Overall, our results suggest a model in which some consumers are not fully aware of the utility

value of their payment choices. Instead of calculating the solution to an intertemporal choice prob-

lem, consumers start with salient numerical cues available on their monthly credit card statements,

and adjust or adopt these cues based on their views of whether the cues represent desirable or

acceptable payment amounts.38 The minimum payment may be an especially powerful anchor be-

cause it signifies staying in good standing with the issuer and avoiding late fees. This feature may

create the perception that the minimum is a suggested payment amount, as the most prominent

amount besides the full balance featured on credit card statements and payment interfaces (Thaler

and Sunstein 2008). We interpret consumers’ reduced-form responses to these “informative” an-

chors as capturing a set of psychological rules, one of which may be an implicit advice channel.

While many consumers realize that making only the minimum payment would fail to significantly
  36
     We find no evidence that consumers use other heuristics such as paying twice the three-year amount, rounding
the amount to the nearest $50 or $100, etc.
  37
     Other recent empirical research on anchoring, such as Beggs and Graddy (2009) has found a role for the
adjustment-based mechanism, while Chapman and Johnson (1999), for instance, find support for anchoring-as-
activation.
  38
     Choi, Haisley, Kurkoski and Massey (2012) find evidence that cues play a significant role in 401(k) savings choices
using randomized field experiments.
                                                                                                 36


amortize their debt, they may nonetheless be at a loss for how much more they should pay, and

use anchoring heuristics to choose their ultimate repayment amounts.



VIII      Conclusion

Using a sample covering one quarter of the U.S. general-purpose credit card market, we examine

whether anchoring to the minimum payment causes consumers to make smaller payments toward

their outstanding balance. Our identification strategy relies on changes to issuers’ minimum pay-

ment formulas, and we estimate that at least 10% of all consumer accounts anchor to the minimum

payment. This anchoring response is immediate, and occurs for both increases and decreases in the

minimum payment. An attempt by the CARD Act to introduce an alternative suggested repayment

amount resulted in fewer than 1% of accounts adopting the new suggested payment, more than an

order of magnitude smaller than the impact of anchoring.

   Our findings provide novel real-world evidence of anchoring, and have implications for models of

lifecycle consumption and savings behavior. Our finding that a sizable fraction of consumers anchor

on the minimum payment lends support to heterogeneous-agent models that include consumers

that are “boundedly rational” (Gabaix 2014) or follow simple heuristics in the presence of costly

information acquisition (Gabaix, Laibson, Moloche and Weinberg 2006). Lifecycle models that have

attempted to calibrate the share of consumers with outstanding credit card debt (and the amount of

that debt) fall well short of their empirical benchmarks, even when allowing for relatively extreme

hyperbolic preferences (see, e.g. Angeletos et al. 2001). Our results suggest that anomalies related

to repayment behavior may influence the stock of outstanding consumer debt, and help to explain

the calibration gaps in these consumption models.

   By improving our understanding of consumer behavior, these findings have significant implica-

tions for designing optimal defaults in credit markets. As discussed by Choi, Laibson, Madrian and

Metrick (2003) and Carroll et al. (2009) in the context of retirement saving, under some conditions

defaults should be set such that they are optimal for the largest fraction of individuals possible,

whereas in others the default should be deliberately suboptimal in order to force active choice. Our

work suggests that while a large fraction of near-minimum payers appear to treat the minimum

as an anchor, others may be liquidity constrained. In the presence of significant heterogeneity in
                                                                                                37


consumer circumstances, tools for optimizing consumer choice may be preferable to unilaterally in-

creasing payment requirements (Campbell 2016). However, the modest effects we document of the

CARD Act disclosures illustrate the challenges of changing real-world behavior using traditional

forms of disclosure. Developing further evidence on ways to help imperfectly-rational consumers

amortize their debts while minimizing the impact on liquidity-constrained consumers is an impor-

tant area for future research.

   Exploring the role of anchoring and related behaviors in other contexts within the consumer

credit market provides another fruitful avenue for future research. There have been few existing

studies of anchoring in consumer credit markets, and prior work has also largely focused on min-

imum payments on credit cards. Minimum payments are a feature of many mortgage contracts

(such as the popular “Option-ARM” contract during the housing boom), as well as auto loans,

student loans, and payday loans. Credit limits and maximum borrowing amounts may also serve as

salient anchors. Studying these effects could help explain repayment behavior, aggregate debt lev-

els, and consumption dynamics, and yield useful parameters for evaluating the effects of government

intervention in credit markets.
                                                                                            38


References
Agarwal, Sumit, John C Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson, “The Age of
   Reason: Financial Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation,” Brookings
   Papers on Economic Activity, 2009, 2009 (2), 51–117.

    , Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Chunlin Liu, “The Importance of Adverse Selection
    in the Credit Card Market: Evidence from Randomized Trials of Credit Card Solicitations,”
    Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2010, 42 (4), 743–754.

    ,     , Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel, “Regulating Consumer Financial Prod-
    ucts: Evidence from Credit Cards,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (1),
    111–164.

Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and
   Stephen Weinberg, “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and
   Empirical Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2001, pp. 47–68.

Ausubel, Lawrence M., “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market,” The American
   Economic Review, 1991, pp. 50–81.

Bar-Gill, Oren and Elizabeth Warren, “Making Credit Safer,” University of Pennsylvania
    Law Review, 2008, pp. 1–101.

Barr, Michael S., Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir, “Behaviorally Informed Reg-
    ulation,” in Eldar Shafir, ed., The Behavioral Foundations of Public Policy, Princeton, NJ:
    Princeton University Press, 2013.

Beggs, Alan and Kathryn Graddy, “Anchoring Effects: Evidence from Art Auctions,” The
   American Economic Review, 2009, pp. 1027–1039.

Bertrand, Marianne and Adair Morse, “Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases, And Payday
    Borrowing,” The Journal of Finance, 2011, 66 (6), 1865–1893.

    , Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should We Trust Differences-In-
    Differences Estimates?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1), 249–275.

Beshears, John, James J Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C Madrian, “The Impor-
   tance of Default Options for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from the United States,”
   in “Social Security Policy in a Changing Environment,” University of Chicago Press, 2009,
   pp. 167–195.

Bond, Philip, David K Musto, and Bilge Yilmaz, “Predatory Mortgage Lending,” Journal
   of Financial Economics, 2009, 94 (3), 412–427.

Campbell, John Y, “Household Finance,” The Journal of Finance, 2006, 61 (4), 1553–1604.

    , “Restoring Rational Choice: The Challenge of Consumer Financial Regulation,” American
    Economic Review, 2016, 106 (5), 1–30.

     and N Gregory Mankiw, “Consumption, Income and Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the
    Time Series Evidence,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, Volume 4,” MIT Press, 1989,
    pp. 185–246.
                                                                                          39


Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew
    Metrick, “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    2009, 124 (4), 1639–1674.

Chapman, Gretchen B and Eric J Johnson, “Anchoring, Activation, and the Construction
   of Calues,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 1999, 79 (2), 115–153.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Søren Leth-Petersen, Torben Nielsen, and Tore Olsen,
   “Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from
   Denmark,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1141–1219.

Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Metrick, “Saving for Retirement on
   the Path of Least Resistance,” Behavioral Public Finance: Toward a New Agenda, 2006.

Choi, James J, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “Defined
   Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Choices, and the Path of Least Resistance,”
   in “Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 16,” MIT Press, 2002, pp. 67–114.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “Optimal
   Defaults,” The American Economic Review Paper and Proceedings, 2003, 93 (2), 180–185.

Choi, James J, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “For Better or
   for Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior,” in “Perspectives on the Economics
   of Aging,” University of Chicago Press, 2004, pp. 81–126.

    , Emily Haisley, Jennifer Kurkoski, and Cade Massey, “Small cues change savings
    choices,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2012.

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, “CARD Act Report: A Review of the Impact of the
   CARD Act on the Consumer Credit Card Market,” Technical Report October 2013.

d’Astous, Philippe and Stephen H Shore, “Liquidity Constraints and Credit Card Delin-
    quency: Evidence from Raising Minimum Payments,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis, Forthcoming, 2015.

Deaton, Angus, “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, 1991, pp. 1221–1248.

Debbaut, Peter, Andra Ghent, and Marianna Kudlyak, “Are Young Borrowers Bad Bor-
   rowers?,” Technical Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 13-09R 2013.

Ding, Lei, Roberto G Quercia, Carolina K Reid, and Alan M White, “The Impact of
   Federal Preemption of State Antipredatory Lending Laws on the Foreclosure Crisis,” Journal
   of Policy Analysis and Management, 2012, 31 (2), 367–387.

Epley, Nicholas and Thomas Gilovich, “The Anchoring-and-Adjustment Heuristic: Why the
    Adjustments are Insufficient,” Psychological science, 2006, 17 (4), 311–318.

Gabaix, Xavier, “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality,” The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1661–1710.

    , David Laibson, Guillermo Moloche, and Stephen Weinberg, “Costly Information
    Acquisition: Experimental Analysis of a Boundedly Rational Model,” The American Economic
    Review, 2006, 96 (4), 1043–1068.
                                                                                            40


Gross, David B. and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates
   Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data,” The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 2002, 117 (1), 149–185.

Hayashi, Fumio, “The Effect of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption: A Cross-Sectional Anal-
   ysis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1985, 100 (1), 183–206.

Heidhues, Paul and Botond Kőszegi, “Exploiting Naivete about Self-Control in the Credit
    Market,” The American Economic Review, 2010, pp. 2279–2303.

Hershfield, Hal E and Neal J Roese, “Dual Payoff Scenario Warnings on Credit Card State-
   ments Elicit Suboptimal Payoff Decisions,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 2014.

Jacowitz, Karen E and Daniel Kahneman, “Measures of Anchoring in Estimation Tasks,”
    Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1995, 21, 1161–1166.

Jambulapati, Vikram and Joanna Stavins, “Credit CARD Act of 2009: What did Banks
   do?,” Journal of Banking & Finance, 2014, 46, 21–30.

Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L Violante, “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
   Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (4), 1199–1239.

    ,     , and Justin Weidner, “The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
    nomic Activity, 2014, (1), 77–153.

Kim, Jane J., “Minimums Due on Credit Cards are on the Increase,” Wall Street Journal, March
   24 2005.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, “Bunching,” Annual Review of Economics, 2016, 8.

Knittel, Christopher R. and Victor Stango, “Price Ceilings as Focal Points for Tacit Collusion:
    Evidence from Credit Cards,” American Economic Review, 2003, pp. 1703–1729.

Kuchler, Theresa, “Sticking to Your Plan: Hyperbolic Discounting and Credit Card Debt Pay-
   down,” Available at SSRN 2629158, 2015.

Laibson, David, “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 1997, pp. 443–477.

Madrian, Brigitte C and Dennis F Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Partic-
   ipation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1149–87.

Maggio, Marco Di and Amir Kermani, “Credit-Induced Boom and Bust,” Columbia Business
   School Research Paper, 2014, (14-23).

Navarro-Martinez, Daniel, Linda Court Salisbury, Katherine N Lemon, Neil Stewart,
   William J Matthews, and Adam JL Harris, “Minimum Required Payment and Supple-
   mental Information Disclosure Effects on Consumer Debt Repayment Decisions,” Journal of
   Marketing Research, 2011, 48 (SPL), S60–S77.

Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (et al.), “Account Management and Loss Al-
     lowance Guidance on Credit Card Lending,” 2003.
                                                                                           41


Seira, Enrique and Sara G Castellanos, “Interest and Minimum Payment Elasticities in Credit
    Cards,” 2010. Mimeo.

Shui, Haiyan and Lawrence M Ausubel, “Time Inconsistency in the Credit Card Market,”
    2004. 14th Annual Utah Winter Finance Conference.

Simonsohn, Uri and George Loewenstein, “Mistake# 37: The effect of previously encountered
   prices on current housing demand,” The Economic Journal, 2006, 116 (508), 175–199.

Skiba, Paige and Jeremy Tobacman, “Payday Loans, Uncertainty and Discounting: Explaining
    Patterns of Borrowing, Pepayment, and Default,” Vanderbilt Law and Economics Research
    Paper, 2008, (08-33).

Stango, Victor, “Strategic Responses to Regulatory Threat in the Credit Card Market*,” Journal
    of Law and Economics, 2003, 46 (2), 427–452.

     and Jonathan Zinman, “Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance,” The Journal
    of Finance, 2009, 64 (6), 2807–2849.

     and       , “Borrowing High vs. Borrowing Higher: Sources and Consequences of Dispersion
    in Individual Borrowing Costs,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
    2013. Working Paper 19069.

Stewart, Neil, “The Cost of Anchoring on Credit Card Minimum Repayments,” Psychological
    Science, 2009, 20 (1), 39–41.

Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth,
   and Happiness, Yale University Press, 2008.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,”
   Science, 1974, 185 (4157), 1124–1131.

Vigna, Stefano Della and Ulrike Malmendier, “Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory
    and Evidence,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, pp. 353–402.

Zinman, Jonathan, “Household Debt: Facts, Puzzles, Theories, and Policies,” Annual Review of
   Economics, 2015, 7 (1), 251–276.
                                                                                                                  42



                    Figure 1: Stylized Minimum Payment Formula Changes

                                  Panel A: Floor Increase from $20 to $40




                                      Panel B: Schedule Increase by $20




Note: The figure presents a simplified example of a typical credit card minimum payment formula and the two types of
formula changes we observe in our sample. The “old” formula in both panels is minimum = max{f loor, 2%·balance}.
In Panel A, the floor is $20 for the old formula and $40 for the new formula. In Panel B, the formula is shifted from
the old formula to a new formula with minimum = $20 + max{f loor, 2% · balance}, in both cases with f loor = $20.
                                                                                                               43




             Figure 2: Prevalence of Minimum and Near-Minimum Payments
                                   Panel A: Distribution of Payer Types




                         Panel B: Consistency of Payments Within Payer Type




Note: Panel A shows the distribution of accounts by payer type, and Panel B shows the composition of payments for
positive-balance months within each payer type. Each account is classified into a payer type based on whether the
account was paid in full or paid at or near the minimum amount in at least 50% of months. Accounts that did not
pay any of these three amounts in 50% of months are classified as mixed payers. Payments are defined as “near” the
minimum if they are strictly greater than but within $50 of the minimum.
                                                                                                                 44




                 Figure 3: Distribution of Payments as a Fraction of Balance




Note: The figure shows the distribution of payments as a fraction of the balance in 5% bins by payer type. Each
account is classified into a payer type based on whether the account was paid in full or paid at or near the minimum
amount in at least 50% of months. Accounts that did not pay any of these three amounts in 50% of months are
classified as mixed payers. Payments are defined as “near” the minimum if they are strictly greater than but within
$50 of the minimum.
                                                                                                                 45



         Figure 4: Relationship Between Payments and Borrower Characteristics
                                   Panel A: Distribution of Fraction Paid




                                   Panel B: Distribution of Payer Types




Note: Panel A shows the relationship between the distribution of payments as a fraction of balance and borrower
income, borrower age, account balance, and FICO at origination. The darkest area represents full payments, the
lightest area represents payments below 10% of the balance, and the gray band represents payments between 10% and
99% of the outstanding balance. Panel B shows the distributions of payer types by the same borrower characteristics.
Each account is classified into a payer type based on whether the account was paid in full or paid at or near the
minimum amount in at least 50% of months. Accounts that did not pay any of these three amounts in 50% of months
are classified as mixed payers. Payments are defined as “near” the minimum if they are strictly greater than but
within $50 of the minimum.
       Figure 5: Changes In Payment Distribution Due to Formula Changes: Liquidity Constraints vs. Anchoring

          (a) Expected Bunching With Liquidity Constraints Only                                  (b) Expected Bunching With Anchoring




                                                                   (c) Excessive Bunching




Note: The figure depicts three potential ways the distribution of payments could respond to an increase in the minimum payment from M in1 under an old formula
to M in2 under a new formula. In each panel, the solid and dashed lines show the payment distributions under the old and new formulas, respectively. All three
panels show a potential increase in the share of delinquencies from F1 to F10 . In figure (a), all accounts paying between M in1 and M in2 under the old formula
                                                                                                                                                                   46




bunch at M in2 under the new formula, except those that become delinquent. The distribution of payments above M in2 is unchanged in this case. In figure (b),
some accounts paying between M in1 and M in2 under the old formula move to payments higher than M in2 under the new formula. In figure (c) some accounts
paying more than M in2 under the old formula decrease payments to M in2 or less.
                                                                                                                  47




   Figure 6: Difference-in-Differences Regressions Around Issuer Formula Changes
                             Panel A: Average Change in Minimum Payments

            (a) Minimum Formula Increase                              (b) Minimum Formula Decrease




                Panel B: Average Change in Probability of Paying ≤ Higher Minimum

            (c) Minimum Formula Increase                              (d) Minimum Formula Decrease




Note: The figure shows estimates from difference-in-differences regressions of the effects of minimum payment formula
changes. Panel A shows the effects on average minimum payments. Panel B shows the effects on P , an indicator
variable for payments that are less than or equal to the higher of the two minimum payment formulas. Figures (a) and
(c) show the pooled effect for four formula changes that increased the minimum payment, and figures (b) and (d) show
the effect for one formula change that decreased the minimum payment. The solid lines show point estimates, and the
dashed lines show 95% confidence intervals using standard errors that cluster by issuer formula type interacted with
FICO decile. All regressions include control issuers that did not change their formula and controls for time-varying
account characteristics and fixed effects for issuer formula type interacted with FICO decile. See text for details.
                                                                                                 48




Figure 7: Example of Three-Year Repayment Disclosure Mandated by the CARD Act


         If you make no
                                      You will pay off the
         additional charges                                        And you will end up
                                      balance shown on
         using this card and                                       paying an estimated
                                      this statement in
         each month you                                            total of. . .
                                      about. . .
         pay. . .

          Only the minimum
                                       11 years                     $4,745
          payment

                                                                    $3,712
          $103                         3 years
                                                                    (Savings = $1,033)

Source: Federal Reserve Board:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerinfo/wyntk_creditcardrules.htm. Accessed February, 2013.
                                                                                                                   49


                    Figure 8: Effect of CARD Act Disclosures on Payments
                                    Panel A. Cross-Sectional Regressions




                               Panel B: Difference-in-Differences Regression




Note: Panel A presents difference-in-differences estimates for the effects of the three-year repayment disclosure
mandated by the CARD Act. The sample includes statements between December 2009 and May 2010, spanning three
months before and three months after the effective date of the disclosure requirements. Each solid bar represents
the results of a separate regression with dependent variable equal to an indicator for a payment duration between
25 and 45 months, rounded to the nearest month. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. Panel B shows the
results of a difference-in-differences regression with a dependent variable equal to an indicator for payment duration
between 30 and 36 months when rounded to the nearest month. The coefficients correspond to the results shown in
column (4) of Table 4A. The solid line represents point estimates from the regression, and the dashed lines represent
95% confidence intervals. All regressions include controls for time-varying account characteristics and fixed effects
for issuer interacted with FICO decile, and standard errors are clustered by issuer interacted with FICO decile.
                                                                                                               50




                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                       Mean    Std. Dev.      p25       p50       p75

              Card and account
               Income                                $65,583    $49,300    $32,400   $55,000   $87,499
               FICO at origination                       701         76        656       707       758
               Account age (years)                      9.14       7.90          3         7        14
               Age of primary account-holder           51.68      16.10         39        51        63
               Credit limit                           $9,767     $8,842     $3,000    $8,100   $13,760
               Retail APR                              16.14       8.10         12     15.24     19.99
               Joint account                             8%
               Has annual fee                           12%
              All Card Accounts
               # of open cards                          3.02       2.30          1         2         4
               Total balance                         $10,677    $16,859     $1,227    $4,541   $13,751
               Total credit limit                    $38,928    $35,779    $14,500   $29,600   $52,900
               # of new cards in last 3 months          0.06          0          0         0         0
               # of cards 60+ days past due             0.03          0          0         0         0

              Purchases and Balances
               Utilization                              45%        40%        6%        35%       87%
               Balance                                $3,187     $4,607      $384     $1,359    $4,187
                 Promotional                            $545     $2,129        $0         $0        $0
                 Cash advance                           $168       $988        $0         $0        $0
                 Penalty                                $398     $1,940        $0         $0        $0
               Purchase volume                          $501     $1,497        $0        $62      $445
                 Purchase volume > 0                    63%
              Payment and Delinquency Behavior
                Fraction paid                          42%         50%        3%       11%      100%
                Minimum payment                         $82        $210       $20       $39       $88
                Actual payment                         $570      $1,651       $50      $150      $451
                Payment:
                 < Minimum                              9%
                 Exact minimum                         15%
                 Near minimum                          20%
                 Intermediate                          23%
                 Full                                  33%
                Charged fees:
                  Late                                   9%
                  Overlimit                              1%
                  NSF                                  0.2%
                Had past due                             8%



Note: The table provides summary statistics from our sample. The sample consists of a 1% sample of active general-
purpose credit card accounts from several large issuers from 2008-2013, with approximately 40 million monthly
account-level observations.
                                                                                                                               51




      Table 2: Estimates of Anchoring From Minimum Payment Formula Changes


                                             Regression estimates                              Anchoring estimates
                                         Minimum     Delinq.
                                                                  P                       θ            θ*        LC*
                                             Due
                                           (1)          (2)        (3)                  (4)            (5)           (6)
                                     Panel A: Positive Formula Changes, No Time-Varying Controls

                  ∆ (t=-1 to t=0)            14.0      0.016      - 0.013                       0.07      0.03          0.39
                                             (0.7)    (0.002)      (0.007)                    (0.04)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                             [0.0]    [0.000]      [0.056]

                  ∆ (t=-1 to t=3)            14.3      0.002      - 0.031                       0.17      0.07          0.35
                                             (0.6)    (0.003)      (0.006)                    (0.04)    (0.01)        (0.01)
                                             [0.0]    [0.380]      [0.000]

                  ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)            14.5      0.002      - 0.037                       0.21      0.09          0.33
                                             (0.7)    (0.003)      (0.008)                    (0.04)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                             [0.0]    [0.400]      [0.000]

                                           Panel B: Positive Formula Changes, Full Controls

                  ∆ (t=-1 to t=0)            12.2      0.004      - 0.033                       0.18      0.08          0.34
                                             (0.9)    (0.003)      (0.008)                    (0.04)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                             [0.0]    [0.210]      [0.000]

                  ∆ (t=-1 to t=3)            14.4      0.000      - 0.034                       0.19      0.08          0.34
                                             (1.2)    (0.002)      (0.009)                    (0.05)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                             [0.0]    [0.900]      [0.000]

                  ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)            15.4     - 0.002     - 0.039                       0.22      0.09          0.33
                                             (1.6)     (0.004)     (0.011)                    (0.06)    (0.03)        (0.03)
                                             [0.0]     [0.580]     [0.001]

                                           Panel C: Negative Formula Change, Full Controls

                  ∆ (t=-1 to t=0)           - 30.5     0.005        0.120                       0.31      0.16          0.35
                                              (0.7)   (0.003)      (0.006)                    (0.02)    (0.01)        (0.01)
                                              [0.0]   [0.071]      [0.000]

                  ∆ (t=-1 to t=3)           - 33.7     0.007        0.150                       0.38      0.20          0.31
                                              (1.1)   (0.002)      (0.008)                    (0.02)    (0.01)        (0.01)
                                              [0.0]   [0.003]      [0.000]

                  ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)           - 37.8     0.002        0.150                       0.38      0.20          0.31
                                              (1.3)   (0.003)      (0.007)                    (0.02)    (0.01)        (0.01)
                                              [0.0]   [0.390]      [0.000]




Note: The table shows difference-in-differences regression estimates for the effect of issuer formula changes on payments. Panels
A and B report pooled estimates for four formula changes that increased the minimum payment, and Panel C reports estimates
for one formula change that decreased the minimum payment. Standard errors clustered by issuer formula type interacted
with FICO decile are shown in parentheses, and p-values are shown in brackets. Columns (1) and (2) show the average dollar
change in minimum payments and the share of delinquent accounts, respectively. Column (3) presents the change in P , the
share of accounts paying less than or equal to the higher of the two minimum payment formulas. Columns (4) and (5) present
estimates of θ and θ∗ , the fraction of anchoring accounts among those directly affected by the formula changes and among all
accounts, respectively. Column (6) presents estimates of the share of accounts that pay close to the minimum payment due
to liquidity constraints. See text for details. The regressions in Panel A include only time fixed effects and fixed effects for
issuer formula type interacted with FICO decile as independent variables, and includes only potentially treated accounts in the
analysis sample. Panels B and C include all accounts from control and treated issuers and a full set of account-level controls
and fixed effects for issuer formula type interacted with FICO decile.
                                                                                                                                                                           52




                              Table 3: Heterogeneity in Anchoring Estimates

                         P           θ*         LC*        P             θ*         LC*                P            θ*        LC*        P             θ*        LC*
                        (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)            (5)          (6)             (7)           (8)       (9)       (10)          (11)       (12)
                                                                Panel A: Stratified by FICO Band

      Sample:                 Deep Subprime                        Core Subprime                                  Prime                            Super-prime
      FICO range:                 < 620                              620 - 660                                   660 - 720                            > 720

      ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)   - 0.072        0.13        0.59   - 0.080           0.15         0.52         - 0.066          0.15      0.38   - 0.020          0.06       0.15
                         (0.008)     (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.010)        (0.02)       (0.02)          (0.015)       (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.010)       (0.03)     (0.03)
                         [0.000]                           [0.000]                                     [0.000]                           [0.049]

                                                                 Panel B: Stratified by Payer Type

      Sample:                 Exact Min Payer                      Near Min Payer                            Mixed Payer                            Full Payer

      ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)   - 0.097        0.11        0.83   - 0.160           0.32         0.53         - 0.036          0.08      0.21    0.004           0.00       0.02
                         (0.013)     (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.016)        (0.03)       (0.03)          (0.007)       (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.002)        (0.00)     (0.00)
                         [0.000]                           [0.000]                                     [0.000]                          [0.048]

                                                            Panel C: Stratified by Income Quartile

      Sample:                      Lowest                              Second                                     Third                              Highest

      ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)   - 0.046        0.10        0.36   - 0.045           0.10         0.36         - 0.036          0.08      0.32   - 0.033          0.07       0.29
                         (0.013)     (0.03)      (0.03)    (0.013)        (0.03)       (0.03)          (0.012)       (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.011)       (0.02)     (0.02)
                         [0.000]                           [0.001]                                     [0.005]                           [0.004]

                                                                Panel D: Stratified by Age Quartile

      Sample:                      Lowest                              Second                                     Third                              Highest

      ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)   - 0.064        0.13        0.35   - 0.045           0.10         0.39         - 0.041          0.11      0.31   - 0.024          0.08       0.24
                         (0.015)     (0.03)      (0.03)    (0.010)        (0.02)       (0.02)          (0.012)       (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.009)       (0.03)     (0.03)
                         [0.000]                           [0.000]                                     [0.003]                           [0.009]




Note: The table shows heterogeneity in estimates of anchoring from difference-in-differences regressions stratified
by borrower characteristics. The first column in each group presents the estimate for the change in P , the share
of accounts paying less than or equal to the higher of the two minimum payment formulas. The second column
presents estimates of θ∗ , the fraction of all accounts that anchor to the minimum payment. The third column
presents estimates of the share of accounts that pay close to the minimum payment due to liquidity constraints.
Standard errors clustered by issuer formula type interacted with FICO decile are shown in parentheses, and p-values
are shown in brackets. Panel A stratifies the results by FICO at origination, Panel B stratifies by payer type, Panel C
stratifies by income, and Panel D stratifies by borrower age. All regressions include both treated and control issuers
and controls for time-varying account characteristics and fixed effects for issuer formula type interacted with FICO
decile.
                                                                                                                    53




                  Table 4: Effects of the CARD Act Disclosures on Payments


                                                        (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                                                       Panel A: Full Sample

                                                     Paid            Paid             Paid             Paid
                                   Outcome:      36-month     35-36-month      34-36-month      30-36-month

                               ∆ (t=-1 to t=3)      0.002            0.003            0.004           0.007
                                                   (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)
                                                   [0.000]          [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.000]

                               ∆ (t=-1 to t=6)      0.003            0.004            0.005           0.008
                                                   (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.002)
                                                   [0.000]          [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.000]

                              ∆ (t=-1 to 12+)       0.001            0.002            0.002           0.005
                                                   (0.000)          (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)
                                                   [0.026]          [0.017]          [0.019]         [0.000]

                                                 Panel B: Stratified by FICO Band

                                   Outcome:                  Paid 30-36 month amount
                                                    Deep
                                    Sample:      Subprime Core Subprime          Prime          Super-prime
                                FICO Range:         < 620      620 - 660      660 - 720               > 720

                              ∆ (t=-1 to 12+)       0.020            0.017            0.004           0.003
                                                   (0.001)          (0.003)          (0.002)         (0.001)
                                                   [0.000]          [0.001]          [0.140]         [0.007]

                                                 Panel C: Stratified by Payer Type

                                   Outcome:                    Paid 30-36 month amount
                                                 Exact Min       Near Min         Mixed                Full
                                      Sample:       Payers          Payers        Payers             Payers

                              ∆ (t=-1 to 12+)       0.050            0.018           - 0.002        - 0.004
                                                   (0.005)          (0.003)           (0.003)        (0.005)
                                                   [0.000]          [0.000]           [0.490]        [0.330]




Source: The table shows difference-in-differences regression estimates for the effect of the three-year repayment
disclosure mandated by the CARD Act. Panel A presents coefficient estimates for the full sample. The columns refer
to different dependent variables defined as indicators for repayment durations between 30 to 36 months. Panel B
stratifies the results for 30-36-month repayment durations by FICO score, and Panel C stratifies by payer type. All
regressions include controls for time-varying account characteristics and fixed effects for issuer interacted with FICO
decile. Standard errors clustered by issuer interacted with FICO decile are shown in parentheses, and p-values are
shown in brackets.
                                                                                                                54




            Figure A-1: Illustration of Stylized CDF for Anchoring Calculations




Note: The figure shows the CDF of payments when the minimum payment is equal to M in1 . F2 denotes the fraction
of payments less than or equal to a potential higher minimum payment M in2 , and δ denotes the fraction of payments
less than or equal to M in1 + X̄, for some X̄ > 0. The cumulative distribution has discontinuities at M in1 and the
full balance, where consumers bunch at making exactly the minimum payment and paying their balances in full.
                                                                                                        55




        Figure A-2: Account Characteristics Before and After Formula Changes

                  (a) Credit Limit                                          (b) APR




                                        (c) Share with Zero APR




Note: The figures show mean account characteristics for each month before and after minimum payment formula
changes.
                                                                                                         56




        Figure A-3: Borrower Characteristics Before and After Formula Changes

              (a) FICO at Origination                                 (b) Borrower Income




                                             (c) Borrower Age




Note: The figures show mean borrower characteristics for each month before and after minimum payment formula
changes.
                                                                                                                  57




                          Figure A-4: Sensitivity of Anchoring Estimates

                  (a) By FICO Band                                           (b) By Payer Type




                (c) By Income Quartile                                      (d) By Age Quartile




Note: The figures show the sensitivity of estimates of θ∗ , the fraction of all accounts that anchor to the minimum
payment, to assumptions about the set of accounts potentially susceptible to anchoring. Each graph shows the
estimate of the share of anchoring accounts as a function of whether payments within a given band (X̄ in the text) of
the minimum varying between $1 and $200 are assumed to be susceptible to anchoring. The graphs show sensitivity
estimates for the stratified regressions shown in Table 3.
                                                                                                                   58




                          Figure A-5: Spillover Effects of Formula Changes

           (a) Purchases on Affected Card                            (b) Total Balance on Affected Card




           (c) Total Number of Open Cards                           (d) Total Balance on All Open Cards




Note: The figures show difference-in-differences regression estimates for the effects of minimum payment changes on
purchases, balances, and number of open cards. The sample includes accounts that were potentially treated with one
of four formula changes that increased the minimum payment. The regressions include only time fixed effects and
fixed effects for issuer formula type interacted with FICO decile as independent variables. The solid lines show point
estimates, and the dashed lines show 95% confidence intervals using standard errors that cluster by issuer formula
type interacted with FICO decile.
                                                        Table A-1: Summary Statistics By Payer Type

                                               Mean       Median      Std. Dev.     Mean     Median         Std. Dev.     Mean       Median        Std. Dev.     Mean      Median        Std. Dev.
                                                       A. Min payer                     B. Near Min Payer                         C. Mixed payer                         D. Full payer
          Card and account
           Income                            $58,325     $47,499       $44,926    $56,579   $48,000          $39,900    $66,097      $57,499        $48,723    $74,117     $62,000        $56,259
           FICO at origination                   692         693            58        671       678               71        693          701             77        762         772             53
           Account age (years)                  8.93        6.65             8       7.09      4.84                7       8.01         5.39              8      12.72       12.09              8
           Age of primary account-holder       48.57          47            15      48.66        48               15      49.95           50             15      56.60          57             17
           Credit limit                       $7,490      $6,000        $6,448     $7,048    $4,800           $7,069     $9,307       $7,500         $8,520    $13,402     $11,900        $10,033
           Retail APR                          15.03       16.00            10      16.98     16.99                9      16.75        15.99              9      14.82       14.00              5
           Joint account                         6%                                   4%                                    6%                                    16%
           Has annual fee                        7%                                  15%                                   12%                                    12%

          All Card Accounts
           # of open cards                      3.79        3.00             3       4.07      3.00                3       3.07         3.00              2       2.19        2.00              1
           Total balance                     $17,837     $12,117       $19,182    $17,533   $11,996          $18,173    $12,030       $6,322        $16,889     $3,412      $1,467        $12,029
           Total credit limit                $34,974     $25,400       $33,542    $36,156   $26,700          $33,647    $40,802      $30,900        $37,433    $38,932     $30,400        $35,040
           # of new cards in last 3 months      0.05           0             0       0.06         0                0       0.07            0              0       0.05           0              0
           # of cards 60+ days past due         0.06           0             0       0.05         0                0       0.04            0              0       0.00           0              0

          Purchases and Balances
           Utilization                          73%         89%           30%        68%       80%              30%        48%          45%            40%        11%          6%            20%
           Balance                            $5,045      $3,787        $5,000     $4,062    $2,416           $4,638     $3,558       $1,555         $5,122     $1,258        $566         $2,355
             Promotional                        $737          $0        $2,527       $815        $0           $2,449       $675           $0         $2,392        $52          $0           $660
             Cash advance                       $383          $0        $1,512       $308        $0           $1,273       $157           $0           $970         $6          $0           $200
             Penalty                            $362          $0        $1,793       $388        $0           $1,764       $607           $0         $2,465        $65          $0           $611
           Purchase volume                       $83          $0          $371       $103        $0             $351       $335          $31         $1,009     $1,230        $581         $2,428
             Purchase volume > 0                30%                                  42%                                   58%                                    99%
          Payment and Delinquency Behavior
            Fraction paid                       9%           2%           20%        9%         3%              20%       31%            9%            40%        95%        100%            20%
            Minimum payment                     $88          $45          $177       $97        $57             $140      $102           $40           $284        $35         $22            $55
            Actual payment                     $139          $45          $628      $171        $80             $613      $438          $150         $1,297     $1,247        $573         $2,533
            Payment:
             < Minimum                          6%                                   7%                                   15%                                     2%
             Exact minimum                     77%                                  18%                                    9%                                     3%
             Near minimum                      10%                                  58%                                   16%                                     0%
             Intermediate                       6%                                  15%                                   42%                                     5%
             Full                               2%                                   2%                                   19%                                    90%
            Charged fees:
              Late                               7%                                   9%                                  13%                                      3%
              Overlimit                          1%                                   1%                                    2%                                     0%
              NSF                              0.2%                                 0.2%                                  0.3%                                   0.1%
            Had past due                         6%                                   7%                                  14%                                      1%



Note: The table provides summary statistics for accounts in each payer type. Each account is classified into a payer type based on whether the account was paid
in full or paid at or near the minimum amount in at least 50% of months. Accounts that did not pay any of these three amounts in 50% of months are classified
as mixed payers. The sample definition is the same as that in Table 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     59
                                                                                                                        60




                           Table A-2: Robustness of Anchoring Estimates




                                   Regression estimates                                Anchoring estimates
                              Minimum      Delinq.
                                                        P                       θ              θ*            LC*
                                  Due
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)                      (4)            (5)           (6)
                                       Panel A: Treatment Intensity Specification

      ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)             1.230     0.0004     - 0.0019                       0.13         0.10          0.36
                                 (0.130)   (0.0002)     (0.0006)                    (0.04)       (0.03)        (0.02)
                                 [0.000]   [0.0510]     [0.0019]

                                              Panel B: Exclude Promotions

      ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)              16.3       0.001     - 0.029                       0.19         0.08          0.31
                                   (1.3)     (0.003)     (0.010)                    (0.07)       (0.03)        (0.03)
                                   [0.0]     [0.640]     [0.007]

                                            Panel C: Single Cardholders Only

      ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)              17.0     - 0.011     - 0.041                       0.34         0.09          0.17
                                   (4.7)     (0.007)     (0.011)                    (0.09)       (0.02)        (0.02)
                                   [0.0]     [0.110]     [0.001]

                                           Panel D: Multiple Cardholders Only

      ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)              22.2       0.006     - 0.044                       0.25         0.11          0.34
                                   (2.8)     (0.005)     (0.012)                    (0.07)       (0.03)        (0.03)
                                   [0.0]     [0.230]     [0.001]




Note: The table shows difference-in-differences regression estimates for the effects of issuer formula changes on
payments in four variations of our main specification. Panel A uses the difference in the minimum payments between
the old and new formulas as the treatment variable. Panel B excludes any cards with a promotional interest rate
offer. Panels C and D use subsamples of single cardholders and multiple cardholders, respectively. Columns (1) and
(2) show the average dollar change in minimum payments and the share of delinquent accounts. Column (3) presents
the change in P , the share of accounts paying less than or equal to the higher of the two minimum payment formulas.
Columns (4) and (5) present estimates of θ and θ∗ , the fraction of anchoring accounts among those directly affected
by the formula changes and among all accounts, respectively. Column (6) presents estimates of the share of accounts
that pay close to the minimum payment due to liquidity constraints. All regressions include both treated and control
issuers and controls for time-varying account characteristics and fixed effects for issuer formula type interacted with
FICO decile. Standard errors clustered by issuer formula type interacted with FICO decile are shown in parentheses,
and p-values are shown in brackets.
                                                                                                                           61




                Table A-3: Microdata Regressions with Account Fixed Effects

                                        Regression estimates                               Anchoring estimates
                                    Minimum     Delinq.
                                                             P                        θ            θ*        LC*
                                        Due
                                       (1)          (2)        (3)                  (4)            (5)           (6)
                                 Panel A: Positive Formula Changes, No Time-Varying Controls
              ∆ (t=-1 to t=0)            13.7      0.018      - 0.013                       0.07      0.03          0.39
                                         (0.7)    (0.002)      (0.007)                    (0.04)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                         [0.0]    [0.000]      [0.057]
              ∆ (t=-1 to t=3)            14.0      0.009      - 0.027                       0.15      0.06          0.35
                                         (0.6)    (0.003)      (0.007)                    (0.04)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                         [0.0]    [0.004]      [0.000]
              ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)            14.1      0.011      - 0.031                       0.17      0.07          0.35
                                         (0.6)    (0.002)      (0.007)                    (0.04)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                         [0.0]    [0.000]      [0.000]
                                       Panel B: Positive Formula Changes, Full Controls
              ∆ (t=-1 to t=0)            11.8      0.005      - 0.031                       0.17      0.07          0.35
                                         (0.9)    (0.003)      (0.008)                    (0.04)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                         [0.0]    [0.150]      [0.000]
              ∆ (t=-1 to t=3)            12.0      0.001      - 0.035                       0.19      0.08          0.34
                                         (1.3)    (0.002)      (0.009)                    (0.05)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                         [0.0]    [0.500]      [0.000]
              ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)            12.2      0.000      - 0.040                       0.22      0.09          0.32
                                         (1.4)    (0.002)      (0.010)                    (0.06)    (0.02)        (0.02)
                                         [0.0]    [0.940]      [0.000]
                                       Panel C: Negative Formula Change, Full Controls
              ∆ (t=-1 to t=0)          - 30.9      0.004        0.120                       0.31      0.16          0.35
                                         (0.6)    (0.003)      (0.007)                    (0.02)    (0.01)        (0.01)
                                         [0.0]    [0.160]      [0.000]
              ∆ (t=-1 to t=3)          - 32.2      0.006        0.130                       0.34      0.17          0.34
                                         (0.7)    (0.002)      (0.007)                    (0.02)    (0.01)        (0.01)
                                         [0.0]    [0.007]      [0.000]
              ∆ (t=-1 to t=5)          - 35.0      0.000        0.120                       0.31      0.16          0.35
                                         (1.2)    (0.002)      (0.006)                    (0.02)    (0.01)        (0.01)
                                         [0.0]    [0.980]      [0.000]



Note: The table shows difference-in-differences regression estimates for the effect of issuer formula changes on pay-
ments using micro data (rather than the collapsed data shown in Table 2). Panels A and B report pooled estimates
for four formula changes that increased the minimum payment, and Panel C reports estimates for one formula change
that decreased the minimum payment. Standard errors clustered by issuer formula type interacted with FICO decile
are shown in parentheses, and p-values are shown in brackets. Columns (1) and (2) show the average dollar change
in minimum payments and the share of delinquent accounts, respectively. Column (3) presents the change in P , the
share of accounts paying less than or equal to the higher of the two minimum payment formulas. Columns (4) and
(5) present estimates of θ and θ∗ , the fraction of anchoring accounts among those directly affected by the formula
changes and among all accounts, respectively. Column (6) presents estimates of the share of accounts that pay close
to the minimum payment due to liquidity constraints. See text for details. The regressions in Panel A include only
time and account fixed effects as independent variables, and includes only treated accounts in the analysis sample.
Panels B and C include all accounts from control and treated issuers and a full set of account-level controls and
account fixed effects.
