NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A MODEL OF FICKLE CAPITAL FLOWS AND RETRENCHMENT
Ricardo J. Caballero
Alp Simsek
Working Paper 22751
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22751

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016, Revised July 2019

We thank three anonymous referees, and the editor Harald Uhlig especially, for their detailed,
constructive comments. Masao Fukui, Antoine Levy, Andrea Manera, and Zilu Pan provided
outstanding research assistance. We are also grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Chris Ackerman,
Charles Engel, Kristin Forbes, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Anton Korinek, Signe Krogstrup, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Jonathan Ostry, Andrei Shleifer, and Frank Warnock, as well as the seminar
participants at YALE SOM, Harvard University, Duke University, Tufts University, Brown
University and the conference participants at the NBER IFM Meeting, Chicago International
Macro Finance Conference, Harvard/MIT Financial Economics Workshop, the ECB/FED/
FEDNY Global Research Forum on International Macroeconomics and Finance, for their
comments. Simsek acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) under
Grant Number SES-1455319. A previous version of this paper circulated under the title “A Model
of Fickle Capital Flows and Retrenchment: Global Liquidity Creation and Reach for Safety and
Yield.” First draft: August 31, 2016. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

A Model of Fickle Capital Flows and Retrenchment
Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 22751
October 2016, Revised July 2019
JEL No. E3,E4,F3,F4,F6,G1
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of gross capital flows and analyze their role in global financial stability. In
our model, consistent with the data, when a country experiences asset fire sales, foreign
investments exit (fickleness) while domestic investments abroad return home (retrenchment).
When countries have symmetric expected returns and financial development, the benefits of
retrenchment dominate the costs of fickleness and gross flows increase fire-sale prices.
Fickleness, however, creates a coordination problem since it encourages local policymakers to
restrict capital inflows. When countries are asymmetric, capital flows are driven by additional
mechanisms, reach-for-safety and reach-for-yield, that can destabilize the receiving country.

Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics, E52-528
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
caball@mit.edu
Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E52-552
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu

A Dynamic link to the most recent version of the paper is available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/zf48a2dd5cfga64/fickleFlowsMostRecent_Public.pdf?dl=0

1.

Introduction

Capital in‡ows are large, often exceeding 10 percent of a country’s GDP per year. But they are
also …ckle— foreign investors tend to exit when a country is in …nancial distress. Fickleness can
exacerbate asset …re sales, where assets are traded at a lower price than when investors with the
highest valuation have su¢ cient liquidity.1 Consistent with this mechanism, we show that the
decline of capital in‡ows into a country is typically associated with higher future stock returns in
that country (see Section 2). Concerns about …ckle capital in‡ows exacerbating asset …re sales have
spawned an academic and policy literature that emphasizes the need to regulate capital ‡ows (see,
e.g., IMF (2012)).
Less studied than …ckleness, but as prevalent, is retrenchment. Retrenchment occurs when local
investors reduce their foreign investments and bring home their global liquidity during domestic distress. Empirically, capital out‡ows are highly correlated with in‡ows, meaning that local investors
come home as foreign investors leave the country (see Section 2). Since retrenchment increases
domestic liquidity during distress, it tends to o¤set the …nancial instability caused by …ckleness
and weakens the case for regulating capital ‡ows. In this paper, we address this tension and its
implications. We develop a stylized model of capital ‡ows that assumes …ckleness, and we ask
whether capital ‡ows can still be a useful source of liquidity.
Our model features a continuum of countries, each associated with a risky asset. The asset
always pays a …xed amount, but the timing of the payo¤ is uncertain. Speci…cally, each country
experiences a “liquidity shock” with some probability, in which case its asset’s payo¤ is delayed to
a future period. When this happens, the asset is traded at an endogenous price. In each country,
there is one group of agents (“distressed sellers”) that sell their legacy risky assets to make new
investments, and another group of agents (“banks”) that can purchase risky assets. We make
parametric assumptions so that the asset experiences a …re sale and its price is determined by
banks’available liquidity. We analyze how cross-country investments impact the severity of asset
price declines when there is a liquidity shock.
Speci…cally, in the ex-ante period banks have three choices: invest in the local risky asset, invest
in foreign risky assets, or consume. These decisions are the source of ex-ante capital ‡ows in our
model. If banks invest in the foreign risky asset, there are capital out‡ows from the sending country
and capital in‡ows into the receiving country. Our key assumption is that, ex post, banks are homebiased in that they are extremely …ckle in foreign countries. If the foreign country experiences a
liquidity shock, banks sell their risky asset in that country regardless of the price. This assumption
captures a variety of factors that might handicap foreigners during domestic distress: asymmetric
information or Knightian uncertainty, deteriorating property rights, asymmetric regulation, and so
on. We are agnostic about the source of …ckleness and view it as a modeling device to capture the
asymmetric behavior of foreigners and locals during crises that we see in the data. In particular,
while foreign banks in our model sell local assets, local banks retrench and use their global liquidity
1

By liquidity we mean …nancial resources that can be immediately deployed to purchase other …nancial or real
assets. For early models of …re sales, see, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny (1992) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).

2

to purchase local assets at …re-sale prices.
In our baseline model, countries are identical except for their liquidity shocks. In this case, a
natural question is whether banks invest in foreign countries at all, since …ckleness (which occasionally forces banks to sell at …re-sale prices) reduces their expected return from foreign risky assets
relative to the local risky asset. However, funds invested abroad can provide valuable liquidity
during local …re sales. In our model, this liquidity e¤ect is strong enough that there is always
foreign investment and capital ‡ows despite …ckleness.
We then analyze how these …ckle capital ‡ows among similar countries a¤ect global …nancial
stability. Our main positive result is that capital ‡ows increase …re-sale asset prices despite their
…ckleness. The intuition is that …ckle foreign banks sell local assets at …re-sale prices, but local banks
obtain liquidity from their diversi…ed foreign assets at relatively high valuations. In a symmetric
environment, every pre-crisis in‡ow is matched by a pre-crisis out‡ow of equal size. Thus symmetric
capital ‡ows provide liquidity and increase …re-sale prices.
In this symmetric environment, we also assess policies that regulate capital ‡ows. Our main
normative result is that regulating capital ‡ows is subject to a coordination problem. Even though
capital ‡ows increase …re-sale prices in global equilibrium, local policymakers trying to increase …resale prices in their home country might restrict capital in‡ows. This tension arises because there is
a public-goods aspect to the global liquidity generated via …ckle capital ‡ows. Every capital in‡ow
into one country is an out‡ow from some other country. Local regulators restrict in‡ows to reduce
the country’s exposure to …ckleness, but they do not recognize the retrenchment bene…ts that a
stable source of foreign assets has for banks in other countries.
We also investigate the determinants of gross capital ‡ows in our baseline model. First, we show
that a greater scarcity of safe assets increases gross capital ‡ows— a situation reminiscent of the
period before the global …nancial crisis. Foreign assets (imperfectly) substitute for safe assets by
creating liquidity during local liquidity shocks. Second, we show that an increase in the perceived
correlation between liquidity shocks reduces gross capital ‡ows— a situation reminiscent of the
period after the …nancial crisis. When banks think liquidity shocks are more likely to be global,
they perceive that foreign assets create less liquidity. The resulting decline in foreign investment
reduces liquidity and …re-sale prices even if the global shock is not realized.
Our baseline symmetric model roughly captures gross capital ‡ows among developed countries.
However, when liquidity or investment returns are substantially asymmetric across regions, gross
capital ‡ows may not be stabilizing. We identify two potentially destabilizing mechanisms, reachfor-safety and reach-for-yield, that apply when developed markets with substantial liquidity but
relatively low returns trade capital ‡ows with emerging markets with less liquidity but relatively
high returns.
The reach-for-safety mechanism is driven by cross-country di¤erences in liquidity (captured by
the supply of local safe assets in our model). Greater liquidity in a developed market country makes
its assets relatively attractive to foreign banks. Other things equal, this induces the developed
country to experience greater in‡ows relative to its out‡ows (or run current account de…cits).

3

Moreover, the in‡ows into the developed market country end up in stable, low-yield safe assets,
whereas the out‡ows are directed to risky, high-yield assets. Banks in the developed market country
e¤ectively sell liquidity insurance to emerging markets. These types of reach-for-safety ‡ows reduce
…re-sale prices in the developed market while increasing them in emerging markets. (See Lane
and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) for empirical evidence on the risk composition of cross-country assets
and liabilities, and Gourinchas and Rey (2007); Gourinchas et al. (2010, 2012) for evidence on the
venture capitalist and insurer roles the U.S. plays in the global system).
The reach-for-yield mechanism is driven by cross-country di¤erences in investment returns. If
the return in an emerging market country is greater than in other markets, foreign banks invest
in this country not only to have a source of liquidity during their local liquidity shocks but also
to chase higher returns. This process stops only when …ckle in‡ows are large enough that, in the
event of a local liquidity shock, the emerging market country has lower …re-sale prices compared
to other countries (thereby reducing its appeal to foreign banks). Thus, we …nd that …ckle ‡ows
driven by the pursuit of higher returns destabilize the emerging markets receiving these ‡ows.
Related literature.

International diversi…cation is at the core of our mechanism. An extensive

literature studies capital ‡ows in frictionless models of international risk sharing (see e.g., Grubel
(1968); Cole and Obstfeld (1991); Van Wincoop (1994); Lewis (2000); Coeurdacier and Rey (2013)).
The main reason for diversi…cation in our paper is di¤erent from the reasons highlighted in this
literature. In our model, investments abroad provide valuable liquidity to local banks during …re
sales.
Our paper is part of a literature that focuses on gross positions held by sophisticated …nancial
intermediaries and their role in allocating international liquidity where it is most valuable (see, for
instance, Brunnermeier et al. (2012); Bruno and Shin (2013); Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015);
Gabaix and Maggiori (2015); Fostel et al. (2015)). A related literature emphasizes the costs of
capital ‡ows: while ‡ows improve capital allocation, their …ckleness may exacerbate local …re-sale
externalities and justify macroprudential regulation (see, for instance, Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(2004); Jeanne and Korinek (2010); Ostry et al. (2010); Caballero and Lorenzoni (2014); Calvo
(2016); Korinek and Sandri (2016)). We explore the global equilibrium implications of …ckleness
and the policy coordination issues that arise in this global context.
We take …ckleness as given. In this sense we take a similar approach to Scott and Uhlig
(1999), who take the …ckleness of …nancial investors as given and study the impact of …ckleness on
economic growth. The all-or-nothing attitude of …ckle foreign banks is extreme in our model, but it
is intended to capture a variety of reasons that foreign investors exit during turmoil (see Remark 3).
One important reason is the attitude of Knightian agents facing an unfamiliar situation. As such,
our model is related to Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008) and Caballero and Simsek (2013). We
develop this Knightian uncertainty interpretation in Online Appendix A.1.
One central reason for capital ‡ows in our model is investors seeking safe assets. Because safe
assets are scarce, investors diversify in foreign risky assets to secure liquidity during local …re sales.
In this sense, our work is related to the literature on the limited availability of safe assets and its

4

macroeconomic consequences (e.g., Caballero (2006); Caballero et al. (2008, 2016); Bernanke et al.
(2011); Gorton et al. (2012); Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012); Gorton (2016)).
The endogenous liquidity creation aspect of our model is similar to Holmström and Tirole
(1998), although our context and mechanism are di¤erent. The liquidity pricing of local assets is
similar to the literature on limits-to-arbitrage and …re sales, e.g., Allen and Gale (1994); Shleifer
and Vishny (1997); Gabaix et al. (2007); Lorenzoni (2008); Krishnamurthy (2010); Gromb and
Vayanos (2016); Holmström and Tirole (2001). In addition to these mechanisms, we highlight the
bene…t of gross ‡ows as a stabilization channel.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews and extends the empirical
literature documenting the …ckleness and retrenchment aspects of capital ‡ows. Section 3 presents
our baseline model with symmetric countries. Section 4 illustrates how symmetric capital ‡ows
create liquidity and mitigate …nancial distress. Section 5 concerns the optimal regulation of capital
‡ows in our environment. Section 6 develops a special case of the baseline model, to analyze the
determinants of gross capital ‡ows. Section 7 considers a variant of the baseline model in which an
(in…nitesimal) country has di¤erent return and liquidity parameters from the remaining countries,
and uses it to analyze asymmetric ‡ows driven by reach-for-safety and reach-for-yield. Section 8
concludes. Online Appendix A contains various extensions of the model as well as proofs of the
propositions, and Online Appendix B describes the data sources and the details of the empirical
analysis.

2.

Fickleness and Retrenchment: Some Facts

Our model is built on the observation that capital in‡ows are …ckle (i.e., foreign investors exit
when a country is in distress) and that capital out‡ows retrench (i.e., local investors reduce their
foreign investments during domestic distress and bring home their global liquidity). In this section
we discuss the evidence for these phenomena and motivate our modeling ingredients.2
Systematic analysis of gross capital ‡ows typically relies on the International Monetary Fund’s
(IMF) Balance of Payments Statistics. Using this data, Broner et al. (2013a,b) document that
…ckleness and retrenchment are broad empirical regularities (see also, Forbes and Warnock (2012)
and Bluedorn et al. (2013)). They write: “during contractions foreigners reduce their investments
in domestic assets and domestic agents reduce their investments abroad. This retrenchment toward
home …nancial markets is particularly acute during crises.” Figure 1, which extends their dataset
until 2017, illustrates this pattern for three developed economies from di¤erent regions: the U.S.,
Spain, and Japan. For each country, we plot capital in‡ows by foreign agents (henceforth, capital
in‡ows) and capital out‡ows by domestic agents (henceforth, capital out‡ows) together with a local
2

For a policy motivation, see Obstfeld (2012) who documents the …ckleness and retrenchment that occurred in the
U.S. at the peak of the subprime …nancial crisis, and argues that retrenchment mitigated the crisis. Speci…cally, he
writes: “...over the two quarters of intensive global deleveraging following the Lehman Brothers collapse in September
2008... [U.S.] Gross capital in‡ows... went into reverse, as foreigners liquidated $198.5 billion in U.S. assets. In
addition, the U.S. …nanced a current account shortfall of $231.1 billion... Where did the total of nearly $430 billion
in external …nance come from? It came from U.S. sales of $428.4 billion of assets held abroad...”

5

1988

1997

2006

2015

1975

25000
20000

15

15000

10

15000

5

10000

0
0

1983

1991

1999

Capital inflows scaled by trend GDP (percent)
Capital outflows scaled by trend GDP (percent)

2007

2015

1996

2000

2004

2008

2012

2016

5000

1979

-5

0

1970

-10

-5

0

0

5000

1000

5

10

10000

2000

10

20

15

C

30

B
3000

A

Stock index (S&P 500, IBEX 35, Nikkei 225; right y-axis)

Figure 1: Gross capital ‡ows and a stock price index for three countries. Sources: IMF, World
Bank, and Global Financial Data (see Online Appendix B for details). A, United States; B, Spain;
C, Japan.
stock market index to visualize the correlation of ‡ows with each other and with domestic …nancial
distress.
To quantify these correlations, we …rst regress capital out‡ows on capital in‡ows. We standardize the capital ‡ow measures in Figure 1 by the mean and standard deviation of each measure
within each country. We focus on the period between 1970 and 2017 and consider two separate
samples: a large sample of 170 countries for which we have data on capital ‡ows, and a smaller
sample of 30 OECD countries for which we have additional data on stock prices and returns (see
Online Appendix B.1 for data sources and details). We include country-speci…c linear time trends
in all regressions. The …rst two columns of Table 1 illustrate our results. In‡ows and out‡ows are
strongly correlated in both samples and the magnitudes are especially large for the OECD sample.
The last two columns illustrate that the results remain largely unchanged when we include time
…xed e¤ects: that is, in‡ows and out‡ows in an individual country are highly correlated even after
controlling for the average ‡ows in sample countries (see Jeanne and Sandri (2017) and Alberola
et al. (2016) for similar evidence). As Broner et al. (2013a,b) note, these patterns are di¢ cult to
reconcile with standard frictionless macroeconomic models, because the shocks (e.g., to domestic
productivity) in those models typically a¤ect domestic agents’and foreigners’domestic investments
in the same direction. Rather, the evidence is more easily reconciled with models where crises a¤ect
domestic agents and foreigners asymmetrically.
We model this asymmetry by assuming that foreign banks sell their assets in a distressed country
regardless of the price, even if the expected return is high (…ckleness). As foreign banks sell, local
banks use their global liquidity to purchase local assets at a high expected return (retrenchment).
6

Table 1: Correlations between capital in‡ows and out‡ows
Out‡ows/trend GDP (std)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
In‡ows/trend GDP (std)
0.441** 0.820** 0.417** 0.752**
(0.043) (0.034) (0.036) (0.047)
Time FE
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country speci…c linear trend
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Sample
Full
OECD
Full
OECD
Observations
5102
838
5102
838
R2 (adjusted)
0.23
0.74
0.28
0.76

Note: The full sample (resp. the OECD sample) is an unbalanced panel of 170 countries (resp. 30 countries) between
1970 and 2017 (see Online Appendix B for details). Estimation is via OLS. Standard errors are in parentheses and
double-clustered by country and year. * and ** indicate signi…cance at 0.05 and 0.01 levels, respectively.

To assess the plausibility of these ingredients, we investigate the relationship between capital ‡ows
and expected stock returns. Using our OECD sample, we regress future stock returns on current
capital ‡ows.
Our baseline speci…cation focuses on the annualized log return of the local stock market index
(including dividends) measured in local currency over the subsequent …ve years (see Online Appendix B.2 for similar results with the return measured in U.S. dollars or over di¤erent horizons).
We control for country …xed e¤ects and include country-speci…c linear time trends. The …rst two
columns of Table 2 illustrate that a decline in capital in‡ows or out‡ows in a country is followed
by high stock returns. The e¤ects are statistically signi…cant and economically large: a one standard deviation decline in the in‡ow (resp. out‡ow) to GDP ratio is associated with a 3.3 (resp.
3.4) percentage point increase in the annualized log stock return over the subsequent …ve years.
Consistent with our model, foreigners seem to exit when expected stock returns are high, whereas
locals seem to return home.
One possibility is that these excess-return …ndings are dominated by global shocks, where all
investors retrench to their respective home countries, and the results re‡ect the excess return
associated with global “risk-o¤” episodes. While we allow for global shocks, gross ‡ows in our
model create liquidity due to non-global shocks (where not all countries are hit symmetrically).
To focus on non-global shocks, we consider a speci…cation with time …xed e¤ects, which absorbs
global changes in ‡ows and returns. The last two columns of Table 2 show that the results remain
signi…cant, although with a smaller magnitude. Consistent with our model, foreigners seem to exit
a country when the expected stock return there is high, even after controlling for the average ‡ows
and stock returns in sample countries. Moreover, our model also predicts that non-global shocks
should reduce local asset prices (and raise excess returns) less than global shocks, as in Table 2.
When shocks are mostly local, domestic investors obtain greater liquidity from their foreign assets
(see Section 4.2).

7

Table 2: Return prediction regressions using gross capital ‡ows
Log stock return in next 5 years (annualized, local currency)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
In‡ows/trend GDP (std)
-0.033**
-0.017**
(0.005)
(0.005)
Out‡ows/trend GDP (std)
-0.034**
-0.014**
(0.005)
(0.006)
Time FE
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country speci…c linear trend
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
716
716
716
716
2
R (adjusted, within country)
0.29
0.29
0.56
0.55

Note: The sample is an unbalanced panel of 30 OECD countries between 1970 and 2017 (see Online Appendix B
for details). Estimation is via OLS. Standard errors are in parentheses and double-clustered by country and year. *
and ** indicate signi…cance at 0.05 and 0.01 levels, respectively.

Remark 1 (Additional Facts on the Role of Banks). In recent work, Avdjiev et al. (2017) further analyze international capital ‡ows by the sectors that send or receive them (banks, corporates,
or sovereigns) and …nd that global banks are largely responsible for the …ckleness and retrenchment
patterns in aggregate data. These banks seem to be especially important for understanding retrenchment in developed markets, whereas sovereigns (which increase their borrowing or draw down their
reserves during crises) seem to account for some retrenchment in emerging markets. This motivates
our emphasis on “banks” as the main empirical counterpart to the agents in our model, as well as
our interpretation that our baseline symmetric model applies most naturally to developed markets.
Moreover, retrenchment by emerging market sovereigns suggests that many of the mechanisms that
we emphasize are also relevant in emerging markets with “central banks” taking the functional role
of “banks” in our model.

3.

The Model

The baseline model features three periods, t 2 f0; 1; 2g, and a single consumption good in each

period. There is a continuum of mass one of countries denoted by superscript j 2 J, which are
symmetric except for their local shocks in period 1.

Shocks. In period 1, an aggregate state s 2 S = f1; :::; jSjg is drawn with probability s > 0,
P
where
s2S s = 1. The aggregate state determines the probability of a liquidity shock in a
given country, which is the same across countries and denoted by
random variable
1

s

!j

s

2 [0; 1]. Speci…cally, a

is drawn for each country j and i.i.d. across j, with

s

= Pr ! j = b and

= Pr ! j = g . We say that a country with ! j = b experiences a liquidity shock (thus, b

and g stand for bad and good states, respectively). The ex-ante probability of a liquidity shock is
8

positive but less than one,

P

S

s s

2 (0; 1). We also assume

s

is strictly increasing in s so that

aggregate states with greater s are associated with a greater likelihood of liquidity shocks.
Assets. There are three types of assets. First, each country j has a risky asset whose payo¤
depends on the realization of ! j . If ! j = g, then each unit of the asset pays R units in period 1
and 0 units in period 2. If instead ! j = b, so that the country experiences a liquidity shock, then
each unit of the asset pays 0 units in period 1 and R units in period 2. In this case, the asset has
an endogenous price pjs in period 1. We focus on symmetric equilibria in which the price in period
1 is the same for all countries that experience a liquidity shock, that is, pjs
with

!j

ps for each country j

= b. Initially, each country has e units of the risky asset, which we refer to as legacy assets

(endowed to local distressed sellers that will be described below). In period 0, agents can produce
more risky assets according to a linear technology. Speci…cally, they can convert one unit of the
consumption good in period 0 into one unit of the risky asset in any country (therefore, the price
of the risky asset in period 0 is equal to one).
Second, there is a risk-free asset that pays 1 unit of the consumption good in period 1 (and
0 units in period 2). The risk-free asset is in …xed supply: speci…cally, there are

units in each

country (endowed to local banks that will be described below). In period 0, the risk-free asset is
traded at an endogenous price qf .
Third, there are Arrow-Debreu …nancial securities that facilitate aggregate risk sharing. Specifically, for each aggregate state s 2 S, there is an Arrow-Debreu security that pays 1 unit of the

consumption good in period 1 if state s is realized (and 0 units in all other states or in period 2).
The Arrow-Debreu securities are in zero net supply. In period 0, the Arrow-Debreu security for
state s is traded at an endogenous price qs .3

Agents. There are two types of agents. First, each country j has a mass one of agents that we
refer to as “distressed sellers.” These agents are our modeling device to generate liquidity-driven
asset sales while keeping the analysis tractable (see Remark 5 for an interpretation in the context
of a more conventional model). Therefore, we model them rather mechanically: they are born in
period 1 endowed withh e units
of the local risky asset (all of the legacy assets). They maximize
i
j
the utility function E c~2;s , where c~j2;s denotes their consumption in period 2 conditional on the
aggregate state s. They have access to a linear technology that converts 1 unit of the consumption
good in period 1 into

units of the consumption good in period 2. The payo¤ from this technology

cannot be pledged to other agents, so the distressed sellers can only invest in their technology using
the liquidity from their legacy assets. Speci…cally, if ! j = g is realized in their country, they receive
Re units of the consumption good from their legacy assets. They invest these liquid resources in
3

Note that agents cannot trade …nancial contracts whose payo¤s are contingent on local liquidity shocks, ! j j .
In Online Appendix A.2, we …rst show that when markets are complete, …ckleness is irrelevant for …re-sale prices.
We then consider the case in which markets are partially complete: in particular, agents can sell contingent contracts
subject to a collateral constraint. We show that, as long as markets are not fully complete, …ckleness a¤ects …re-sale
prices and our analysis generalizes. We adopt the incomplete-markets setting as our baseline model because it features
the tension between …ckleness and retrenchment while simplifying the exposition.

9

their technology and consume the output in period 2, that is, c~j2;s ! j = g = Re. If instead ! j = b
is realized, then they decide whether to keep their legacy assets or to sell them. We let ~ js 2 [0; e]
denote their holdings of the legacy assets at the end of period 1, and note that their consumption
in period 2 is,
c~j2;s ! j = b = ~ js R +

e

~ js ps .

(1)

As long as ps > R for each s, distressed sellers optimally choose ~ js = 0 and sell all of their legacy
assets regardless of the aggregate state. We will make parametric assumptions so that this is the
case along the equilibrium path for most of our analysis.
In each country j, there is also a second group of agents with mass one, which we refer to as
“banks.” These are the main agents in our model and their preferences are,
h
i
E u cj0 + cj1;s + cj2;s

(2)

where the utility function, u ( ), satis…es u0 (c) > 0; u00 (c) < 0 for each c > 0 as well as the Inadatype conditions, limc!0 u0 (c) = 1 and u0 (1) < R. Note that these preferences also imply that, if
! j = b is realized, then (local) banks would be indi¤erent to holding the asset if and only if ps = R.
We will make parametric assumptions so that the equilibrium asset price will be below this level,
ps < R, which we refer to as a …re sale.4
Banks in each country j are endowed with one unit of the con-

Banks’ budget constraints.

sumption good in period 0, as well as

units (all of the …xed supply) of the risk-free asset. In period
0

0, they choose an investment strategy in risky assets, xj ;j , across countries, j 0 . We impose that
0

xj;j is a point mass, and xj ;j for j 0 6= j is a density with respect to the Lebesgue measure. Banks

also choose how many consumption units to invest in the risk-free asset, y j , or in Arrow-Debreu

securities, zsj
cj0

s

. Their budget constraint in period 0 is,

+x

j;j

+x

out;j

j

+ y qf +

X

zsj qs

= 1 + qf ,

s2S

where x

out;j

=

Z

0

xj ;j dj 0 .

(3)

j 0 6=j

Here, xout;j denotes the out‡ows: the aggregate amount banks in country j invest in other countries.
0

Banks are not allowed to short-sell risky assets, xj ;j

0 for each j 0 , but they are allowed to take

unrestricted positions in the risk-free asset or the Arrow-Debreu securities subject to obtaining
nonnegative consumption in all periods and states.
0

In period 1, if ! j = g and j 0 6= j, then banks in country j receive R units of the consumption

good from each unit of their risky asset investment in country j 0 . By an exact law of large numbers,
these investments generate xout;j (1

s) R

units of the consumption good (see Uhlig (1996) for

4
Recall that we assume the assets in countries without a liquidity shock (! j = g) pay early in period 1. This
simpli…es the exposition by ensuring that we do not need to worry about asset prices or …re sales in these countries
(the ex-dividend price would always be zero). Equivalently, we could assume the risky asset always pays later (in
period 2), but make parametric assumptions (e.g., on the legacy asset endowment of distressed sellers) such that the
countries without liquidity shocks are not subject to …re sales (ps ! j = g = R).

10

0

details).5 If instead ! j = b and j 0 6= j, then banks in country j sell their risky asset holdings

in country j 0 , which captures our main …ckleness assumption (see Remark 3 below for various
interpretations). By the same law of large numbers, these sales generate xout;j

s ps

units of the

consumption good. Hence, the total resources banks in country j receive from investments in other
countries is given by xout;j Rs , where
Rs = (1

s) R

+

s ps ,

(4)

denotes the expected one-period payo¤ from a unit of foreign investment conditional on the aggregate state s. In addition, banks receive y j +zsj units of the consumption good from their investments
in the risk-free asset and the Arrow-Debreu securities.
Banks’total resources in period 1 and how they use these resources depend on the shock in their
own country. If ! j = g, then banks’risky asset investments in their own country pay Rxj;j units in
period 1. Moreover, banks have no more remaining investment opportunity so they consume all of
their available resources in period 1. Then, their budget constraint in state ! j = g can be written
as,
cj1;s ! j = g = xj;j R + xout;j Rs + y j + zsj

and cj2;s ! j = g = 0:

(5)

If instead ! j = b, then banks’risky investments in their own country pay zero units in period 1.
However, banks are not required to sell their holdings in their own country. We let
banks’position in the local risky asset in period 1 with
budget constraints in state
cj1;s ! j = b +

!j

j
s

0 denote

= b and aggregate state s. Then, banks’

!j

= b can be written as,

j
s ps

= xj;j ps + xout;j Rs + y j + zsj

and cj2;s ! j = b =

j
s R.

(6)

Banks’problem.
Putting everything together, banks in each country j make an investment plan,
h 0
i
j
j
;j
j
x
0 0 ; y ; zs ; js 0 , to maximize their expected utility in (2), where cj0 is determined by
j

s

Eq. (3), cj1;s ! j = g and cj2;s ! j = g are determined by Eq. (5), cj1;s ! j = b and cj2;s ! j = b
are determined by Eq. (6), and consumption in all periods and states is nonnegative, cj0
0; cj2;s

0; cj1;s

0.

Equilibrium. The equilibrium with symmetric prices is a collection of optimal allocations for
distressed sellers and banks, together with prices, (ps )s ; qf ; (qs )s , that ensure market clearing. The
market clearing condition for the risky asset in a country j with ! j = b in period 1 is,
e+x

in;j

+x

j;j

=

~ js

+

j
s

where x

in;j

=

Z

0

xj;j dj 0 .

(7)

j 0 6=j

5

More precisely, conditional on the aggregate
h 0
i state s, the return
h 0 from
i these countries corresponds to an integral
R
0
over random variables, j 0 2[0;1] Rxj ;j 1 ! j = g dj 0 (where 1 ! j = g denotes the indicator variable). We obtain
the law of large numbers by interpreting this as a Pettis integral, which is a generalization of the Lebesgue integral
to vector-valued functions. We then use a slight extension of Theorem 3 in Uhlig (1996) to evaluate the integral as
R
0
0
out;j
equal to j 0 2[0;1] Rxj ;j (1
with probability one.
s ) dj = R (1
s) x

11

Here, xin;j denotes the in‡ows: the aggregate amount foreign banks invest in a country j. The left
side of the equation captures the supply of risky assets, which comes from the distressed sellers’
endowment of legacy assets, the ex-ante in‡ows, and the ex-ante local investments. The right side
captures demand, which only comes from distressed sellers and local banks, because foreign banks
sell all of their asset holdings in country j when ! j = b. The market clearing condition for the
risk-free asset in period 0 is given by,
Z

j

y dj =

j

Z

dj = .

(8)

j

Finally, the market clearing condition for the Arrow-Debreu security for each state s is given by,
Z

j

zsj dj = 0.

(9)

Remark 2 (Interpreting Assets). We view the risky assets in our model as securities that are held
by banks and that can be subject to …re sales. Some examples are, equity, long-term debt (bank loans
and portfolio debt), and unsecured short-term debt subject to default risk. In contrast, safe assets
are not subject to …re sales and yield a relatively high payo¤ during distress events, e.g., short-term
debt that is highly collateralized or issued by entities with negligible default risk.
Remark 3 (Interpreting Fickleness). Our …ckleness assumption captures a variety of factors that,
during a local distress event, reduce foreign banks’ valuation of the local risky asset relative to
locals’valuation. One interpretation is asymmetric information or uncertainty: foreign banks have
an information disadvantage that worsens when the local market is distressed (see Online Appendix
A.1 for a formalization based on Knightian uncertainty). This interpretation is broadly consistent
with the large literature on portfolio home bias (see, for instance, Gehrig (1993); Brennan and Cao
(1997); Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2009)). Another example is weaker property rights for
foreign banks. In distressed markets, foreign banks are more likely to be expropriated or defaulted
against than locals (see Broner et al. (2014) for a formalization in the context of the European
sovereign debt crisis). A related interpretation is asymmetric regulation that increases foreign
banks’cost of investment in distressed markets relative to their local counterparts (see Uhlig (2014)
for a model along these lines in the context of the same European crisis). Finally, the asymmetry
might also stem from distorted higher valuation by local banks, e.g., because of “moral suasion” by
local regulators and governments.
Remark 4 (Implementation with Lending to Local Firms). In practice, banks often lend to …rms
(or other banks), as opposed to investing in production technologies, and their …ckleness can take
the form of not renewing these loans, as opposed to selling loans. We could capture these realistic
elements without changing anything substantive. In particular, our equilibrium has an equivalent
implementation in which there are competitive local …rms (with no funds) that invest in the domestic
linear production technology in period 0 by borrowing from banks with a one-period, state-contingent
debt contract. The contract promises R units for each unit borrowed if the country does not expe12

rience a liquidity shock, and ps units if there is a liquidity shock (while debt contracts in practice
tend to be noncontingent, the promises in distress are often implicitly reduced, e.g., via lenders’
decision to recall loans). With this implementation, when there is a local liquidity shock, foreign
banks withdraw their …nancing (…ckleness) and local …rms pay them by selling or pledging their
risky assets to local banks.
Remark 5 (An Alternative Model with Distressed Banks). In Online Appendix A.5, we build
an alternative model in which there are no separate distressed sellers. Instead, we require banks
to hold a minimum amount of the local risky asset (in view of their comparative advantage in
lending in the local market), which corresponds to the legacy assets in the main model. We also
model liquidity shocks as events in which local risky assets experience losses. These losses generate
…nancial distress for banks due to their holdings of legacy assets. Banks are then forced to sell
some of their legacy assets to another group of agents, “secondary buyers” (who reside in the
same country). These buyers convert the assets to an alternative use that generates lower payo¤ s,
following the standard …re-sale mechanism as in, e.g., Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). Our main results
hold in this setting. Hence, “distressed sellers” introduce the standard balance sheet channel into
our model while substantially simplifying the analysis. By endowing these agents with legacy assets
and a technology with high return (large ), we mechanically generate liquidity-driven asset sales
and the misallocation of capital (from high to low-marginal-value agents) that results from these
sales.

4.

Gross Flows and Global Liquidity Creation

In this section we characterize the equilibrium. We show that, despite their …ckleness, gross ‡ows
exist, contribute to global liquidity creation, and mitigate …re sales. We also show that foreign
investment in period 0 is associated with a risk premium even though banks have linear utility in
period 1 (thus risk aversion, the standard source of the risk premium, is absent). Throughout the
rest of the paper, we focus on the following parametric condition.
Assumption 1. eR= <

< eR.

The right side of the inequality ensures the equilibrium features …re sales, ps < R. The left side
ensures ps > R, so that distressed sellers always sell their legacy assets, ~ js = 0 [cf. Eq. (1)].

4.1.

Equilibrium and liquidity creation

Under Assumption 1, we conjecture an equilibrium with symmetric prices that satisfy ps 2 (R= ; R)
for each s. We also conjecture a symmetric equilibrium allocation in which each country invests the
0

same amount in the risky asset of each other country, xj ;j = xout;j for each j 0 6= j; and all countries

choose identical allocations. We denote these symmetric allocations by dropping the superscript j,
that is,
xout;j

xout ; y j

y; zsj
13

zs for each j.

Note that these assumptions imply that the in‡ows into a country are equal to its out‡ows, xin;j
xin = xout [cf. Eqs. (3) and (7)]. When it is clear from the context, we also drop the superscript
“in” or “out” and denote these symmetric gross ‡ows with x.
Since banks have linear utility between periods 1 and 2, the presence of …re sales (ps < R)
implies that banks in countries with state ! j = b invest all of their resources in period 1 in the
local risky asset, that is, cj1;s ! j = b = 0, and their position on the risky asset,

j
s,

is determined

by Eq. (6). In addition, since countries have symmetric allocations, the market clearing conditions
and zsj = zs = 0. Combining these observations with the budget

(8) and (9) imply y j = y =

constraints (3) ; (5) ; (6), we obtain,
cj0 + xj;j + xout = 1,
cj1;s ! j = g

= xj;j R + xout Rs + ,

cj2;s ! j = b

=

R
.
ps

xj;j ps + xout Rs +

Substituting these expressions into the objective function in (2), and rearranging terms, the
representative bank’s problem can be written as,
max u 1

xj;j ;xout

xj;j

xout + xj;j R +

X

s

xout Rs +

Ms ,

(10)

s

where Ms

1

s

+

s

R
.
ps

(11)

Here, Ms denotes the expected period-1 marginal value of the consumption good conditional on
the aggregate state s. When ! j = g, local banks do not have an investment opportunity in period
1 and consume their available resources. When ! j = b, local banks take advantage of local …re
sales in period 1 to invest their available resources and obtain greater marginal value, R=ps > 1.
The expression for expected marginal value, Ms , combines these two cases.
To solve problem (10), …rst note that the ex-ante marginal value from investing in the local
risky asset is simply equal to its payo¤, R. In contrast, the ex-ante marginal value from investing
P
in foreign risky assets is given by, s s s (ps ), where
s (ps )

The function

s (ps ),

Rs Ms = ((1

s) R

+

s ps )

1

s

+

s

R
ps

.

(12)

captures the ex-ante marginal value conditional on the aggregate state s

and given the price level ps . For banks, expected payo¤ from foreign investment is relatively low,
Rs < R, because they are …ckle and sell their risky assets when there is a liquidity shock in the
foreign country. On the other hand, expected period-1 marginal value is relatively high, Ms > 1,
because they retrench and use the liquidity from foreign assets to buy underpriced, distressed assets
during a local liquidity shock. The ex-ante marginal value,

s (ps )

= Rs Ms , combines banks’costs

and bene…ts from foreign investment. Our next result characterizes this expression and shows that

14

it always exceeds the ex-ante marginal value from local investment.
Lemma 1. For each aggregate state s with
investment,

s (ps ),

s

2 (0; 1), the ex-ante marginal value from foreign

is strictly decreasing in ps over the range ps 2 (0; R], and it satis…es

In particular, when ps 2 (0; R), we have
investing in local risky assets, so banks

s (ps )
set xj;j

s (R)

= R.

> R and investing in foreign risky assets dominates
= 0.

The possibility of local …re sales induces banks to invest in a diversi…ed portfolio of foreign risky
assets as a form of liquidity insurance. Consistent with this intuition, a decline in the …re-sale price
at home, ps , increases the marginal value from foreign investment,

s (ps ).

Combining Lemma 1 with problem (10), we characterize the equilibrium level of foreign investment as the solution to,
u0 1

xout = E Rs Ms =

X

s s (ps ) .

(13)

s

Banks buy foreign risky assets until the ex-ante marginal value from investment is equal to their
current marginal utility from consumption. Note that a reduction in the …re-sale price ps (in any
aggregate state with

s

> 0) increases xout : a lower price increases the value of liquidity insurance,

and this insurance is obtained by increasing foreign investment.
Next consider the determination of the …re-sale asset prices, ps . Recall that cj1;s ! j = b = 0
and
and

j
s
~ js

is determined by Eq. (6) after substituting y j =

and zsj = 0. Substituting this expression

= 0 into the market clearing condition (7), we obtain an expression for the …re-sale price,
ps =

+ xout Rs
.
e + xin

(14)

The denominator captures the total amount of sales, comprised of liquidity-driven sales (e) and
past in‡ows, all of which are liquidated in a crisis. The numerator corresponds to local banks’
available liquidity, which comes from their safe assets and their foreign asset positions, determined
by past out‡ows. Eq. (14) says that (when there are …re sales) the asset price is determined by
the cash-in-the-market per asset for sale. This expression illustrates the key tension captured by
our model: while past in‡ows tend to reduce the …re-sale price, past out‡ows provide liquidity to
retrenching local banks and help stabilize …re-sale prices.
Recall that, in a symmetric equilibrium, in‡ows and out‡ows in period 0 are equal to each
other, xin = xout = x. Using this observation and the expression Rs = (1

s) R

+

s ps ,

we can

solve Eq. (14) to obtain the following expression for …re-sale prices,
ps = Psmc (x)

+ x (1
e + x (1

s) R
s)

.

(15)

The last equality de…nes the market clearing relation, ps = Psmc (x), which describes the price level
in state s as a function of gross ‡ows. Increasing gross ‡ows increases both the numerator and the
denominator, which captures the competing e¤ects of retrenchment and …ckleness on …re-sale prices.
15

The following lemma resolves this tension and shows that retrenchment dominates …ckleness.
Lemma 2. Under Assumption 1, for each aggregate state s with
level,

Psmc (x),

s

< 1, the market clearing price

is strictly increasing in symmetric gross ‡ows, x.

Eq. (14) provides the intuition for why retrenchment dominates …ckleness. Note that past
in‡ows (x in the denominator) are liquidated at the …re-sale return, ps . However, past out‡ows
(x in the numerator) provide liquidity to retrenching local banks at a higher return, Rs . When
ps < R and
Rs = (1

s

< 1, the …re-sale return is lower than the return from foreign investment, ps <

s) R +

s ps .

It follows that symmetric ‡ows increase liquidity in the bad state and raise

…re-sale prices. Despite their …ckleness, gross ‡ows reallocate excess liquidity from foreign …nancial
markets to the local market, which needs liquidity.
The equilibrium levels of gross ‡ows and prices, x; (ps )s , are characterized by solving Eq. (13)
together with Eq. (15) for each aggregate state s. We can now state our main result, which
establishes the existence of a unique symmetric equilibrium that features x 2 (0; 1), and ps 2

(R= ; R). The result also compares the equilibrium prices with those that would obtain in an

autarky allocation where all foreign investment is banned. In autarky, banks solve the same portfolio
0

problem as before, with the additional restriction that xj ;j = 0 for any j 0 6= j. It is easy to check
that banks hold some local risky assets, xj;j = x > 0, where x is the solution to, u0 (1

x) = R.

However, these local investments do not generate any additional liquidity when there is a local
liquidity shock in period 1. Therefore, the …re-sale price is still characterized by Eq. (15) after
substituting zero capital ‡ows. This yields a …re-sale price in autarky paut = =e, which, by Lemma
2, is lower than the equilibrium price ps .
Proposition

1

(Equilibrium Capital Flows and Global Liquidity Creation). Consider

the model with Assumption 1.
xj;j ;

xout

=

xin

= x ; y; (zs ;

s )s ,

There exists a unique symmetric equilibrium allocation,
with symmetric prices, (ps )s ; qf ; (qs )s . The equilibrium alloca-

tion satis…es xj;j = 0; y = ; zs = 0. The tuple (x; (ps )s ) is characterized by Eqs. (13) and (15),
and satis…es x 2 (0; 1) and ps 2 (R= ; R) for each s. Capital ‡ows create liquidity, in the sense

that the …re-sale price is greater than the price that would obtain in the autarky allocation, that is,
paut = =e for each s, with strict inequality if

ps

s

< 1.

Figure 2 illustrates this result for the special case with a single aggregate state. In this case, let
and

s 2 (0; 1) denote the probability of a liquidity shock, p
P mc (x) denote the functions characterized in Lemmas 1

corresponds to the optimality condition, u0 (1
market clearing relation, p =

P mc (x).

x) =

ps denote the …re-sale price, and

(p)

and 2. The declining curve in Figure 2

(p). The increasing curve corresponds to the

The equilibrium is the intersection. The equilibrium price is

strictly greater than the autarky price, which illustrates that gross ‡ows help create liquidity and
mitigate …re sales despite their …ckleness.

16

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 2: Equilibrium when there is a single aggregate state.

4.2.

Asset prices and returns

Let us go back to the case with multiple aggregate states and characterize the equilibrium asset
prices and returns. Recall our convention that

s

is strictly increasing in s so that states with a

greater s are associated with greater likelihood of liquidity shocks. Combining this with Eq. (15)
illustrates that ps is strictly decreasing in s: that is, states with a greater likelihood of liquidity
shocks are associated with strictly lower equilibrium prices. Intuitively, these states have less global
liquidity since more countries are simultaneously hit by the liquidity shock. This also implies that
the payo¤ from foreign investment, Rs = (1
marginal value in period 1, Ms = 1

s

s) R +

+

s (R=ps )

s ps ,

is strictly decreasing in s, whereas the

is strictly increasing in s.

Next consider the asset prices in period 0, qf ; (qs )s . Recall that the equilibrium features y j =
and zsj = 0 for each s. Suppose banks in a country consider changing these allocations, y j ; zsj .
Following similar steps as above (and using xj;j = 0) the optimal allocations solve,
max u cj0 +
j
y ;(zsj )s
where cj0 = 1

X

xout Rs + y j + zsj Ms ,

s

s

xout

X

qf y j

(16)

qs zsj .

s

Using the optimality condition for zsj , we obtain an expression for Arrow-Debreu prices,
qs
s

=

Ms
u0 (1

x)

.

(17)

As usual, the stochastic discount factor (SDF), qs = s , is determined by the expected marginal value
in the corresponding state divided by marginal utility in period 0. Note also that qs =

s

is strictly

increasing in s (because Ms is strictly increasing). As expected, states with a greater probability
17

of liquidity shocks feature more expensive state prices. For future reference, note that substituting
P
Eq. (17) into (13) implies 1 = s Rs qs : that is, the cost of foreign diversi…ed investment is equal

to the cost of the replicating portfolio of Arrow-Debreu securities.

Using the optimality condition for y j , we solve for the risk-free asset price, qf

E [Ms

] =u0 (1

x). We de…ne the risk-free return as the inverse of this price, Rf

ing Eq. (13) to substitute for

u0 (1

Rf =

=

1=qf . Us-

x) in the expression for qf , we obtain,

E R s Ms
cov Rs ; Ms
= E Rs +
.
E [Ms ]
E [Ms ]

(18)

Observing that covariance term is negative, since Rs is strictly decreasing in s and Ms is strictly
increasing in s, we also …nd that the risk premium on foreign assets is positive,
E Rs

Rf =

cov Rs ; Ms
E [Ms ]

0.

(19)

Here, the inequality is strict as long as there are multiple states. Intuitively, the risk-free asset
provides valuable liquidity insurance in states (with higher s) in which aggregate liquidity is scarce,
whereas risky foreign investment generates a relatively lower payo¤ in those states. In equilibrium,
this reduces the risk-free rate and generates a risk premium on foreign investment.
Proposition 2 (Equilibrium Asset Prices and Risk Premia). Consider the symmetric equilibrium
characterized in Proposition 1. The …re-sale price, ps , is strictly decreasing in s (which captures the
likelihood of the liquidity shock). The state price, qs = s , is characterized by Eq. (17) and is strictly
increasing in s. The return on the risk-free asset and the risk premium on foreign investment is
characterized by Eqs. (18) and (19). The risk premium is strictly positive as long as there are
multiple aggregate states.

5.

Regulating Gross Flows

In this section, we analyze policies that regulate capital ‡ows. We …rst characterize the constrained
optimal allocation and show that the competitive equilibrium is constrained ine¢ cient due to
pecuniary externalities. We then show that there is a public-goods aspect to global liquidity
creation that generates a need for coordinated policy.
Throughout, we focus on the special case with a single aggregate state, so we drop the subscript
s from all variables. We also assume the policymakers are utilitarian with identical welfare weights
on all agents: the social welfare in each country
h j is ithe sum
h of
i (local) banks’and (local) distressed
j
j
j
j
j
sellers’expected utilities, W = u c0 + E c1 + c2 + E c~2 .

5.1.

Constrained optimal allocation and externalities

Consider a constrained social planner that can dictate (symmetric) period-0 local and foreign
investment in each country but otherwise cannot interfere with the equilibrium allocations. We
18

denote local investment with xj;j , foreign investment with x, and the resulting equilibrium price
with p. In view of Assumption 1, we conjecture that the resulting price satis…es p 2 (R= ; R) for
any choice of xj;j ; x .

Following similar steps as in Section 3, the market clearing condition (15) still applies. Moreover,
the social welfare that results from this allocation is given by,
Wj = u 1
where R = (1

x

xj;j + xj;j + x + e R + + (

1) eR,

(20)

) R + p. This expression is the sum of utility from investment activity by

banks (…rst three terms) and net production by distressed sellers (last term). Conditional on risky
investment x + xj;j in period 0, the risky assets produce a total of x + xj;j + e R units of the
consumption good in either period 1 or period 2. Safe assets produce an additional

units of

the consumption good in period 1. Finally, the investment activity by distressed sellers uses (in
expectation) eR units of the consumption good in period 1 and delivers eR units in period 2, for
an expected net production of (

1) eR. All of these resources are consumed by either banks or

distressed sellers in periods 1 or 2. Since these agents have linear utility over these periods, the
utilitarian social welfare is given by (20) (see Online Appendix A.6 for details).
The constrained social planner chooses x; xj;j

0 to maximize (20) subject to the market

clearing condition (15). Since p is strictly increasing in x (cf. Lemma 1) but does not depend on
xj;j , the optimum features xj;j = 0. That is, local investment is dominated both in equilibrium and
in the constrained optimum.
However, the level of foreign investment in the constrained optimum can be di¤erent than in
equilibrium. Speci…cally, the optimality condition for foreign investment implies,
u0 (1

x) = R + (

1) e

dp
dx

where

dp
(1
)
=
(R
dx
e + x (1
)

p) .

(21)

To …nd the constrained optimum, we solve this expression together with the market clearing condition (15). Under Assumption 1, there exists a unique intersection that satis…es x 2 (0; 1) and

p 2 (R= ; R). For comparison, recall that the equilibrium is characterized by solving a di¤erent
optimality condition (13) together with the same market clearing condition (15) (see Figure 2).
Hence, the equilibrium is typically constrained ine¢ cient. The following proposition characterizes
the direction of the ine¢ ciency.
Proposition 3 (Constrained Optimal Allocation). Consider the model with Assumption 1 and a
single aggregate state. The constrained optimal allocation, (x; p), is characterized as the unique
solution to Eqs. (21) and (15). Compared to the decentralized equilibrium allocation, denoted by
(xeq ; peq ), the constrained planner chooses greater x (which leads to greater p) if and only if,
e + xeq (1

) + xeq (R=peq )
R
> eq .
eq
e+x
p

(22)

To understand this result, note that investing in foreign assets creates liquidity and increases the
19

…re-sale price p [via Eq. (15)]. The increase in the …re-sale price increases the wealth of the sellers
and reduces the wealth of the buyers. These e¤ects represent pecuniary externalities that the banks
ignore but the planner takes into account. Condition (22) says that foreign investment is associated
with net positive pecuniary externalities if and only if it increases sellers’average marginal value
more than it decreases buyers’marginal value. Note that in a liquidity shock e + xeq units of the
asset are sold (at the …re-sale price) from distressed sellers and …ckle foreign banks to local banks.
The right side of the expression describes the period-1 marginal value of the buyers (local banks),
which is equal to R=peq . The left side describes the weighted average period-1 marginal value of
the sellers, where the weights are proportional to the number of units that they sell. The distressed
sellers have weight e and marginal value , foreign investors in countries without a liquidity shock
have weight xeq (1
shock have weight

) and marginal value 1, and foreign investors in countries with a liquidity
xeq

and marginal value R=peq .

In order to sharpen intuition, consider the extreme case where

! 1. In this limit, condition

(22) holds and thus the constrained optimal allocation features greater x and p. In fact, foreign
investment approaches one (its maximum feasible level) in the constrained optimum, whereas it is
strictly below one in the competitive equilibrium. Intuitively, the sellers’average marginal value is
dominated by distressed sellers’marginal value, which is large and exceeds buyers’marginal value.
This leads to positive pecuniary externalities from foreign investment.
Now consider the case with lower . In this case, condition (22) can be violated because some of
the sellers are …ckle foreign banks that have lower marginal value than buyers (local banks). If the
condition is violated, the constrained optimum features lower x and p than the equilibrium. Since
raising …re-sale prices bene…ts both the distressed sellers and …ckle foreigners with low marginal
value, foreign investment generates negative pecuniary externalities when …ckle foreigners bene…t
more than distressed sellers. The planner opts for lower foreign investment and lower …re-sale prices
to transfer wealth from …ckle foreign banks to local banks.
We view the distressed sellers in our setting as a modeling device to capture liquidity-driven sales
that transfer risky assets from high to low-marginal value agents. In view of this interpretation, we
take the case with high

and positive pecuniary externalities from foreign investment as the most

natural benchmark for welfare analysis.

5.2.

Public-goods aspects of liquidity creation

We next investigate whether local policymakers acting in isolation can achieve globally optimal
outcomes without coordination. Speci…cally, suppose each country has a local policymaker that
maximizes utilitarian social welfare in her own country. For the baseline scenario, we focus on the
limit,
As

! 1 , while we relegate the discussion of the case with lower

to the end of this section.

! 1, maximizing the utilitarian social welfare becomes equivalent to maximizing the …re-sale

price in the local market, which we denote by pj (see Online Appendix A.3). That is, similar to the
social planner in the previous subsection, local policymakers want to increase the …re-sale price.
The di¤erence is that they exclusively care about the price in their own country.
20

To simplify the exposition, we equip local policymakers with a single binary policy instrument,
bj

2 f0; 1g, encoding the decision to allow or ban capital in‡ows. The local policymaker chooses

bj

at the beginning of period 0, before any other decision is made. If bj = 0, then foreigners can

j
invest in country j as in our baseline model. If
h b 0 = 1, ithen foreign investment is banned in country
j. In period 0, banks choose their portfolio, xj ;j 0 0 , subject to the additional constraint that
0

j

0

xj ;j = 0 for each j 0 6= j such that bj = 1. The remaining ingredients are the same as in Section 3.

If all policymakers choose bj = 0, then we recover the equilibrium allocation with free ‡ows.

If instead all policymakers choose bj = 1, all foreign investment is banned, and we recover the
autarky allocation. Recall that the price with free ‡ows is strictly greater than in autarky (see
Figure 2). Thus, a global policymaker that prescribes symmetric policies (with the objective of
maximizing the symmetric …re-sale prices, p) would allow capital ‡ows in all countries. Note that
this is consistent with our analysis in Section 5.1: the global policymaker creates as much global
liquidity as possible given the instruments she has access to.
We next characterize the Nash equilibrium outcome, and contrast it with the coordinated solution. First consider the equilibrium for a given con…guration of policy choices. Suppose the sets of
countries with bj = 1 (“banned countries”) and bj = 0 (“free countries”) are Lebesgue measurable
with measures B 2 [0; 1) and 1

B, respectively. As before, we focus on a symmetric equilibrium

in which each banned country chooses identical and fully diversi…ed foreign investment in each free
country, denoted by xban

0, and experiences identical …re-sale prices, pban 2 (0; R). Likewise,

each free country chooses identical and fully diversi…ed foreign investment in each free country,
denoted by xf ree

0, and experiences identical …re-sale prices, pf ree 2 (0; R). Following similar

steps as above, the …re-sale price levels satisfy,
pban =
where R

f ree

= (1

+ (1

B) xban R
e

f ree

f ree

and pf ree =

+ (1 B) xf ree R
,
e + Bxban + (1 B) xf ree

) R + pf ree . The equilibrium tuple, pban ; pf ree ; xban ; xf ree , is characterized

by solving these equations jointly with the optimality conditions (see Online Appendix A.3). The
expressions for …re-sale prices show that for banned countries, in‡ows (zero) are smaller than
out‡ows [(1

B) xban ]. In contrast, for free countries, in‡ows [Bxban + (1

than out‡ows [(1

B) xf ree ] are greater

B) xf ree ]. These net imbalances raise the …re-sale price in banned countries

while lowering the price in free countries. In equilibrium, the optimal levels of out‡ows also react
to these changes, but these induced e¤ects do not overturn the initial e¤ect: that is, pban > pf ree
in any symmetric equilibrium with B 2 [0; 1).

Now consider the Nash equilibrium among the policymakers. Since pban > pf ree for B < 1,

the only candidate for equilibrium is the autarky allocation in which all policymakers ban capital
in‡ows. In Online Appendix A.3, we verify that this is an equilibrium and establish the following
result.
Proposition 4 (Nash Equilibrium with Restrictions on Capital In‡ows). Consider the model with

21

Assumption 1 in which local policymakers choose whether to ban capital in‡ows, bj 2 f0; 1g. Suppose
! 1 so that each policymaker’s objective is to maximize the asset price in her own country, pj .

Then, the unique Nash equilibrium features bans on capital in‡ows, bj = 1 for each j, whereas the
symmetric constrained optimum features free capital ‡ows, bj = 0 for each j.

In particular, the Nash equilibrium generates strictly lower …re-sale prices and lower welfare
in every country compared to a coordinated equilibrium (see Figure 2). This discrepancy arises
because global liquidity is a public good: policymakers that make locally optimal policy choices
ignore their impact on global liquidity. Every in‡ow into a country corresponds to an out‡ow that
provides liquidity and raises …re-sale asset prices in the sending country. In the limit

! 1,

greater asset prices improve welfare by mitigating …re-sale externalities. Local planners ignore the
bene…cial e¤ects of in‡ows for sending countries while fully internalizing the …ckleness costs, as
these costs are felt at the local level, which leads to smaller capital ‡ows and liquidity.
Finally, consider the alternative scenario where

is lower. As our analysis in Section 5.1

suggests, the global policymaker might prefer to reduce foreign investment and …re-sale prices.
Nonetheless, coordination improves welfare in this less standard case, too. Consider the extreme
pj : that is, they would like to minimize

version where the policymakers have the objective function

the local …re-sale price. We can check that a coordinated solution would ban capital ‡ows whereas
the Nash equilibrium would feature free capital ‡ows. In this scenario, liquidity is a public “bad”,
which leads to a coordination problem in the opposite direction.
The general point is that, when liquidity has a …rst-order e¤ect on welfare, capital ‡ows must
be coordinated because they contribute to global liquidity. Fickleness exacerbates the coordination
problem because it lowers local liquidity during distress and induces local policymakers to take
di¤erent actions than a global policymaker would prescribe.

6.

Determinants of Gross Flows

In this section we analyze the determinants of gross ‡ows in our setting.

6.1.

The beta model

We conduct our analysis using a special case of the model (“the beta model”) that leads to closed
form solutions. In this model, liquidity shocks are either completely uncorrelated or fully correlated
across countries. Speci…cally, there are three aggregate states, s 2 f1; 2; 3g, with,
1

for some

= 0;

2

= ;

3

= 1,

(23)

2 (0; 1). In particular, state s = 2 corresponds to the case in which the liquidity shocks

are i.i.d. across countries. States f1; 3g together can be thought of as a “correlated shock”state in

which the liquidity shocks are perfectly correlated across countries. Speci…cally, either all countries

22

are hit (state 3) or no country is hit (state 1). We also assume the state probabilities are given by,
1

Here, the parameter

= (1

);

2

=1

;

=

3

.

(24)

2 (0; 1) captures the probability that shocks are correlated.

Note that the expected returns and marginal values conditional on each aggregate state are,
R1 = R;

R2 = (1

) R + p2 ;

M1 = 1;

M2 = 1

+ R=p2 ;

R3 = p3 ,

(25)

M3 = R=p3 .

(26)

Next note that the ex-ante marginal value from foreign investment satis…es,
and

3 (p3 )

= R 1 M1 = R

= R3 M3 = R. Thus, Eq. (13) becomes,
u0 (1

where

1 (p1 )

2 (p2 )

x) = E Rs Ms = R + (1

)

2 (p2 ) ,

(27)

= R2 M2 . The market clearing condition (15) implies,
p2 = P2mc (x) =

+ x (1
e + x (1

)R
:
)

(28)

Eqs. (27) and (28) determine the pair, (x; p2 ). Figure 3, which is a generalized version of Figure 2,
provides a pictorial illustration of the equilibrium pair, (x; p2 ).
Using the market clearing condition (15), we calculate the price in state 3 (with
p3 =

e

:

3

= 1) as,
(29)

We omit the derivation of p1 , which plays no role since there are no liquidity shocks in state 1
(

1

= 0). This also implies that the average …re-sale price conditional on a correlated shock (states

f1; 3g) is equal to p3 . Note that we have p3 < p2 : that is, the correlated shock state features lower
…re-sale prices on average than the state with uncorrelated shocks.

Next consider the prices and returns for …nancial assets. Using Eq. (25), the expected return
on foreign assets depends on the expected …re-sale price, that is,
E Rs = (1
State prices are given by qs =

s

= Ms =u0 (1

) R + ( p3 + (1

) p2 ) .

(30)

x) where Ms are characterized in (26).

Finally, combining Eq. (18) with Eqs. (26) and (27), the risk-free rate can be calculated as,
Rf =

E R s Ms
=
E [Ms ]

R + (1
) (p2 )
+ R=p3 ) + (1
) (1

,

(31)

The risk premium can be obtained from Eqs. (30) and (31). Thus, Eqs. (25

31) provide a

(1

+ R=p2 )

closed-form characterization of the equilibrium in the beta model. We use this model to establish
23

A

B

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Figure 3: Comparative statics of equilibrium. A, change in the supply of safe assets; B, change in
the probability of correlated liquidity shocks.
a number of comparative statics results.

6.2.

Safe-asset scarcity

Consider a reduction in the supply of safe assets, . By Eq. (29), this reduces the …re-sale price
in the correlated shock state, p3 . To see the e¤ect on the rest of the equilibrium, recall that the
pair, (x; p2 ), is characterized by the optimality condition (27) and the market clearing relation (28).
The left panel of Figure 3 shows that a decline in

shifts the market clearing equation downward

without a¤ecting the optimality condition. This increases capital ‡ows, x, while also reducing the
…re-sale price in the uncorrelated state, p2 . Intuitively, the …re-sale price declines because banks
have less liquidity to arbitrage asset …re sales [cf. Eq. (28)]. Anticipation of these more severe …re
sales induces greater ex-ante investment in foreign risky assets to obtain liquidity insurance [cf. Eq.
(27)]. When safe assets are scarcer, there is greater demand for global liquidity, and gross capital
‡ows increase to meet this need.
Next consider the impact on expected asset returns in period 0. By Eq. (30), the expected
return on risky foreign assets declines due to lower …re-sale prices. In Online Appendix A.6, we
show that the risk-free return characterized by Eq. (31) also declines. Finally, consider the risk
premium on foreign assets, E Rs

Rf . We can check that the risk premium becomes zero as

! eR (as this limit features ps ! R and Ms ! 1 for each s), whereas it is strictly positive for

any
in

< eR [see Eq. (19)]. Thus, in the neighborhood of abundant safe assets,

= eR, the decline

also increases the risk premium. The following result summarizes this discussion.

24

Proposition 5. Consider the beta model described in this section. A reduction in

(which exac-

erbates safe-asset scarcity) increases gross ‡ows, x, reduces …re-sale prices, p2 and p3 , and reduces
the expected risky and safe asset returns, E Rs and Rf . In the lower neighborhood of
reduction in

also increases the risk premium, E Rs

= eR, the

Rf .

This result provides one explanation for the worldwide increase in gross capital ‡ows in the
run-up to the global …nancial crisis (see Bluedorn et al. (2013)). Through the lens of our model,
gross ‡ows increased, at least partly, as a response to the global safe asset scarcity that developed
in early 2000s (see e.g., Caballero (2006)).

6.3.

Global shocks and the global …nancial cycle

Now consider an increase in the probability of the correlated shock state,

. The right panel of

Figure 3 illustrates that this increase shifts the optimality curve downward without a¤ecting the
market clearing equation. Hence, it lowers gross ‡ows, x, and the …re-sale price in the uncorrelated
state, p2 . Correlated shocks reduce the liquidity insurance value of capital ‡ows, which translates
into lower ex-ante foreign investment, x, and lower ex-post liquidity. Lower ex-post liquidity reduces
the price even in the uncorrelated state. That is, the possibility of correlated shocks, by reducing
capital ‡ows, a¤ects asset prices even if those shocks are ultimately unrealized. The impact on
expected asset returns in period 0 is analogous to the impact of the decline in

described in the

previous subsection, which leads to the following result.
Proposition 6. Consider the beta model described in this section (with Assumption 1). An increase
in

(which increases the correlation of the liquidity shocks) reduces capital ‡ows, x, reduces the

…re-sale asset price in the uncorrelated state, p2 , and reduces the expected risky and safe asset
returns, E Rs and Rf . In the neighborhood of
premium, E Rs
An increase in

= 0, an increase in

also increases the risk

Rf .
in this model can be thought of as capturing a “risk-o¤” environment in

which the banks become more concerned about investing abroad. This reduces capital ‡ows and
liquidity creation, while also reducing the risk-free rate and increasing the risk premium. This
result is consistent with the large and persistent decline in gross capital ‡ows in the aftermath of
the global …nancial crisis illustrated in Figure 1 (see also Bluedorn et al. (2013); Lane and MilesiFerretti (2012), and Milesi-Ferretti and Tille (2011)). Through the lens of our model, the global
crisis increased the (real or perceived) correlations of …nancial crises, which in turn reduced the
usefulness of gross capital ‡ows as liquidity insurance.6
6

In Online Appendix B.3, we corroborate that the correlations of stock price changes in OECD countries increased
after the crisis and remained elevated for several years (see Figure A1). However, note that other factors, such as the
implementation of the Basel III accord that restricted banks’risk-taking, also contributed to depressing gross capital
‡ows. Conversely, the increase in bank capital and leverage before the crisis arguably contributed to the growth of
gross capital ‡ows at that time.

25

7.

Reach for Safety and Yield

In our baseline model, countries are symmetric and gross capital ‡ows are entirely driven by the
liquidity insurance motive. In this section, we deviate from the baseline model by introducing
asymmetries in liquidity supply and risky asset return across countries. We illustrate two additional
mechanisms that might drive capital ‡ows, reach-for-safety and reach-for-yield, and we investigate
how they a¤ect …re sales.

7.1.

The model with a special country

Suppose all but one of the countries are “regular”and have the parameters described in the previous
section. The remaining country is “special”and can have di¤erent parameters, ( ; R ): its supply
of safe assets is given by

, and the return on its risky assets is given by R . As before, banks

in the special country are endowed with all this country’s safe assets as well as one unit of the
consumption good in period 0. The rest of the model is unchanged. To simplify the exposition, we
assume

1

> 0, so liquidity shocks happen with strictly positive probability in all aggregate states

(see Online Appendix A.4 for cases with

1

= 0).

Since the special country has Lebesgue measure zero, the equilibrium allocations and prices
in the regular countries are the same as the symmetric equilibrium characterized in the previous
sections, denoted by x; (ps )s ; qf ; (qs )s . Our goal is to characterize the equilibrium allocations and
prices in the special country, which we denote by x

;

; xin; ; xout; ; y ; (zs )s ; (~ s )s ; (ps )s . Through-

out, we assume the parameters in the special country satisfy the following:
Assumption 2.
R

R 2 0;

e

P

P

s qs s

s qs (1

s)

;

In particular, the special country has weakly greater return, R

P

s qs p s x

qf

:

R, which su¢ ces to cover the

cases of interest, and its parameters are not too di¤erent from those in regular countries, which
yields an interior solution.
First consider the investments regular countries’ banks make in the special country, xin; . In
view of Assumption 2, we conjecture an equilibrium with strictly positive in‡ows, xin; > 0. We
assume that foreign banks are indi¤erent between investing in the special country and regular
countries at the margin. We can state this using a no-arbitrage condition between investments into
the special country and other countries,
1=

X
s

R s qs =

X

Rs qs , where Rs = (1

s) R

+

s ps :

(32)

s

This condition says that (when there is positive investment into the special country) the cost
of investment (one unit) must be equal to the value of a replicating portfolio of Arrow-Debreu
securities.7 The second equality (which we established in Section 4.2) says that the same condition
7

We technically state this as an assumption because banks in regular countries are actually indi¤erent to taking

26

holds for investment into regular countries.
Next consider investments by the special country’s banks, xout; ; y ; (zs )s . These values are
not uniquely determined because there are multiple equivalent ways of obtaining the same payo¤
vector. We therefore de…ne the country’s liquidity purchase (or sale) in each aggregate state as,
ls = xout; Rs + y + zs

.

Note that ls captures the additions to the country’s liquidity starting from its endowment,

. We

conjecture that the equilibrium also features …re sales in the special country, ps < R for each s.
Then, banks in the special country solve the following analogue of problem (10),

x

;

max

0;(ls

)s

where c0 + x

;

u (c0 ) + x
+

X

;

R +

X

s ls Ms ,

s

qs ls = 1.

(33)

s

In Online Appendix A.6, we show that x

;

= 0, that is, foreign investment dominates local

investment for the special country. The remaining optimality conditions (for an interior solution)
are,
qs

=

s

Ms
Ms
= 0
, where Ms = 1
0
u (c0 )
u (c0 )

s

+

s

R
.
ps

(34)

Hence, the relative SDF is equal to the relative marginal value of banks in the special country and
the regular countries (as we established in Section 4.2).
Finally, consider the equilibrium value of …re-sale prices in the special country, (ps )s . Using
similar steps as before, these prices are determined by the following analogue of Eq. (14),
+ ls
e ~ s + xin;
~ s = 0 if ps R and ~ s = e if ps < R .

ps =
where

(35)
(36)

Here, ~ s denotes the optimal amount of legacy assets the distressed sellers in the special country
retain [cf. Eq. (1)], which is not necessarily zero unless we strengthen Assumption 1 (speci…cally,
we could ensure ~ s = 0 by considering the limit,
existence of an equilibrium.

! 1). The following result establishes the

Proposition 7. Consider the model with Assumption 1 and

1

> 0, together with a special country

that satis…es Assumption 2. There exists an equilibrium in which the allocations and prices for
regular countries are characterized by Propositions 1-2. In the special country, there is no local
investment, x

;

= 0. The remaining allocations, xin; ; c0 ; (ls )s ; (ps )s ; (~ s )s , are characterized as

the unique solution to the system of equations (32

36).

any nonnegative position in the special country, as this country has measure zero. In a version of the model in which
the special countries have strictly positive but small mass > 0, condition (32) always holds in equilibrium. Hence,
the equilibrium we analyze can be viewed as the limit of these equilibria as ! 0.

27

We next use this model to illustrate capital ‡ows driven by reach for safety and reach for yield.
Unlike regular countries, the special country trades safe and contingent assets in equilibrium, which
modi…es the balance of payments accounting. We adopt the convention that total in‡ows are equal
to foreign investment in local risky assets, xin;

xin; ; whereas total out‡ows account for the local

investment in foreign risky assets and the net trade of safe and contingent assets,8
xout;

xout; + qf (y
=

X

X

)+

qs z s

(37)

s

qs ls = 1

c0 .

s

Here, the second line uses the de…nition of ls (together with the no-arbitrage condition,

P

s R s qs

=

1) as well as the budget constraint (33). Hence, total out‡ows are equal to the value of banks’
liquidity purchases in period 0. Since there is no local investment in period 0, these purchases are
also equal to the banks’endowment in period 0 net of their consumption.

7.2.

Reach for safety and global imbalances

We …rst abstract away from return di¤erences (i.e., R = R), and focus on the e¤ect of asymmetries
in the liquidity supply (i.e.,

6= ). We can think of a developed country with deep …nancial

markets and a large supply of safe assets— such as the U.S.— featuring
emerging market country can be thought of as having

> . Conversely, an

< .

As a benchmark, consider the autarky allocation in which the special country does not exchange
capital ‡ows with regular countries. It is easy to check that the special country’s autarky price is
characterized by ps = min (R;

=e) for each s (see Proposition 1 for a similar result for regular

countries). In particular, a special developed country with su¢ ciently high liquidity,

> eR,

would completely avoid …re sales whereas regular countries would experience …re sales, that is,
ps = R > ps for each s. In contrast, a special emerging market country with
experience more severe …re sales than regular countries, ps =

<

would

=e < ps for each s.

Next, we analyze the equilibrium with free capital ‡ows. Using Proposition 7, we can verify
that the equilibrium in the special country obtains when, c0 = c0 ; ~ s = 0, and,
ps = ps < R
x
x

in;

out;

ls

(38)

= x + (e + x) (

1) ,

= x,
=

xRs

8

(

),

With trade in safe and contingent assets, gross ‡ows are indeterminate since the special country can always sell
a …nancial asset to regular countries and purchase exactly the same asset from those countries. This would increase
in‡ows and out‡ows without any additional e¤ects. Our de…nition excludes these types of spurious ‡ows and focuses
on the lowest level of gross ‡ows that can emerge in our setting.

28

where we refer to

as the leverage ratio of out‡ows, and de…ne it as,
=

x + qf
:
x + qf

(39)

The …rst line in (38) says that the asset prices in the special country are the same as asset prices
in regular countries. In particular, even though a developed country with

> eR would avoid …re

sales in autarky, it cannot escape …re sales in equilibrium with free capital ‡ows. Conversely, an
emerging market country with

<

obtains higher …re-sale prices with free capital ‡ows than it

would obtain in autarky.
To understand these results, consider the case of a developed country with

>

(the case with

<

is symmetric). All else equal, greater liquidity in this special country increases its …re-sale
P
prices, which increases the expected return, s Rs qs , above the level obtained in regular countries,
P
s Rs qs . This temporarily violates the indi¤erence condition (32) and makes the special country’s
assets attractive to foreign banks. The special country’s increased appeal translates into greater

in‡ows, xin, and lower …re-sale prices as illustrated by Eq. (35). This process stops only when the

special country also experiences severe …re sales that equate its expected return with the expected
returns in regular countries. In fact, the second and the third lines of Eq. (38) illustrate that the
developed country receives more in‡ows than out‡ows (it has a current account de…cit). These net
in‡ows neutralize the country’s initial liquidity advantage and induce a …re sale in equilibrium.
While this intuition explains why …re sales in the developed country are as severe as in the
regular countries on average, it does not explain why asset prices are equated state-by-state. In
fact, from the earlier market clearing condition (15), one could expect a developed country to have
relatively high prices in states with high

s

where global liquidity is low— because its greater local

liquidity supply can provide some cushion. This does not happen in our model because banks in
the developed country do not necessarily retain their initial endowments of liquidity. Rather, as
captured by Eqs. (34) and (35), they trade …nancial assets to move their liquidity across aggregate
states.
The last line in (38) characterizes the equilibrium outcome from these trades. Banks in the
developed country sell some of their safe asset endowments,

(which is positive when

to increase their investment in a diversi…ed foreign portfolio. We refer to

> ),

as the leverage ratio

of out‡ows, because it captures the value of foreign risky asset investments divided by the value of
P
out‡ows [note that
in view of Eq. (32)]. For regular countries (that feature
s xRs qs =x =
= ), the leverage ratio is normalized to one. For a developed country, the leverage ratio is

greater than one,

> 1, meaning that the country’s out‡ows are riskier than out‡ows in other

countries. Intuitively, banks in the developed country are selling some of their excess liquidity to
take advantage of the positive risk premium on foreign assets [cf. Eq. (19)]. In our model, this
e¤ect is strong and ensures that the special country has the same (…re-sale) asset price as the
regular countries in every state.
Conversely, an emerging market country with

29

<

has more out‡ows relative to its in‡ows

(xout; = x > xin; ), and its out‡ows are also safer than those in regular countries,

< 1. Intu-

itively, the scarcity of liquidity in the special country reduces its in‡ows, while also inducing its
banks to purchase safe assets from abroad to obtain additional liquidity (by paying the risk premium). These forces improve …re-sale prices relative to what the country would obtain in autarky.
The following result summarizes this discussion.
Proposition 8. Consider the setup in Proposition 7 with R = R and

6= . With free …nancial

‡ows, the equilibrium allocations in the special country are given by (38). Regardless of its liquid-

ity supply, the special country experiences …re sales with prices that are equal to those in regular
countries, ps = ps < R for each s. When
xin,

>

xout;

> , the country receives more in‡ows than out‡ows,

= x, and has riskier (more leveraged) out‡ows than regular countries,

< , the country has more out‡ows than in‡ows,
out‡ows than regular countries,

xout;

=x>

xin;

> 1. When

, and safer (less leveraged)

< 1.

These results suggest that reach-for-safety ‡ows have potentially destabilizing e¤ects for developed markets with

>

but stabilizing e¤ects for emerging markets with

< .

Our results are consistent with the empirical work in Gourinchas and Rey (2007) and Gourinchas
et al. (2010), who document that out‡ows from the U.S. are riskier than its in‡ows. They show that
the U.S. earns a risk premium on capital ‡ows in normal times, but it transferred resources and
provided insurance to the rest of the world during the global …nancial crisis. Our model suggests
that these transfers exacerbated the severity of the crisis in the U.S., while mitigating its impact
in the countries that held the (relatively) safe U.S. assets.
In Online Appendix A.4, we extend this analysis to the beta model from Section 6 to investigate
how the global risk conditions a¤ect the reach for safety. We show that an increase in the correlation
parameter,
xin,

, increases the absolute value of the country’s imbalances as a fraction of out‡ows,

x =x, as well the absolute value of its relative leverage ratio, j

that the “risk o¤” induced by the increase in

7.3.

1j. These results suggest

strengthens the ‡ows driven by reach for safety.

Reach for yield

We next abstract away from di¤erences in liquidity supply (i.e.,

= ), and investigate the e¤ect

of asymmetries in return, (R 6= R). We focus on the more interesting case with R > R, so

that the special country can be thought of as a rapidly growing or high-yielding emerging market
country.
Note that Eqs. (32) and (34) can be combined to obtain,
X

qs ((1

s) R

+

s ps )

=

s2S

X

qs ((1

s) R

+

s ps ) ,

(40)

s2S

1

s

+

1

s

+

R
sp
s
R
s ps

=

u0 (c0 )
for each s 2 S.
u0 (c0 )

(41)

This represents a system of jSj + 1 equations in jSj + 1 unknowns, (ps )s ; c0 . In Online Appendix
30

A.6, we show that there is a unique solution to this system (see Lemma 4). We characterize the
remaining equilibrium allocations by solving the rest of the equations listed in Proposition 7.
We also show that, when R > R, the solution satis…es ps < ps for each s; that is, the …resale prices in the special country are lower than in regular countries. To understand this result,
suppose the countries had identical …re-sale prices, ps = ps . This would violate the indi¤erence
condition (40), because foreign banks would strictly prefer to invest in the special country. Foreign
investment would increase the in‡ows into the special country xin; , and lower the …re-sale prices
according to (35). This process stops only when the special country’s …re-sale prices are lower and
the indi¤erence condition is reestablished. Using more subtle arguments, we show that the special
country obtains a lower …re-sale price in every aggregate state s.
Furthermore, we show that ps =ps is strictly increasing in s; that is, …re-sale prices in the special
country are relatively higher in aggregate states with a greater likelihood of liquidity shocks. Eq.
(41) illustrates that local banks in the special country distribute their liquidity across states to
equate their expected marginal value. Since (by assumption) crises are more frequent in states
with higher s, they purchase more liquidity insurance for these states. This mitigates the …re sales
caused by the reach-for-yield in‡ows in states with higher s (e.g., the global …nancial crisis), at the
expense of deepening the …re sales in states with lower s (more localized crises).
The solution satis…es, c0 < c0 , which implies xout; > x [cf. Eq. (37)]. Thus, the special country
has greater out‡ows than the regular countries. Put di¤erently, banks in the special country take
precautions not only by purchasing more insurance (as in the previous result) but also by holding
more foreign assets. Nonetheless, with free capital ‡ows, these attempts to obtain greater insurance
make the country attractive to foreigners and ultimately translate into greater in‡ows. Formally,
we show that xin; > xout; > x: the reach for yield increases the special country’s in‡ows more
than its out‡ows. The following result summarizes this discussion.
Proposition 9. Consider the setup in Proposition 7 with

=

and R > R. With free …nancial

‡ows, the special country experiences larger price drops than the regular countries in all states.
However, this di¤ erence is smaller in more distressed states: ps =ps < 1 for each s, and ps =ps is
strictly increasing in s. The special country’s in‡ows exceed its out‡ows, xin; > xout; , which in
turn exceed the gross ‡ows in (otherwise comparable) regular countries, xout; > x.
In Online Appendix A.4, we extend this analysis to the beta model from Section 6 to investigate
how global return and risk conditions a¤ect the reach for yield. All else equal, a decline in investment
returns in regular countries, R, reduces …re-sale prices (on average) in the special country relative to
their counterpart in regular countries. Intuitively, lower returns in other countries make investing
in high-yielding countries more attractive, but this is countered by lower …re-sale prices as in
Proposition 9. These results are consistent with recent …ndings that depressed interest rates in
developed markets cause a surge of capital in‡ows to emerging markets (see, for instance, Shin
(2014); Tillmann (2016)).
We also show in Online Appendix A.4 that a drop in the correlation parameter,

, reduces

…re-sale prices in the special country relative to their counterpart in regular countries. We can
31

understand this result by considering the timing of losses on investments made in high-yielding
countries. These losses will be less costly for foreign banks if the shocks in the high-yielding country
have a lower correlation with aggregate distress states (when

is lower). Thus, a reduction in

makes investing in high-yielding countries more attractive, which increases their ex-ante in‡ows
and lowers their ex-post …re-sale prices due to …ckleness. This result is consistent with the view
that reach-for-yield ‡ows rise during “risk-on” environments.

8.

Final Remarks

We develop a global equilibrium model of capital ‡ows that addresses the tension between destabilizing …ckleness and stabilizing retrenchment during liquidity crises. We show that, in a global
symmetric equilibrium, gross capital ‡ows create liquidity and stabilize …re sales despite their …ckleness. Fickleness, however, creates a coordination problem since it encourages local policymakers
to restrict capital in‡ows. Thus, global policy coordination is important for the regulation of
international capital ‡ows.
Asymmetries in returns or liquidity qualify our baseline …ndings, generating potentially destabilizing reach-for-safety and reach-for-yield scenarios. This instability arises not from gross ‡ows,
but rather from imbalances that lead to net ‡ows. Therefore, our model features a clear distinction:
symmetric ‡ows are stabilizing while net ‡ows are destabilizing for the (net) receiving country. This
highlights net ‡ows as a potential source of instability, although in general other features such as
the risk composition of gross ‡ows can also a¤ect stability.
We focus on policies that concern restrictions on capital ‡ows. In so doing, our goal is to
highlight and isolate the public-goods aspect of capital ‡ows that local policymakers likely miss,
not to argue against macroprudential policies in general. In fact, if we interpret the distressed
sellers in our model as banks (see Online Appendix A.5 for a formalization), then macroprudential
policies that reduce banks’ risks would also be useful in our environment as they would further
mitigate …re sales. Moreover, our model illustrates how foreign investment can make banks more
stable, though unmodeled features (such as speculation driven by mistaken beliefs) might turn
foreign investment into a destabilizing force.
In our model, the main rationale behind capital ‡ows is liquidity insurance. However, capital
‡ows in practice are also driven by other motives such as comparative advantage. Many of the
mechanisms we highlight are robust to broadening the rationale behind ‡ows. To see this, consider
an alternative scenario in which banks have specialized expertise (e.g., in making certain types of
loans). They start in their home market, where their expertise is strongest, and expand into foreign
markets as they build su¢ cient capital. To match the capital ‡ow correlations in the data, suppose
also that banks’investments in foreign countries are …ckle. Then, reversing these investments during
local distress would provide some liquidity insurance as in our model. Moreover, local policymakers
would still dislike the …ckle nature of capital in‡ows, although they might be more receptive to
in‡ows than in our model due to the foreign banks’expertise.

32

One of our core assumptions is that …ckleness stems from a reaction by foreign investors to local
conditions. However, capital in‡ows can also reverse when there is a local shock in the foreigners’
home location: that is, foreigners’ own retrenchment might feel like …ckleness in the receiving
country.9 This raises the question of whether one can explain the capital ‡ow correlations in the
data purely from retrenchment shocks without assuming …ckleness. While this mechanism is likely
to contribute to gross ‡ows patterns during global crises, it has di¢ culty explaining the decline in
capital ‡ows (and the rise in expected returns) when countries experience non-global shocks (see
Section 2).
Finally, an important dimension of crises that we leave for future work is the behavior of
exchange rates. The current model already sheds light on which exchange rate implications might
arise. For example, Proposition 9 implies that high-yielding countries, R > R, experience greater
net out‡ows during crises (driven by their relatively large ex-ante in‡ows that are …ckle), which is
likely to put downward pressure on the exchange rate. Conversely, low-yielding countries, such as
Japan, can experience net in‡ows and a currency appreciation during …nancial distress (driven by
their relatively large ex-ante out‡ows that retrench).

9
This happens in our model, but the resulting “…ckleness”does not hurt receiving countries that do not experience
a liquidity shock, because we assume that assets in those countries pay early. We can relax this assumption and
generate some contagion in our environment. Nonetheless, retrenchment is still likely to be a stabilizing force,
because retrenching (but non-…ckle) investors would sell foreign assets at relatively low prices only when they could
purchase distressed home assets at even lower prices.

33

References
Alberola, E., A. Erce, and J. M. Serena (2016). International reserves and gross capital ‡ows
dynamics. Journal of International Money and Finance 60, 151–171.
Allen, F. and D. Gale (1994). Limited market participation and volatility of asset prices. The
American Economic Review , 933–955.
Avdjiev, S., B. Hardy, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and L. Servén (2017). Gross capital ‡ows by banks,
corporates and sovereigns. NBER Working Paper no. 23116 .
Bernanke, B. S., C. C. Bertaut, L. DeMarco, and S. B. Kamin (2011). International capital ‡ows and
the return to safe assets in the united states, 2003-2007. FRB International Finance Discussion
Paper (1014).
Bluedorn, J. C., R. Duttagupta, J. Guajardo, and P. Topalova (2013). Capital ‡ows are …ckle:
Anytime, anywhere. Number 13-183. International Monetary Fund.
Brennan, M. J. and H. H. Cao (1997). International portfolio investment ‡ows. The Journal of
Finance 52 (5), 1851–1880.
Broner, F., T. Didier, A. Erce, and S. L. Schmukler (2013a). Gross capital ‡ows: Dynamics and
crises. Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (1), 113–133.
Broner, F., T. Didier, A. Erce, and S. L. Schmukler (2013b). International capital ‡ows during
crises: Gross matters. VoxEU.org (March 28).
Broner, F., A. Erce, A. Martin, and J. Ventura (2014). Sovereign debt markets in turbulent times:
Creditor discrimination and crowding-out e¤ects. Journal of Monetary Economics 61, 114–142.
Brunnermeier, M., J. De Gregorio, B. Eichengreen, M. El-Erian, A. Fraga, T. Ito, P. Lane, J. PisaniFerry, E. Prasad, R. Rajan, et al. (2012). Banks and cross-border capital ‡ows: Policy challenges
and regulatory responses. Committee on International Economic Policy and Reform.
Bruno, V. and H. S. Shin (2013). Capital ‡ows, cross-border banking and global liquidity. NBER
Working Paper no. 19038 .
Caballero, R. J. (2006, November). On the macroeconomics of asset shortages. In A. Beyer and
L. Reichlin (Eds.), The role of money - Money and monetary policy in the twenty-…rst century,
pp. 272–283. European Central Bank.
Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2016). Safe asset scarcity and aggregate demand.
American Economic Review 106 (5), 513–518.
Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, P.-O. Gourinchas, et al. (2008). An equilibrium model of “global
imbalances” and low interest rates. American Economic Review 98 (1), 358–93.
Caballero, R. J. and A. Krishnamurthy (2004). Smoothing sudden stops. Journal of Economic
Theory 119 (1), 104–127.
Caballero, R. J. and A. Krishnamurthy (2008). Collective risk management in a ‡ight to quality
episode. The Journal of Finance 63 (5), 2195–2230.

34

Caballero, R. J. and G. Lorenzoni (2014). Persistent appreciations and overshooting: A normative
analysis. IMF Economic Review 62 (1), 1–47.
Caballero, R. J. and A. Simsek (2013). Fire sales in a model of complexity. The Journal of
Finance 68 (6), 2549–2587.
Calvo, G. A. (2016). Macroeconomics in times of liquidity crises: Searching for economic essentials.
The MIT Press.
Coeurdacier, N. and H. Rey (2013). Home bias in open economy …nancial macroeconomics. Journal
of Economic Literature 51 (1), 63–115.
Cole, H. L. and M. Obstfeld (1991). Commodity trade and international risk sharing: How much
do …nancial markets matter? Journal of Monetary Economics 28 (1), 3–24.
Forbes, K. J. and F. E. Warnock (2012). Capital ‡ow waves: Surges, stops, ‡ight, and retrenchment.
Journal of International Economics 88 (2), 235–251.
Fostel, A., J. Geanakoplos, G. Phelan, et al. (2015). Global collateral: How …nancial innovation
drives capital ‡ows and increases …nancial instability. Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper no.
2076 .
Gabaix, X., A. Krishnamurthy, and O. Vigneron (2007). Limits of arbitrage: Theory and evidence
from the mortgage-backed securities market. The Journal of Finance 62 (2), 557–595.
Gabaix, X. and M. Maggiori (2015). International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3), 1369–1420.
Gehrig, T. (1993). An information based explanation of the domestic bias in international equity
investment. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 97–109.
Gorton, G. (2016). Safe assets. Annual Review of Economics forthcoming.
Gorton, G., S. Lewellen, and A. Metrick (2012). The safe-asset share. The American Economic
Review 102 (3), 101–106.
Gourinchas, P.-O. and H. Rey (2007). From world banker to world venture capitalist: US external
adjustment and the exorbitant privilege. In G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and
Adjustment, pp. 11–66. University of Chicago Press.
Gourinchas, P.-O., H. Rey, N. Govillot, et al. (2010). Exorbitant privilege and exorbitant duty.
Bank of Japan IMES Discussion Paper Series no. 10-E-20 .
Gourinchas, P.-O., H. Rey, and K. Truempler (2012). The …nancial crisis and the geography of
wealth transfers. Journal of International Economics 88 (2), 266–283.
Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos (2016). Arbitrage and its limits, pp. 1–3. London: Palgrave Macmillan
UK.
Grubel, H. G. (1968). Internationally diversi…ed portfolios: welfare gains and capital ‡ows. The
American Economic Review 58 (5), 1299–1314.
Holmström, B. and J. Tirole (1998). Private and public supply of liquidity. The Journal of Political
Economy 106 (1), 1–40.
35

Holmström, B. and J. Tirole (2001). LAPM: A liquidity-based asset pricing model. The Journal
of Finance 56 (5), 1837–1867.
IMF (2012). The liberalization and management of capital ‡ows: An institutional view. IMF Policy
Paper no. 4720 .
Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek (2010). Excessive volatility in capital ‡ows: A pigouvian taxation
approach. NBER Working Paper no. 15927 .
Jeanne, O. and D. Sandri (2017). Global …nancial cycle and liquidity management. IMF Working
Paper .
Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997). Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy 105 (2), 211–248.
Korinek, A. and D. Sandri (2016). Capital controls or macroprudential regulation? Journal of
International Economics 99, S27–S42.
Krishnamurthy, A. (2010). Ampli…cation mechanisms in liquidity crises. American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (3), 1–30.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). The aggregate demand for treasury debt.
Journal of Political Economy 120 (2), 233–267.
Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2007). The external wealth of nations mark II: Revised
and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970–2004. Journal of international
Economics 73 (2), 223–250.
Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2012). External adjustment and the global crisis. Journal
of International Economics 88 (2), 252–265.
Lewis, K. K. (2000). Why do stocks and consumption imply such di¤erent gains from international
risk sharing? Journal of international Economics 52 (1), 1–35.
Lorenzoni, G. (2008). Ine¢ cient credit booms. The Review of Economic Studies 75 (3), 809–833.
Milesi-Ferretti, G.-M. and C. Tille (2011). The great retrenchment: International capital ‡ows
during the global …nancial crisis. Economic Policy 26 (66), 289–346.
Miranda-Agrippino, S. and H. Rey (2015). World asset markets and the global …nancial cycle.
NBER Working Paper no. 21722 .
Obstfeld, M. (2012). Does the current account still matter? NBER Working Paper no. 17877 .
Ostry, J. D., A. R. Ghosh, K. Habermeier, M. Chamon, M. S. Qureshi, and D. Reinhardt (2010).
Capital in‡ows: The role of controls. Revista de Economia Institucional 12 (23), 135–164.
Ravn, M. O. and H. Uhlig (2002). On adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott …lter for the frequency of
observations. Review of economics and statistics 84 (2), 371–376.
Scott, A. and H. Uhlig (1999). Fickle investors: An impediment to growth? European Economic
Review 43 (7), 1345–1370.
Shin, H. S. (2014). The second phase of global liquidity and its impact on emerging economies. In
Volatile Capital Flows in Korea, pp. 247–257. Springer.
36

Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1992). Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium
approach. The Journal of Finance 47 (4), 1343–1366.
Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1997). The limits of arbitrage. The Journal of Finance 52 (1),
35–55.
Tillmann, P. (2016). Unconventional monetary policy and the spillovers to emerging markets.
Journal of International Money and Finance 66, 136–156.
Uhlig, H. (1996). A law of large numbers for large economies. Economic Theory 8 (1), 41–50.
Uhlig, H. (2014). Sovereign default risk and banks in a monetary union. German Economic
Review 15 (1), 23–41.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S. and L. Veldkamp (2009). Information immobility and the home bias puzzle.
The Journal of Finance 64 (3), 1187–1215.
Van Wincoop, E. (1994). Welfare gains from international risksharing. Journal of Monetary Economics 34 (2), 175–200.

37

Online Appendix for: A Model of Fickle Capital Flows and
Retrenchment
Ricardo J. Caballero
MIT and NBER. caball@mit.edu

Alp Simsek
MIT, NBER, and CEPR. asimsek@mit.edu

These appendices contain supplementary material for A Model of Fickle Capital Flows and Retrenchment.
Online Appendix A contains the omitted details and proofs related to our theoretical analysis. Online
Appendix B has information about our data sources and details for the empirical analysis.

Online Appendix A: Theory
This appendix is organized as follows. Online Appendices A.1-A.5 analyze various extensions of the model
in the main text. Online Appendix A.6 contains the omitted proofs.

A.1.

Endogenizing …ckleness with Knightian uncertainty

In the main text, we assumed that the banks are …ckle in the sense that, if there is a liquidity shock in a
foreign country, they sell their asset holdings in that country regardless of the price. We view this assumption
as a modeling device to capture the observed heterogeneous behavior of foreigners and locals during crises
(see Section 2). It also captures various factors that could handicap foreigners during local crises, such as
asymmetric information or Knightian uncertainty, deteriorating property rights, asymmetric regulation, and
so on. In this section, we explicitly incorporate one such factor, Knightian uncertainty, and illustrate that it
can endogenously generate …ckleness.1
The model is the same as in the main text with the di¤erence that foreign banks do not have to sell their
assets in a country that experiences a liquidity shock in period 1. Instead, banks face uncertainty about the
asset’s payo¤ in period 2 and choose actions that are robust with respect to this uncertainty.
0
Formally, consider a country j 0 that experiences a liquidity shock in period 1, that is, ! j = b. In the
main text, we assumed the asset pays R units in period 2 with certainty. We now suppose the banks in
0
country j believe these assets pay R units in period 2 with probability j ;j 2 [0; 1] and zero units in period
j 0 ;j
2 with probability 1
. Therefore, the expected payo¤ of country-j 0 risky assets (when it experiences
0
a liquidity shock) for a country-j bank is given by j ;j R. Moreover, the banks are uncertain
about
h
i the
parameter
0

j ;j

j 0 ;j

, in the sense that they consider a range of probabilities possible. We let

j 0 ;j

;

j 0 ;j

(with

0

j ;j

) denote the range of probabilities the banks …nd possible regarding the assets in country j 0 .
Following Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989)’s Maximin expected utility representation, we assume the banks
maximize the following objective function (in period 1 as well as period 0),
n

j 0 ;j 2

h

min

0
j 0 ;j ; j ;j

io

j 0 2J

h
i
E u cj0 + cj1;s + cj2;s .

1

(A1)

It is often argued that global banks can hire local experts to remove the information asymmetry. In practice,
while delegation to local experts by an uninformed foreign board may operate during normal times, it is unlikely to
do so during a large …nancial distress.

1

Thus, banks act according to the worst case scenario within the range of probabilities that they believe
possible.2 We capture …ckleness by assuming that banks face greater parametric uncertainty in the foreign
market than in the local market,
j;j

=

j;j

= 1 for each j, and

j 0 ;j

<

j 0 ;j

= 1 for each j 0 6= j.

(A2)

In particular, banks’worst case success probability in a foreign market, captured by , is lower than their
worst case success probability in the local market, which we assume is equal to one. The latter assumption
also implies that banks do not face any parameter uncertainty regarding the risky assets in their own country.
This does not play an important role beyond simplifying the analysis.
0
We let js ;j denote the position that the banks in country j take in period 1 and aggregate state s in the
0
risky assets of country j 0 (conditional on that country experiencing a liquidity shock, ! j = b). In the main
0
j;j
text, we assumed sj ;j = 0 for each j 0 6= j, and we used the shorthand notation js
local
s toh capture i
0
investment. Here, the banks make an investment plan for all countries and aggregate states, js ;j 0 0 .
j ;s

0

j ;j
for j 0 6= j to beha densityiwith respect
For each aggregate state s, we impose j;j
s to be a point mass, and s
0
to the Lebesgue measure. As before, the banks also choose the period 0 allocations, xj ;j 0 0 ; y j ; zsj s ,
j

subject to the restrictions described in Section 3.
h 0
The equilibrium with symmetric prices is a collection of allocations, xj ;j

i
0 ; y j ; zsj
j0

;
s

h

j 0 ;j
s

i

j 0 ;s

that maximizes the objective function in (A1) for each j, and prices (ps )s ; qf ; (qs )s that ensure market
clearing. The market clearing conditions for the safe asset and the Arrow-Debreu securities are the same as
conditions (8) and (9) in the main text, but the market clearing condition for risky assets of country j in
period 1 is slightly di¤erent and given by [cf. Eq. (7)],
e+x

in;j

+x

j;j

=

~ js

+

j;j
s

+

Z

j0

j;j 0 0
s dj .

(A3)

In particular, we now also take into account the possible demand for the risky asset that comes from other
R
0
0
countries’banks, j 0 j;j
s dj .
We characterize the equilibrium for parameters that satisfy Assumption 1 as well as:
Assumption K. 1
R < =e.
With these parameters, we conjecture that the equilibrium characterized in Section 4 remains an equilibrium
0
also in this context. In particular, we claim that it is optimal for banks to choose js ;j = 0 for each j 0 6= j
and aggregate state s. To verify this, note that Eq. (15) implies the equilibrium price satis…es ps
=e for
each s. Combining this with Assumption K implies ps > 1
R for each s. Thus, foreign banks believe
that the asset’s price exceeds its payo¤ under the worst case success probability. In view of the Maximin
0
preferences in (A1), it is then easy to check that choosing js ;j = 0 for each j 0 6= j is an optimal strategy.
0
Next note that, after substituting js ;j = 0 for each j 0 6= j into the objective function in (A1) and
observing that investors do not face any Knightian uncertainty in their own country, we recover the same
0
objective function as in the main text [cf. Eq. (2)]. Likewise, after substituting js ;j = 0 for each j 0 6= j
into the market clearing condition (A3), we recover the same market clearing condition as in the main text
[cf. Eq. (7)]. It follows that the equilibrium that we characterized in Section 4 remains an equilibrium also
in this context.
2

This behavior is reasonable for situations in which economic agents face ambiguity as opposed to quanti…able
uncertainty. Crises are typically associated with this type of uncertainty (see Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008);
Caballero and Simsek (2013) for further discussion).

2

A.2.

Complete markets with respect to local liquidity shocks

In the main text we assumed that banks cannot trade …nancial contracts contingent on local liquidity shocks.
In this section, we relax this assumption. We …rst consider the case in which markets are fully complete: in
particular, banks can trade contingent contracts with respect to local liquidity shocks subject to nonnegative
consumption constraints only. In this case, we show that capital ‡ow …ckleness does not a¤ect …re-sale prices.
Since our goal is to analyze the tension between …ckleness and retrenchment, this motivates the incompletemarkets setting that we adopt as our baseline model. We then consider the case in which markets are
partially complete: in particular, banks can sell a limited amount of contingent contracts with respect to
local liquidity shocks subject to a collateral constraint. We show that our analysis naturally generalizes to
this setting. This illustrates that our results do not require the extreme form of market incompleteness that
we adopt in our baseline model.
For simplicity, we focus attention on the case in which there is a single aggregate state s so there is no
aggregate risk (the results can be generalized). This implies that the Arrow-Debreu securities for aggregate
states are redundant, so we drop them from the notation (equivalently, we set zsj = 0 for each j). Throughout,
we drop the subscript s from the notation.

A.2.1.

Fully-complete markets

The model with complete markets. We expand the set of assets to include country-speci…c ArrowDebreu securities. The security for country j pays one unit of the consumption good if ! j = b is realized
in period 1, and zero units if ! j = g is realized. In period 0, the Arrow-Debreu security for country j is
traded at an endogenous price qcj (where the subscript c stands for “country-speci…c”). We concentrate our
attention on symmetric equilibria in which the price of Arrow-Debreu securities is the same across countries,
that is, qcj qc for each j. Country-speci…c Arrow-Debreu securities are in zero net supply.
In period 0, banks in country j choose an investment strategy on these Arrow-Debreu securities denoted
0
0
by zcj ;j . We impose that zcj;j is point mass, and zcj ;j for j 0 6= j is a density with respect to the Lebesgue
0
measure. As before, banks also choose the investment strategy on risky assets, xj ;j , and their position on
the risk-free asset, y j . Their budget constraint in period 0 is the following analogue of Eq. (3),
cj0 + xj;j + xout;j + y j qf + zcj;j + zcout;j qc = 1 + qf ,
Z
Z
0
0
where xout;j =
xj ;j dj 0 and zcout;j =
zcj ;j dj 0 .
j 0 6=j

(A4)

j 0 6=j

0

As before, banks are not allowed to short-sell risky assets, xj ;j 0 for each j 0 , but they are allowed to take
unrestricted positions on the risk-free asset or country-speci…c Arrow-Debreu securities subject to obtaining
nonnegative consumption in all periods and states.
In period 1, if ! j = g, then banks receive zero units from the Arrow-Debreu security for their own
country. By an exact law of large numbers, they also receive zcout;j units from the Arrow-Debreu securities
on other countries. Combining this with the analysis in Section 3, the banks’ budget constraint in state
! j = g is the following analogue of Eq. (5),

and

cj1 ! j = g

= xj;j R + xout;j R + y j + zcout;j

cj2

=

j

! =g

(A5)

0.

If instead ! j = b, then banks receive zcj;j units from the Arrow-Debreu security of their own country,

3

and still zcout;j units from the Arrow-Debreu securities in other countries. Their budget constraint in state
! j = b is then the following analogue of Eq. (6),
cj1 ! j = b +
cj2
h

xj

0

j

p = xj;j p + xout;j R + y j + zcj;j + zcout;j ,

j

! =b

=

j

(A6)

R.

Putting
everything
an investment
plan,
i
h 0
i together, banks in each country j make
h
i
0 0 ; y j ; zcj ;j 0 0 ; j , to maximize their expected utility, E u cj0 + cj1 + cj2 , where cj0

;j

j

j

is determined by Eq. (3), cj1 ! j = g and cj2 ! j = g are determined by Eq. (A5), cj1 ! j = b and
cj2 ! j = b are determined by Eq. (A6), and consumption in all periods and states is nonnegative,
cj0 0; cj1 0; cj2 0.
The equilibrium with symmetric prices is a collection of optimal allocations for distressed sellers and
banks, together with prices p; qf ; qc , that ensure market clearing. The market clearing conditions for risky
and safe assets are the same as Eqs. (7) and (8) in the main text. For each country j, there is also a market
clearing condition for the corresponding Arrow-Debreu security, which can be written as,
zcj;j

+

zcin;j

= 0 for each j, where

zcin;j

=

Z

0

j 0 6=j

zcj;j dj 0 .

(A7)

Liquidity creation with complete markets. We characterize the equilibrium under the following
strengthening of Assumption 1.
Assumption 1C . eR= <

< eR

) R, where x 2 (0; 1) is the solution to u0 (1

x (1

x) = R.

For any 2 (0; 1), the required upper bound on the supply of safe assets is smaller than its counterpart
in Assumption 1, eR. However, it approaches that upper bound as ! 1. Hence, any that satis…es
Assumption 1 also satis…es Assumption 1C provided that the probability of a liquidity shock, , is su¢ ciently
high.
Under Assumption 1C , we conjecture an equilibrium with symmetric prices that satisfy p 2 (R= ; R).
As before, distressed sellers sell their entire endowments, ~ j = 0. For banks, we conjecture symmetric
equilibrium allocations that satisfy, xout;j = xout = xin = x and y j y, as well as,
zcout;j

z and zcj;j

z:

Hence, banks choose symmetric allocations on foreign Arrow-Debreu securities, which we denote by z.
They also take the opposite position in the Arrow-Debreu security of their own country, denoted by z, so
that the market clearing condition (A7) is satis…ed.
Following similar steps as in Section 4, the budget constraints (A4) ; (A5) ; (A6) imply,
cj0 + xj;j + xout

=

1,

cj1 ! j = g

= xj;j R + xout R +

cj2 ! j = b

=

z,

xj;j p + xout R + + z

z

R
.
p

Substituting these expressions into the objective function and rearranging terms, the representative investor

4

solves the following analogue of problem (10),
max

xj;j ;xout ;z

s.t.

cj2

u 1

x

j;j

x

out

+

"

(1
+

) xj;j R + xout R +
j;j
x p + xout R + + (1

cj1 ! j = g = xj;j R + xout R +
! j = b = xj;j p + xout R + + (1

z 0,
)z R
p

z
)z

R
p

#

,

(A8)
(A9)

0.

Note that banks’ marginal value from increasing z is given by (1
) ( 1 + R=p), which is strictly
positive because p < R. Thus, banks set z as large as possible subject to the nonnegative consumption
constraints in (A9). Since the optimal allocation features z > 0, the constraint binds for the state without
a liquidity shock, ! j = g. This implies,
z=

xj;j R + xout R +

.

(A10)

Intuitively, increasing z is similar to purchasing insurance with respect to local liquidity shocks: it transfers
wealth from the state without a shock to the state with a shock. Banks purchase as much insurance as
possible (subject to nonnegative consumption) because their marginal value is greater when there is a local
liquidity shock.
After substituting (A10), banks’problem (A8) can be written as,
max u 1

xj;j ;xout

xj;j

xout +

xj;j p + xout R +

+ (1

) xj;j R + xout R +

R
.
p

(A11)

Note that the ex-ante marginal value from foreign investment is given by R R
p . Likewise, the ex-ante marginal
value from local investment is given by, ( p + (1
) R) R
R
=
(1
) R + p, the two expressions
.
Since
p
are the same. In particular, and unlike in the main text, banks are indi¤erent between local and foreign
investment. Intuitively, as illustrated by Eq. (A11), banks choose the asset that has the higher expected
payo¤ in period 1. This is because banks use the country-speci…c Arrow-Debreu securities to transfer all of
their expected wealth in period 1 into the state with a local liquidity shock. Since local and foreign assets
have the same expected payo¤ in period 1, banks are indi¤erent between the two options. Consequently, the
equilibrium level of foreign investment is indeterminate.
To keep the analysis parallel to the main text, let us resolve the indeterminacy by assuming that banks
do not invest in the local asset, xj;j = 0. The amount of foreign investment is then determined by the
following analogue of the optimality condition (13),
u0 (1

x) = ((1

) R + p)

R
,
p

(A12)

) R + p and xout = x.
where we substituted R = (1
Following similar steps as in Section 4, the market clearing condition for risky assets can be written as
the following analogue of Eq. (14),
+ xout R + (1
)z
p=
.
in
e+x
As before, the intuition is that the price is determined by the cash-in-the-market per asset for sale. After

5

substituting z from Eq. (A10) and using xout = xin = x (and xj;j = 0), we obtain,
p=
After substituting R = (1
of Eq. (15),

+ xout R =
.
e+x

) R+ p and solving the equation for p, we further obtain the following analogue

+ x (1
)R
.
(A13)
e
To understand this condition, note that the denominator, e , captures the aggregate amount of liquidity
distressed sellers need in period 1. The numerator captures the aggregate amount of liquidity available in
period 1, which comes from the supply of the safe asset, , as well as the aggregate payo¤ from investments
in countries that do not experience a liquidity shock, x (1
) R. Intuitively, the insurance provided by
complete markets enables all available liquidity to ‡ow to countries that experience a liquidity shock, where
it is used to …nance distressed sellers’projects.
The equilibrium is characterized as the pair, (x; p), that solves Eqs. (A12) and (A13). Under Assumption
1C , we can check that there is a unique solution that satis…es x 2 (x; 1) and p 2 (R= ; R), verifying our
conjecture. Banks’positions in Arrow-Debreu securities are characterized by Eq. (A10) given the equilibrium
levels of x and p.
It follows that, as long as aggregate liquidity is su¢ ciently scarce, the equilibrium features …re sales
in this case as well. Complete markets help distribute all available liquidity to countries that experience
liquidity shocks, thereby making it harder to obtain …re sales in equilibrium, but they do not necessarily
prevent …re sales. As this intuition suggests, the …re-sale price in the complete-markets case is always strictly
greater than its counterpart in the baseline model. Speci…cally, comparing Eqs. (A12) and (A13) with Eqs.
(13) and (15) in the baseline setting, note that both curves (in the x p space) are shifted upwards in this
setting. This leads to a greater …re-sale price, p. The upward shift of the market clearing curve re‡ects
the more e¢ cient allocation of liquidity. The upward shift of the optimality curve means that, for a given
…re-sale price p, banks undertake greater foreign investment. Both e¤ects increase the …re-sale price, p. On
the other hand, the equilibrium level of x might be lower than before, because a high …re-sale price lowers
the need for obtaining liquidity via foreign investment.
On the other hand, fully-complete markets also imply that …ckleness does not a¤ect …re-sale prices. To
see this, it is instructive to consider the market clearing conditions for the baseline and the complete-markets
models side-by-side:
+ x (1
)R
+ x (1
)R
p=
and p =
.
e + x (1
)
e
p=

The expression on the left-hand side is the market clearing condition for the baseline model [cf. Eq. (15)].
In this case, greater foreign investment increases the amount of asset sales when there is a liquidity shock,
as captured by x in the denominator of the expression, because foreign investors are …ckle. The expression
on the right-hand side is the market clearing condition for the complete-markets model [cf. Eq. (A13)].
In this case, x does not appear in the denominator of the expression. This illustrates that greater foreign
investment does not a¤ect the amount of asset sales when there is a liquidity shock, despite the fact that
foreign investors are …ckle. The intuition is as follows: complete markets transfer all available liquidity
in period 1 to non-…ckle local banks whose country experiences a liquidity shock, which renders …ckleness
irrelevant for the determination of …re-sale prices.3 Foreign investment still exerts an upward in‡uence on
3

Formally, recall from our earlier analysis that banks’consumption in the state without a liquidity shock is zero,

6

…re-sale prices, due to local banks’retrenchment, but there is no counteracting force due to foreign banks’
…ckleness.
Our goal in this paper is to capture the tension between …ckleness and retrenchment (and investigate its
normative and positive implications). Therefore, we work with our baseline model with incomplete markets,
which features this tension.

A.2.2.

Partially-complete markets

The model with partially-complete markets. We next show that a limited amount of market
completeness can be introduced into our setting without changing anything substantive. To this end, consider
the above setup with the only di¤erence that banks face the additional constraint,
zcout;j

xj;j R + xout;j R + y j .

(A14)

for some 2 [0; 1]. The expression on the left-hand side,
zcout;j , denotes the amount that banks are
required to pay to foreign banks in period 1 due to their sales of country-speci…c Arrow-Debreu securities
in period 0 [cf. Eq. (A5)]. The expression on the right-hand side, xout;j R + y j , denotes the amount banks
receive in period 1 from their foreign investments or safe assets. Eq. (A14) says that insurance promises to
foreign banks need to be collateralized by payo¤s from foreign investments, safe assets, or local investments
(when there is no local liquidity shock, ! j = g).4 The parameter, , captures the tightness of the collateral
constraint. When = 0, the constraint is very tight and banks cannot sell (or buy) any liquidity insurance,
so we recover the baseline incomplete-markets model. When = 1, the constraint is loose and banks can
sell insurance subject to nonnegative consumption constraints only. In this case, we recover the earlier model
with fully-complete markets. When
2 (0; 1), we capture the intermediate cases in which markets are
partially complete. In practice, collateral constraints along the lines of Eq. (A14) emerge naturally due
to a variety of reasons that range from institutional factors (e.g., regulation or limited enforcement) to
information asymmetries (e.g., moral hazard or adverse selection).

Liquidity creation with partially-complete markets. The characterization of equilibrium is
similar to the case with fully-complete markets. As before, suppose parameters satisfy Assumption 1C
and consider an equilibrium with symmetric prices, p 2 (R= ; R), and symmetric allocations that satisfy,
xout;j = xout = xin = x and y j y, as well as zcout;j
z and zcj;j z. Following the same steps as earlier,
banks set z as large as possible subject to the collateral constraint in (A14). This implies the following
analogue of Eq. (A10),
xj;j R + xout R +
z=
.
(A15)
After substituting this expression, banks’problem can be written as the following analogue of Eq. (A11),
max u 1

xj;j ;xout

x

j;j

x

out

+

"

+

(1
) (1
xj;j p + xout R +

) xj;j R + xout R +
+ (1
) xj;j R + xout R +

R
p

#

.

(A16)

cj1 ! j = g = cj2 ! j = g = 0.
4
Unlike diversi…ed foreign investment, local investment is risky and pays p < R in period 1 when there is a local
liquidity shock, ! j = b. Hence, the collateral constraint in (A14) is arguably favorable to local investment relative
to foreign investment. We work with this speci…cation because we will establish that, despite a favorable collateral
constraint, local investment is strictly dominated by foreign investment as long as markets are not fully complete,
2 [0; 1).

7

Note that the ex-ante marginal value from local investment, xj;j , is given by,
(1

) (1

) R + ( p + (1

) R)

R
.
p

The ex-ante marginal value from foreign investment, xout , is given by,
(1

) (1

)R +

R + (1

) R

R
.
p

It is easy to check that, for any 2 [0; 1), the latter expression is strictly greater than the former. Thus,
local investment is strictly dominated by the foreign investment, as in the baseline model, as long as the
markets are not fully complete.
After substituting xj;j = 0, problem (A16) can be solved to obtain the following analogue of the optimality condition (A12),
u0 (1

x) = (1

) (1

)R +

R + (1

) R

R
.
p

(A17)

As before, the amount of foreign investment is determined by the ex-ante marginal value from foreign
investment. When = 0, Eq. (A17) reduces to its counterpart in the baseline model, Eq. (13). When
= 1, Eq. (A12) reduces to its counterpart in the fully-complete markets model, Eq. (A12).
Next note that the market clearing condition (14) still applies in this setting. Substituting for z from
(A15) and using xout = xin = x, we obtain,
p=
After substituting R = (1
Eq. (A13),

+ (1

) + xR
.
e+x

) R + p and solving the equation for p, we obtain the following analogue of
p=

+ (1

)

+ x (1
)R
.
e + x (1
) (1
)

(A18)

As before, the equilibrium …re-sale price is determined by cash-in-the-market per asset sale. When = 0,
Eq. (A18) reduces to its counterpart in the baseline model, Eq. (15). When = 1, Eq. (A12) reduces to its
counterpart in the fully-complete markets model, Eq. (A13).
The equilibrium is the pair, (x; p), that solves Eqs. (A17) and (A18). Under Assumption 1C , we can check
that there is a unique solution that satis…es x 2 (x; 1) and p 2 (R= ; R). Moreover, it can be checked that
the equilibrium is the same as in the baseline model when = 0, and it is the same as in the fully-complete
markets model when = 1.
Finally, note that for any 2 [0; 1) gross investments appear in the denominator of the market clearing
condition, Eq. (A18). In particular, as long as markets are not fully complete, …ckleness a¤ects …re-sale
prices in the same direction as in our baseline model. This illustrates that our results do not require the
extreme form of market incompleteness that we adopt in our baseline model.

A.3.

Equilibrium with bans on capital ‡ows

This section completes the analysis we described in Section 5.2, with policymakers that choose whether to
by bj 2 f0; 1g. Banks choose their portfolio,
hban0 capital
i in‡ows. Recall that the banning decision is denoted
0
0
xj ;j 0 , subject to the additional constraint that xj ;j = 0 for each j 0 6= j with bj = 1. The remaining
j0

8

ingredients are the same as in Section 3. Recall also that we focus on the limit, ! 1. We …rst illustrate
that in this limit, policymakers can be equivalently thought of as maximizing the local …re-sale price, pj .
We then characterize the equilibrium for a given con…guration of banning decisions. Finally, we consider the
Nash equilibrium in which the banning decisions are optimal and prove Proposition 4.
To characterize the objective function when ! 1, note that distressed sellers’expected consumption
in a liquidity shock is given by [cf. Eq. (1)],
c~j2 ! j = b = max
~j R +
j

e

~ j pj .

~

Thus, as long as pj is bounded from below (which is the case in equilibrium), lim
Next note that utilitarian social welfare function satis…es,
Wj

=

h
i
u cj0 + E cj1 + cj2 + (1

) c~j2 ! j = g

+

~j2
!1 c

c~j2 ! j = b

! j = b = = epj .

.

Taking the limit as ! 1, and observing that all terms except for the last one approach zero, we obtain,
lim !1 W j = = epj . Since ; e > 0, maximizing this expression is the same as maximizing the local
…re-sale price, pj . Intuitively, in this limit the balance sheet channel is very strong, and the planners focus
on increasing the investment of distressed sellers.
Next consider the equilibrium for a given con…guration of banking decisions. The extreme cases in
which bj = 0 for each j (free capital ‡ows), or bj = 1 for each j (autarky) are characterized in Section 4.1.
Consider the intermediate case in which capital ‡ows are banned in some countries. Speci…cally, suppose the
sets of countries with bj = 1 (“banned countries”) and bj = 0 (“free countries”) are Lebesgue measurable,
respectively with measures B 2 [0; 1) and 1 B > 0. In this case, we consider a symmetric equilibrium in
which each country invests the same amount in the safe asset and contingent securities, y j = and z = 0;
each ban country makes a symmetric investment in each free country, denoted by xban , and obtains a price
denoted by pban ; and each free country makes a symmetric investment in each free country (other than
itself), denoted by xf ree , and obtains a price denoted by pf ree . Under Assumption 1, we also conjecture
that a symmetric equilibrium features …re sales and strictly positive out‡ows in both banned and free
countries, pban ; pf ree 2 (0; R) and xban ; xf ree > 0. It is convenient to work with the modi…ed variables,
X ban = (1 B) xban ; X f ree = (1 B) xf ree that describe the total amount of foreign investment made by
each banned and free country, respectively.
First consider the free countries. Following similar steps as in Section 4, banks solve the following
analogue of problem (10),

xj;j

max

0;X f ree 0

u 1

xj;j

X f ree + xj;j R + X f ree R

f ree

f ree

+

M f ree ,
f ree

where R
= (1
) R + pf ree and M f ree = 1
+ R=pf ree . By Lemma 1, we have M f ree R
=
pf ree > R. Thus, in free countries, local investment is dominated, xj;j = 0, and foreign investment is
characterized by the optimality condition,
u0 1

X f ree =

9

pf ree .

(A19)

Note also that each free country’s in‡ows are given by,
x

in;j

=

Z

0

xj;j dj 0 = (1

B) xf ree + Bxban = X f ree +

j0

BX ban
.
1 B
f ree

Using Eq. (6) (and symmetry), its banks’asset demand in period 1 is given by j =
+ X f ree R
=pj .
Note also that, since we consider the limit in which ! 1 and the …re-sale price is positive, distressed
sellers sell all of their endowments, ~ j = 0 [cf. Eq. (1)]. Substituting these expressions into Eq. (7), we
obtain the market clearing condition,
f ree

f ree

p

+ X f ree R
=
e + X f ree + BX ban = (1

B)

.

(A20)

Next consider the banned countries. Banks solve a similar problem,

xj;j

max

0;X ban 0

xj;j

u 1

X ban + xj;j R + X ban R

f ree

+

M ban ,

f ree

where M ban = 1
+ R=pban . In this case, R
M ban is not necessarily strictly greater than R, and there
might be some local investment. Using our conjecture, X ban > 0, the optimality conditions can be written
as,
u0 1

xj;j

X ban

u0 1

xj;j

X ban

= M ban R

f ree

R with strict inequality only if xj;j = 0.

To simplify these conditions, we let pban 2 (0; R) denote the unique solution to the equation,
1

+ R=pban

(1

) R + pf ree = R.

(A21)

We then combine the two optimality conditions to obtain the following,
(

u0 1

X ban = 1
+ R=pban R
X ban 2 [0; x]

f ree

if pban < pban
,
if pban = pban

(A22)

where x denotes the solution to u0 (1 x) = R. Hence, if the …re-sale price is equal to the upper bound,
pban , then banks in banned countries are indi¤erent between local and foreign investment. If the price is
below this level, they make only foreign investment.
Finally, note that a banned country’s in‡ows are zero, xin;j = 0. Following similar steps as in free
countries, we obtain the market clearing condition,
pban =

+ X ban R
e

f ree

.

(A23)

The equilibrium is characterized by the tuple,
X f ree ; pf ree ; X ban ; pban , that solve Eqs.
(A19) ; (A20) ; (A22) ; and (A23). The following lemma, the proof of which is relegated to the end of
this section, veri…es that there exists an equilibrium that satis…es, pf ree ; pban 2 (0; R) ; X f ree ; X ban 2 (0; 1).
It also shows that, in every such equilibrium, …re-sale prices in banned countries are greater than in free
countries.

10

Lemma 3. For each B 2 [0; 1), there exists a tuple, pf ree ; pban 2 (0; R) ; X f ree ; X ban 2 (0; 1), that solves
Eqs. (A19) ; (A20) ; (A22) ; and (A23). Moreover, every solution satis…es pban > pf ree .
We next use this analysis to characterize the Nash equilibrium and prove Proposition 4.
Proof of Proposition 4. Consider a Nash equilibrium in which policymakers choose bj 2 f0; 1g to maximize
pj . Since every symmetric equilibrium with B 2 [0; 1) features pban > pf ree , the only candidate for a Nash
equilibrium is the autarky allocation in which all policymakers ban in‡ows, bj = 1 for each j and B = 1.
We next show that, under no arbitrage, the autarky allocation is a Nash equilibrium. Recall that in
autarky every country (which is a banned country) invests a positive amount in the local risky asset, x > 0,
and features the price, pban = =e. Suppose the policymaker in an (in…nitesimal) country j switches to bj = 0
and allows capital ‡ows. We let pf ree denote the equilibrium …re-sale price that would obtain in this country.
Under no arbitrage, this price satis…es pf ree < pban = =e. To see this, suppose pf ree
pban . This would
ban f ree
f ree f ree
imply M R
M
R
> R (cf. Lemma 1), which in turn would violate no arbitrage, because in
equilibrium banned countries invest a positive amount in local risky assets. This proves pf ree < pban , which
in turn proves that the autarky allocation is a Nash equilibrium.
Proof of Lemma 3. First note that, given any X ban 2 (0; 1), there exists a unique pair, pf ree 2 (0; R) and
X f ree 2 (0; 1), that solves Eqs. (A19) and (A20). Moreover, increasing X ban weakly decreases pf ree and
weakly increases X f ree . We therefore denote the solution with pf ree X ban and Xf ree X ban , and note
that pf ree ( ) is a weakly decreasing function and Xf ree ( ) is a weakly increasing function. Note also that
pf ree (0) = p and limX ban !1 pf ree X ban = 0, where p denotes the equilibrium price in the baseline model
with free ‡ows.
Next note that Eq. (A22) describes pban as a function of X ban and pf ree , which we denote with
pban
X ban ; pf ree . We can check that pban
( ) is weakly decreasing in X ban and strictly increasing in pf ree .
1
1
Hence, after substituting the weakly decreasing function, pf ree X ban , we obtain the weakly decreasing
function, f X ban
pban
X ban ; pf ree X ban . Note also that limX ban !1 f X ban = 0, and
1
f (0) = pban
(0; p) = pban > p,
1
where the last inequality follows from applying Eq. (A21) with pf ree = p and observing that (p) > R.
Likewise, note that Eq. (A23) describes pban as another function of X ban and pf ree , which we denote
with pban
X ban ; pf ree . After substituting pf ree X ban , we obtain the continuous function, g X ban
2
pban
X ban ; pf ree X ban . Note also that limX ban !1 g X ban > 0 and g (0) = =e < p (since p denotes the
2
equilibrium in the baseline model).
Using the continuity of functions f ( ) and g ( ), it follows that there exists X ban 2 (0; 1) such that
f X ban = g X ban . By de…nitions of f ( ) and g ( ), X ban corresponds to a solution. The remaining
variables are found from, pf ree = pf ree X ban ; X f ree = Xf ree X ban , and pban = f X ban . We can also
check that the solution is interior and satis…es pf ree ; pban 2 (0; R) ; X f ree ; X ban 2 (0; 1).
We next show that, in every solution, the banned countries feature greater …re-sale prices, pban > pf ree .
Suppose, to reach a contradiction, that pban pf ree . Eq. (A21) implies that pban > pf ree . Thus, we have
pban pf ree < pban . Eq. (A22) then implies that xj;j = 0 and out‡ows are determined by
u0 1

X ban = 1

where the last inequality follows since pban

+ R=pban R

f ree

pf ree ,

pf ree . Combining this with Eq. (A19) implies that X ban

11

X f ree . Combining this inequality with Eqs. (A20) and (A23) then implies pban > pf ree , which yields a
contradiction and completes the proof.

A.4.

Reach for safety and yield in the beta model

In Section 7, we assumed 1 > 0 (liquidity shocks have positive probability in all aggregate states) to
simplify the exposition. In this section, we characterize the equilibrium when 1 = 0. A special case is the
beta model we introduced in Section 6. After we characterize the equilibrium, we use the beta model to
establish additional comparative statics of the reach-for-safety and -yield.
As in Section 7, we consider a special country that has potentially di¤erent parameters, ( ; R ). As
before, the parameters satisfy Assumption 2. The new assumption is that 1 = 0, that is, there exists an
aggregate state in which the conditional probability of liquidity shocks is zero. As before, we denote the
equilibrium allocations in the special country with x ; ; xin; ; (ls )s ; (~ s )s ; (ps )s . Recall that ls = xout; Rs +
y + zs
denotes the banks’ liquidity purchase (and the individual components, xout; ; y ; zs , are not
uniquely determined).
In Proposition 7, we show that x ; = 0 and the remaining equilibrium allocations in the special country
are characterized as the solution to Eqs. (32 36). Most of these equations continue to apply in this setting
with the exception of the optimality condition for out‡ows, Eq. (34). In this case, since liquidity shocks
happen with zero probability in state s = 1, banks in the special country might prefer to bring zero net
liquidity to this state. Thus, we need to allow for the possibility of a corner solution in this state. To this
end, we replace the optimality condition (34) with the following conditions,

and

Ms
qs
Ms
=
= 0
for each s > 1,
u0 (c0 )
u
(c0 )
s
(
either c0 < c0 ; l1 =
.
or c0 = c0 ; l1
; p1 = p1

(A24)
(A25)

Here, Eq. (A24) says that the earlier optimality conditions continue to apply for states s > 1 (that feature
s > 0). Eq. (A25) is the optimality condition for state s = 1. To understand this condition, note that 1 = 0
implies M1 = M1 = 1. For regular countries, we have an interior solution for this state (in a symmetric
equilibrium), which implies that banks are indi¤erent to investing in this state, M1 =u0 (c0 ) = q1 = 1 . Eq.
(A25) presents the optimality condition for the banks in the special country depending on whether c0 < c0
or c0 = c0 (the remaining case, c0 > c0 , can be ruled out). If c0 < c0 , then the special country features
M1 =u0 (c0 ) < q1 = 1 , which implies that banks strictly prefer to reduce their investment in this state and
there is a corner solution, l1 =
. If c0 = c0 , the special country features M1 =u0 (c0 ) = q1 = 1 , which
implies the banks are indi¤erent to investing in this state. In this case, p1 is not uniquely determined.5 But
this indeterminacy is innocuous since 1 = 0 and liquidity shocks happen with zero probability in this state.
We resolve this indeterminacy by assuming, p1 = p1 .
The following result, which is the analogue of Proposition 7 for this setting, summarizes this discussion
and establishes the existence of an equilibrium. The proof is relegated to Online Appendix A.6.
Proposition 10. Consider the model with Assumption 1 and 1 = 0, together with a special country that
satis…es Assumption 2. There exists an equilibrium in which the allocations and prices for regular countries
5

This indeterminacy arises because the banks in the special country can transfer liquidity from state 1 to other
states (therefore lowering p1 ), and banks in regular countries can send greater in‡ows into the special country to
neutralize the price impact of these liquidity transfers (therefore leaving ps unchanged for s > 1).

12

are characterized by Propositions 1-2. In the special country, there is no local investment, x ; = 0. The
remaining allocations, xin; ; c0 ; (ls )s ; (ps )s ; (~ s )s , are characterized as the unique solution to the system of
equations (32 36) after replacing Eq. (34) with Eqs. (A24 A25).
As before, we adopt the convention that total in‡ows are equal to the in‡ows into risky assets, xin;
xin; . Total out‡ows account for the net trade of safe and contingent assets and are given by Eq. (37).
Next consider the beta model we analyzed in Section 6. Note that Proposition 10 also applies for this
model. We use this special case to analyze the determinants of reach-for-safety and -yield.

Reach for safety in the beta model. First suppose R = R and consider the e¤ect of asymmetries
in the liquidity supply, . It is easy to verify that the closed-form solution described in Section 7.2 also
applies in this setting. Thus, the results in Proposition 8 apply. In particular, …re-sale prices are independent
of . A country with
> features more in‡ows than out‡ows, xin, > xout; = x, and it also has riskier
(more leveraged) out‡ows relative to its in‡ows, > 1. A country with
< features more out‡ows than
in‡ows, xout; = x > xin; , and safer (less leveraged) out‡ows than regular countries, < 1.
We next analyze the comparative statics of equilibrium with respect to global risk conditions, which we
capture with (see Section 6). Suppose increases so that the liquidity shocks become more correlated. As
captured by Proposition 6, this decreases the symmetric ‡ows, x, as well as the risk-free rate, Rf . Consider
the e¤ect on net imbalances (as a fraction of out‡ows), xin,
x =x, as well as the absolute value of a
country’s relative leverage ratio, j
1j. After rearranging Eqs. (38), we obtain closed-form expressions,
xin,

x
x

j

e
+1 j
x
j
j
.
xRf +

=

1j =

1j

jxi n , xj
Since an increase in
reduces x and Rf , it also increases both j
1j and
. In particular, for
x
a developed country with
> , it increases the (proportional) current account de…cit and makes the
out‡ows riskier. Conversely, for an emerging market with
< , it increases the (proportional) current
account surplus and makes the out‡ows safer. The following result, which is the analogue of Proposition 8
for this setting, summarizes this discussion.
Proposition 11. Consider the setup in Proposition 10 for the special case of the beta model described in
Section 6. Suppose the parameters satisfy R = R and
6= . All of the results stated in Proposition 8
apply in this setting. In addition, an increase in (the liquidity shocks become more correlated) increases
xin,
x =x and j
1j.

Reach for yield in the beta model. Next suppose = 0 and consider the e¤ect of asymmetries in
return, R . As in the main text, we consider the case with R > R. Using Proposition 10, and Eqs. (23)
and (24), the foreigners’optimality (or indi¤erence) condition (32) can be rewritten as,
q1 R + q2 ((1

) R + p2 ) + q3 p3 = q1 R + q2 ((1

) R + p2 ) + q3 p3 .

(A26)

Likewise, local banks’optimality conditions (A24) for states 2 and 3 can be rearranged as,
1
1

+
+

R
p2
R
p2

=

13

R
p3
R
p3

=

u0 (c0 )
.
u0 (c0 )

(A27)

Eqs. (A26) and (A27) determine (p2 ; p3 ), as well as c0 . Lemma 4 in Online Appendix A.6 establishes that
u0 (c )
(there
there is a unique solution. Moreover, the solution satis…es u0 (c00 ) > 1. By (A25), this implies l1 =
is a corner solution for state 1). The remaining allocations, xin; ; p1 ; (ls )s2f2;3g ; (~ s )s , are characterized by
solving Eqs. (32 36) with the exception of Eq. (34). The price in state 1 is zero, p1 = 0, since banks have
zero net liquidity in this state, l1 + = 0.
Lemma 4 further shows that the solution satis…es p2 < p2 and p3 < p3 , that is, the country experiences
more severe …re sales in both distressed states. Moreover, the relative depth of …re sales is greater in
the idiosyncratic shock state than in the aggregate shock state, p2 =p2 < p3 =p3 . It can also be seen that
xin; > xout; > x, that is, the reach for yield increases the country’s out‡ows, but it increases its in‡ows
more than its out‡ows. Hence, all of the results in Proposition 9 apply in this case as long as we focus on
the prices for aggregate states s > 1 (with s > 0). The remaining price is equal to zero, p1 = 0.
We next investigate the comparative statics of equilibrium with respect to the global return and risk
s
conditions, which we capture with R and . To this end, we substitute qs = s u0M
(c0 ) [cf. Eq. (34)] into Eq.
(A26) and rearrange terms to obtain,
(R

R) (1
) (M1 + M2 (1
p2 M2 (1
) + p3 M3
where p =
M2 (1
) + M3

)) = (p

p ) (M2 (1
) + M3 ) ,
p M2 (1
) + p3 M3
and p = 2
.
M2 (1
) + M3

(A28)

Here, the second line de…nes weighted average …re-sale prices (weighted by probability and price). Eq. (A28)
captures the trade-o¤ from investing in the special country relative to other countries. Banks collect net
positive returns if there is no crisis (captured by the left side), but they make net negative returns if there is
a crisis (captured by the right side). Net gains are multiplied by the probability of no crisis (1
) and the
average marginal value conditional on no crisis. Net losses are calculated in similar fashion. The indi¤erence
condition obtains when the weighted net gains and net losses are equated.
Eq. (A28) shows that, all else equal, a decline in investment returns in other countries, R, makes investing
in the special country more attractive. In equilibrium, this tends to decrease the relative …re-sale price in
the special country, so as to counter the greater net gains with greater net losses conditional on a crisis.
However, the result does not immediately follow since the marginal values are endogenous and depend on
R. In Online Appendix A.6, we formally establish that a decrease in R decreases p
p.
Eq. (A28) also shows that, all else equal, a decline in the correlation parameter, , makes investing
in the special country relatively more attractive: it decreases the weighting term on the right (loss) side
while increasing the weighting term on the left (gain) side since M1 < M2 < M3 . In equilibrium, this tends
to reduce the relative …re-sale price in the special country. In Online Appendix A.6, we formally show a
decrease in decreases p
p. The following proposition, which is the analogue of Proposition 9 for this
setting, summarizes this discussion.
Proposition 12. Consider the setup in Proposition 10 for the special case of the beta model described in
Section 6. Suppose the parameters satisfy
= and R > R. All of the results stated in Proposition 9
continue to apply in this setting for states s 2 f2; 3g with s > 0. The remaining state s = 1 (with 1 = 0)
and p1 = 0. In addition, a decrease in R as well as a decrease in reduces the special
features l1 =
country’s relative weighted average …re-sale price, p
p [de…ned in (A28)].

14

A.5.

An alternative model with distressed banks

In the main text, we built a model in which liquidity shocks are events such that a group of agents (“distressed
sellers”) sell …nancial assets at …re-sale prices to invest in a pro…table project, and another group of agents
(“banks”) arbitrage these …re sales. In practice, crises and …re-sales are often associated with losses to
…nancial institutions, which we call “banks” in our model. In this appendix, we build a model in which
there are no distressed sellers, and liquidity shocks are events such that banks experience losses (so they are
the distressed agents). When this happens, banks are forced to sell their assets to another group of agents,
“secondary buyers,”that reside in the same country as the banks. We show that the equivalent of our main
result (Proposition 1) applies in this case.
We then characterize the constrained optimal allocation in this environment and establish the equivalent
of our main welfare result (Proposition 3). In this setting, …re sales are costly because they tighten banks’
…nancial constraints and generate a misallocation of productive resources to secondary buyers (similar to
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)). As long as banks are net sellers of risky assets in a liquidity shock, the
constrained optimum features higher ex-ante foreign investment and higher ex-post …re-sale prices compared
to the competitive equilibrium, because the planner internalizes that greater prices relax banks’ …nancial
constraints.
Taken together, our results in this appendix highlight that the “distressed sellers” in our main model
are a modeling device that introduces the standard balance sheet channel into the model while simplifying
the analysis. These agents generate the liquidity demand that triggers …re sales, and when the return from
their projects ( ) is high, they also capture the social cost of …re sales.
For simplicity, we focus attention on the case in which there is a single aggregate state s so there is no
aggregate risk (the results can be generalized). Throughout, we drop the subscript s from the notation.

An alternative model. As before, there are three periods, t 2 f0; 1; 2g, and a single consumption good

in each period. There is a continuum of mass one of countries denoted by superscript j 2 J. A random
variable ! j is drawn for each country j and i.i.d. across j, with = Pr ! j = b and 1
= Pr ! j = g .
We say that a country with ! j = b experiences a liquidity shock.
There are two types of assets. First, in each country, there is a linear technology in period 0: investing
one unit of the consumption good produces one unit of a country-speci…c risky asset. If ! j = g, then the
asset generates R + G units of the consumption good in period 1 (and 0 units in period 2), where R denotes
the baseline payo¤ and G denotes an additional gain realized in the good state. If ! j = b, then the asset
generates R units of the consumption good in period 2. But it also generates a loss of L units of consumption
good in period 1 (that is, the asset’s owner is obliged to pay L units of the consumption good). To simplify
the exposition, we assume G (1
) = L, so that the asset’s expected payo¤ after accounting for the gains
and losses is still R.
When ! j = b, the asset is traded at an endogenous price. We let pj denote the price after the payment
of L. As before, we concentrate on symmetric equilibria in which this price is the same across all countries,
that is, pj p for each j.
As before, there is a risk-free asset that pays 1 unit of the consumption good in period 1 (and 0 units in
period 2). The risk-free asset is in …xed supply: speci…cally, there are units in each country (endowed to
the local banks that we describe below). In period 0, the risk-free asset is traded at an endogenous price qf .
(We do not introduce the Arrow-Debreu securities since there is only a single aggregate state).
In each country, there are two types hof agents,
which we refer to as “secondary buyers” and “banks.”
i
j
The secondary buyers have preferences E c~1 . When the local state is ! j = b, they have access to a concave

15

technology that converts the asset in their country into consumption goods in period 1. If they purchase
~j
0 units of the asset, then they produce R log ~ j = + 1 units of the consumption good (for some
> 0). Thus, their consumption is given by
c~j1 = R log ~ j = + 1

p~ j :

We chose the functional form for their production to obtain a simple expression for demand. Speci…cally,
the optimality condition implies the secondary buyers’demand for the asset is given by
~j =

(R=p

1) for each p

R.

(A29)

The role of these buyers is to generate misallocation and welfare losses from …re sales (as in Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997)).
As before, banks are the main agents in our model and their preferences are,
h
i
E u cj0 + cj1 + cj2 .
Banks are endowed with e units of the asset in their country, which we refer to as legacy assets (as in
the main text). Banks are not allowed to sell their legacy assets in period 0, which ensures that they have a
minimum amount of exposure to the local risky asset in period 1. We could endogenize this by introducing
some local expertise with diminishing returns. In particular we view the legacy assets as representing the
comparative advantage of local banks to lend in the local market.
In addition, banks are endowed with 1 unit of the consumption good in period 0 as well as units of the
risk-free asset (as in the main text).
0
Banks in country j choose an investment strategy, xj ;j , in risky assets across countries, j 0 . They also
choose how many consumption units to invest in the risk-free asset, y j . Banks’budget constraint in period
0 is
Z
0
j
j;j
out;j
j
out;j
c0 + x + x
+ y qf = 1 + qf , where x
=
xj ;j dj 0 .
j 0 6=j

Here, xout;j denotes the out‡ows: i.e., what country j banks invest in other countries. Banks are not allowed
0
to short-sell risky assets, xj ;j
0 for each j 0 , but they are allowed to take unrestricted positions on the
risk-free asset subject to obtaining nonnegative consumption in all periods and states.
In period 1, banks receive xout;j R units of the consumption good from their foreign positions, where we
de…ne R = (1
) R + p similar to the main text. Note that banks’losses and gains on average cancel (by
assumption) and we are left with the same expression as in the main text. Banks also receive y j units of the
consumption good from their investments in the safe asset.
If ! j = g, they also receive e + xj;j (R + G) units from the local asset. Moreover, banks do not have a
remaining investment opportunity so they consume all of their available resources in period 1. In particular,
their budget constraint in this state can be written as,
cj1 ! j = g

=

and cj2 ! j = g

=

e + xj;j (R + G) + xout;j R + y j
0.

If ! j = b, then banks lose e + xj;j L units from the local asset. We let j 0 denote banks’position
in the local risky asset in period 1 when ! j = b. Then, their budget constraint in this state can be written

16

as,
cj1 ! j = b +

j

cj2 ! j = g
h 0
As before, banks choose xj ;j

e + xj;j (p

p =

j

=

i
0 0 ; yj ; zj ;

L) + xout;j R + y j ,

R.

j

0 to maximize their expected utility subject to non-

j

negative consumption requirements, cj0 0; cj1 0; cj2 0.
The equilibrium is a collection of optimal allocations and market clearing conditions. The market clearing
condition for the risky asset in a country j with ! j = b in period 1 can be written as,
e + xin;j + xj;j = ~ j +

j

where xin;j =

Z

0

xj;j dj 0 .

(A30)

j 0 6=j

The market clearing condition for the risk-free asset in period 0 can be written as,
Z

y j dj =

j

Z

dj = .

j

Equilibrium in the alternative model. We assume the parameters satisfy
Assumption 1A . eL

R<

< eL.

The right side of the inequality ensures the equilibrium features …re sales, p < R. The left side ensures the
…re-sale price is strictly positive, p > 0. Speci…cally, we conjecture an equilibrium with symmetric …re-sale
prices, p 2 (0; R). We also conjecture symmetric equilibrium allocations, denoted by xout ; y. Later, we
strengthen this assumption to facilitate the welfare analysis. As before, the symmetry implies that y =
and that in‡ows and out‡ows are the same, xin = xout . When it is clear from the context, we denote
symmetric ‡ows with x.
Since banks have linear utility between periods 1 and 2, the presence of …re sales (p < R) implies that
banks in countries with state ! j = b invest all of their resources in period 1 in the risky asset. Combining
this observation with the budget constraints stated earlier, we obtain cj1 ! j = b = 0 and
j

=

e + xj;j (p

L) + xout;j R +
.
p

(A31)

In addition, since countries are symmetric, the market clearing condition implies y j = . Combining
these observations with the budget constraints,
cj0 + xj;j + xout
cj1;s

j

=

! =g

=

cj2;s ! j = b

=

1,
e + xj;j (R + G) + xout R + ,
e + xj;j (p

L) + xout;j R +
R.
p

Substituting these expressions into the objective function and rearranging terms, the banks’problem can
be written as,
maxout u 1 xj;j xout + e + xj;j Rj;j + xout R + M ,
j;j
x

;x

17

where M = 1

+

R
p

as in the main text and
Rj;j = (1

p

) (R + G) +

L
p

R

denotes the ex-ante marginal value from investing in the local asset. It is easy to check that Rj;j < R < RM
(the last inequality follows from Lemma 1), which implies xj;j = 0. As before, local investment in period 0
is dominated by foreign investment.
Banks’foreign investment is then characterized by solving
u0 (1

x) =

(p)

RM ,

(A32)

where R = (1
) R + p and M = 1
+ R
p as in the main text. As before, this yields a decreasing
relationship between x and p.
Next consider the determination of the …re-sale asset price, p. Substituting ~ j ; j from Eqs. (A29) and
(A31) into the market clearing condition (A34) (and using xj;j = 0 and y j = ) we obtain,
p=

R + e (p

L) + xout R +
.
+ e + xin

(A33)

After substituting xin = xout = x and rearranging terms, we obtain,
R+

p=

eL + xR
.
+x

Substituting the expression for R and rearranging, we further obtain,
p=

R+

eL + x (1
+ x (1
)

)R

.

(A34)

As before, this provides an increasing relation between x and p.
The equilibrium is characterized by Eqs. (A32) and (A34). Under Assumption 1A , there exists a unique
solution, (x; p), that also satis…es p 2 (0; R) and x 2 (0; 1).

Global liquidity creation in the alternative model. We next illustrate that our main result
regarding the liquidity-creation role of gross ‡ows (Proposition 1) extends to this setting. To this end, we
start by characterizing the autarky allocation in which foreign ‡ows are banned. In particular, banks solve
the problem described above with the additional restriction xout;j = 0. In this case, there might be some
local investment. Speci…cally, we have,
u0 1

xj;j

(1

) (R + G) +

paut L
R,
paut

(A35)

with strict inequality only if xj;j = 0. Note that this describes a (weakly) increasing relation between paut
and xj;j . Following similar steps as above, the market clearing condition becomes,
paut =

e + xj;j L

R+

18

.

(A36)

This describes a decreasing relation between paut and xj;j . The autarky equilibrium is characterized by
solving Eqs. (A35) and (A36). Under Assumption 1A , there exists a unique solution, paut ; xj;j , that
satis…es paut 2 (0; R) and xj;j 2 [0;x) (recall that x denotes the solution to u0 (1 x) = R).
Comparing Eqs. (A34) and (A36), we have,
p>

R+

eL

R +

e + xj;j L

= paut .

Here, the …rst inequality follows since x > 0 and the second inequality follows since xj;j
0. It follows
aut
that the equilibrium …re-sale price exceeds the autarky level, p > p , as in the baseline model. Intuitively,
as illustrated by Eq. (A33), gross ‡ows create liquidity also in the alternative model because in‡ows are
liquidated at the …re-sale price p, whereas out‡ows provide liquidity at a higher return R.

Public goods aspect of liquidity creation in the alternative model. Eq. (A33) also illustrates
that out‡ows increase local …re-sale prices whereas in‡ows tend to reduce them. The coordination problem
between local policymakers that we highlighted in the main text also extends to this setting. In particular,
suppose local policymakers want to raise local …re-sale prices, pj , and they can choose whether or not to ban
capital ‡ows, bj 2 f0; 1g (as in Section 5.2). It is then easy to check that a global policymaker that could
coordinate policy across countries would prescribe bj = 0 for each j, whereas the Nash equilibrium features
bj = 1 for each j and results in the autarky allocation. Hence, absent coordination, local policymakers
set excessive restrictions on capital ‡ows, which leads to lower liquidity creation and lower …re-sale prices
compared to a coordinated outcome.

Constrained optimal allocation and externalities in the alternative model. We next
characterize the constrained optimal allocation in this environment and illustrate the externalities. As in
Section 5.1, suppose the policymakers have the utilitarian social welfare function,
h
i
h i
W j = u cj0 + E cj1 + cj2 + E c~j2 .
Consider a global planner that can dictate (symmetric) period 0 local and foreign investment in each country
but otherwise cannot interfere with equilibrium allocations. We denote local investment with xj;j , foreign
investment with x, and the resulting equilibrium price with p. Using the functional form for secondary
buyers’ demand [cf. Eq. (A29)] and following similar steps as in Section 5.1, we calculate the planner’s
objective function as,
Wj
where ~

= u 1
=

x

(R=p

xj;j + xj;j + x + e R + + f (~ ) ,
1) and f (~ ) =

(A37)

~ R + R log (~ = + 1) .

This expression is the analogue of Eq. (20) for this setting. The term f (~ ) captures the net production
that results from transferring resources from banks to secondary buyers. It is easy to check that f (0) = 0
and f 0 (~ ) < 0 for each ~ 0. Thus, net production is negative (and increasingly so for greater levels of ~ ).
This illustrates that transferring assets to secondary buyers reduces the utilitarian social welfare.
Following similar steps as above, the market clearing condition is given by the following analogue of Eq.
(A34),
R+
e + xj;j L + x (1
)R
.
(A38)
p=
+ x (1
)

19

The constrained social planner chooses x; xj;j ; p to maximize the expression in (A37) subject to this
condition. It is easy to check that the ex-ante marginal value from foreign investment strictly exceeds
R whereas the marginal value from local investment is strictly less than R. Hence, local investment is
dominated, and xj;j = 0 (as in the main text). Intuitively, the planner prefers foreign investment because it
increases the …re-sale price and reduces misallocation, whereas local investment further reduces the …re-sale
price and exacerbates misallocation.
After setting xj;j = 0, the market clearing condition (A38) is equivalent to its counterpart in equilibrium,
condition (A34). Thus, the planner maximizes (A37) subject to this condition. Taking the …rst order
conditions, we obtain the following analogue of Eq. (21) in Section 5.1,
u0 (1

x)

where f 0 (~ )
d~
dp
dp
dx

= R + f 0 (~ )
=
=
=

R+

d~ dp
,
dp dx

R
1 + ~=

=

R
,
p2
(1
)
(R
+ x (1
)

(R

p) ,

p) .

Here, the second line uses the de…nition of f ( ) in (A37), the third line uses the de…nition of ~ in (A29), and
the last line uses the expression for p in (A34) to evaluate the corresponding derivatives.
Combining these expressions, the planner’s optimality condition becomes
u0 (1

x) = R + R

R
p

2

1

(1
)
.
+ x (1
)

(A39)

As before, this represents a decreasing relationship between (x; p). The equilibrium is characterized by
solving this expression together with Eq. (A39). Under Assumption 1A , there exists a solution that satis…es
p 2 (0; R) and x 2 (0; 1).
As in Section 5.1, the equilibrium and the constrained optimum share the market clearing condition
(A34) but they di¤er because they are associated with di¤erent optimality conditions (A39) and (A32).
After comparing the right-hand terms of conditions (A39) and (A32) and rearranging terms, it is easy to
check that the constrained optimal allocation features greater x (and greater p) if and only if the following
inequality holds:
+ ReL + xeq (1
)
peq
>
=
.
eq
eq
+ x (1
)
R
+ x (1
)
Here, (xeq ; peq ) denote the competitive equilibrium allocation and the equality follows from Eq. (A34). After
rearranging terms and combining with Eq. (A31), the previous inequality is equivalent to
eL >

+ Rxeq (1

).

(A40)

When this inequality is satis…ed, the constrained optimum features greater (x; p) than the equilibrium.
Otherwise, it features smaller (x; p). Hence, the analogue of Proposition 3 in Section 5.1 applies in this
setting.
To understand condition (A40), suppose the parameters are such that banks’ demand for assets in

20

equilibrium satis…es [cf. Eq. (A31)],
j

=

e (peq

L) + xeq R
peq

eq

+

< e.

(A41)

This says that local banks are net sellers of the risky asset in the sense that their demand j is below their
endowment e. This condition implies Eq. (A40), that is, if local banks are net sellers in equilibrium, then
the constrained optimum features greater (x; p). The intuition is that increasing …re-sale prices via greater
foreign investment reduces the wealth of secondary buyers but increases the wealth of local banks (when they
are net sellers) as well as …ckle foreign banks. Since the secondary buyers have lower marginal value than
both local and foreign banks, foreign investment is associated with positive externalities, and the equilibrium
features insu¢ cient liquidity creation and depressed prices.6
Condition (A41) is implied by the following strengthening of Assumption 1A .
Assumption 1A’. eL

R<

< eL

R.

In particular, as long as banks’ losses during liquidity shocks are su¢ ciently large (so that the right side
of the inequality holds), then banks are net sellers of risky assets. Then, the equilibrium features too little
foreign investment and depressed …re-sale prices compared to the constrained optimum.

A.6.

Omitted proofs

Proof of Lemma 1. Using the de…nition of
0
s

(ps ) =

s

=

s

1
(1

s

s)

s

+

(ps ) in Eq. (12), we have,
R
ps

1

R
s

R2
p2s

s 2
ps

((1

s) R

+

s ps )

.

Hence, s (ps ) is strictly decreasing over the range ps 2 (0; R). Using Eq. (12), we also obtain
It follows that s (ps ) > R for ps 2 (0; R). This in turn implies xj;j = 0.

s

(R) = R.

Proof of Lemma 2. Taking the derivative of Eq. (15), we obtain,
d
dx

+ x (1
e + x (1

Here, the inequality follows since

s) R
s)

=

(1
e + x (1

< eR implies Psmc (x) =

s)
s)

Psmc (x)) > 0.

(R

+x(1
e+x(1

s )R
s)

< R, which completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 1. Most of the equilibrium characterization is provided in the main text. It remains
to check that a unique solution to Eqs. (13) and (15) exists. To this end, de…ne the function,
F (X) = u0 (1

X)

X

s s

(ps ) , where ps =

s

+ X (1
e + X (1

s) R
s)

for each s.

6
Note that conditions (A40) and (A41) are similar but not identical. In particular, there might be parameters in
which the latter is violated, so that banks are net buyers, but the former is satis…ed so that the constrained optimum
features greater (x; p) than the equilibrium. Intuitively, when local banks are net buyers, increasing the price reduces
the wealth of secondary buyers and local banks while raising the wealth of …ckle foreign banks. Since secondary buyers
have lower marginal utility than foreign banks, but local banks have higher marginal utility than foreign banks, the
e¤ect of this wealth transfer is ambiguous.

21

By Lemma 2, F (X) is strictly increasing over the range X 2 (0; 1). Note also that,
F (0)

= u0 (1)
<

R

X

X

s

s s

s

s s

e

e
< 0.

Here, the …rst inequality follows from our assumption that u0 (1) < R. The second inequality arises from
combining < eR (by Assumption 1) with Lemma 1, to obtain s e > R. Finally, note that F (1) = 1
since we assume u0 (0) = 1. By continuity, there exists a unique solution to the equation, F (x) = 0, over
the range, (0; 1). This proves the existence and the characterization of equilibrium.
The bounds for the equilibrium price can then be derived by combining Assumption 1 with the market
+x(1
s )R
clearing relation, Eq. (15). Using < eR, we obtain Psmc (x) = e+x(1
< R. Therefore, the equilibrium
s)
mc
also satis…es ps < R for each s. Likewise, using > eR= we obtain Ps (x) > Psmc (0) = =e > R= . This
implies ps > R= for each s.
We next characterize the autarky equilibrium in which all banks are required to make zero foreign
0
investment xj ;j = 0 for each j 0 6= j. In this case, banks solve problem (10) with the additional constraint,
xout;j = 0. It follows that there is some local investment in period 0, and the level of local investment is given
by xj;j = x > 0, where x denotes the solution to u0 (1 x) = R. In period 1, when a country experiences a
liquidity shock, linear utility between periods 1 and 2 (combined with ps < R) implies that local banks use
all their available liquidity to purchase risky assets. Therefore, we can use Eq. (6) with cj1;s ! j = b = 0
and zsj = 0; y j = (from symmetry across countries) to obtain j = xj;j + =ps . Substituting this into Eq.
(7), we obtain ps = paut
=e for each s. This is equal to Psmc (0) [cf. Eq. (15)]: that is, the equilibrium
price is the same as in the baseline model after setting foreign investment equal to zero. Using Lemma 2
and x > 0, this implies ps > paut for each s with s < 1. We also have ps = paut for a state with s = 1.
This completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 2. Provided in the main text.
Proof of Proposition 3. The analysis in the main text characterizes the allocation that obtains when
the planner chooses x; xj;j . In particular, Eq. (15) applies, conditional on the planner’s choice of x. Under
Assumption 1, the resulting price satis…es p 2 (R= ; R).
Next consider the social welfare that results from this allocation. Note that distressed sellers sell all of
their endowments to invest in new projects with return . Thus, their expected equilibrium consumption is
given by
h i
E c~j2 = eR,
where R = (1

) R + p. For banks, following similar steps as in Section 4, we have,
cj0

=

cj1 ! j = g

=

and cj2 ! j = b

=

1

x

xj;j ,

+ xR + xj;j R and cj2 ! j = g = 0,
R
+ xR + xj;j p
and cj1 ! j = b = 0,
p

where (x; p) are characterized as the unique solution to Eqs. (13) and (15).
h
i
h i
Substituting these expressions into the utilitarian social welfare function, u cj0 + E cj1 + cj2 + E c~j2 ,

22

we obtain,
Wj

= u 1

x

xj;j + (1

= u 1

x

xj;j + + xj;j R + xR +

= u 1

x

xj;j + + xj;j R + xR + (R

p)

= u 1

x

xj;j + + xj;j R + xR + (R

p) e + eR.

)

+ xR + xj;j R +

+ xR + xj;j p
R
p

+ xR

R
+ eR
p

1 + eR

+ xR
p

x + eR

Here, the second line groups terms together, the third line substitutes R = R (R p) , and the last line
+xR
substitutes p = e+x
[cf. Eq. (14)].
Substituting (R p) = R R into the previously displayed equation, we …nally obtain Eq. (20) in the
main text, which we report here for convenience:
Wj = u 1

x

xj;j + xj;j + x + e R + + (

1) eR,

where R = (1
) R + p. The social planner chooses x; xj;j to maximize this expression subject to the
dW j
dW j
market clearing condition (15). The constrained optimum features xj;j = 0 because dx
j;j = R <
dx =
dp
R+(
1) e dx .
The optimality condition for foreign investment results in Eq. (21) in the main text, which we report
here,
u0 (1

x)

= R+(

where

dp
dx

=

1) e

dp
dx

(1
)
(R
e + x (1
)

p) .

Note that this describes a strictly decreasing relation between p and x. Eq. (15) describes a strictly increasing
relation. Under Assumption 1, there exists a unique intersection that satis…es x 2 (0; 1) and p 2 (R= ; R).
We next analyze how the constrained optimum compares with the equilibrium. Note that the constrained
optimum features greater x (and p) than the equilibrium if and only if the right-hand side of Eq. (21) exceeds
the right-hand side of Eq. (13),
R+(

1) e

dp
> M R,
dx

when both expressions are evaluated at the equilibrium allocation (xeq ; peq ). After substituting M , R and
dp
dx from Eq. (21), and dividing both sides by R, this inequality becomes,
1+(

1) e

(1
) R peq
>
eq
e + x (1
)
R

1

+

R
peq

1

+

peq
R

.

After expanding the terms on the right hand side and canceling terms from both sides, this inequality
becomes,
e + xeq (1
)
R
> eq .
e + xeq (1
)
p
This is equivalent to condition (22), which completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 4. Provided in Online Appendix A.3.

23

Proof of Proposition 5. The analysis in the main text shows that dx=d < 0 and dp2 =d > 0, that is,
reducing increases x and reduces p2 (see Figure 3). Using (29), p3 also declines. Combining these results
with Eq. (30), E Rs also declines.
To show the e¤ect on Rf , note that Eq. (31) can be rewritten as,
Rf
E Rs Ms
M2
E [Ms ]
and
M2

where

=
=
=

E Rs Ms =M2
E [Ms ] =M2
(1
1
1

(A42)

1
+ (1
) =R + =p2
+ R=p3
+1
.
+ R=p2

) ((1

) R + p2 )

Note that the term in the numerator, E Rs Ms =M2 , is an average of the arithmetic and the harmonic
d(E [Rs Ms ]=M2 )
> 0. For the term in the denominator,
averages of R and p2 . Since dp2 =d > 0, we also have
d
note that,
dE [Ms ] =M2
=
d

(1
1

This is strictly negative since

+ R=p3 )
+ R=p2
dp3 =d
p3

dp3 =d
p3 (1

dp2 =d
and (1
p2
dRf
obtain d > 0.

>

dp2 =d
1
+
) p3 + R
p2 (1

1
)p3 + R

>

(1

1
)p2 + R .

1
) p2 + R

.

Combining the e¤ects on the

numerator and the denominator, we
In particular, decreasing decreases Rf .
Finally, to show that reducing
increases the risk premium in a neighborhood of
= eR, we let
x ( ) ; [ps ( )]s denote the equilibrium as a function of . The analysis in the proof of Proposition 1 implies
that x ( ) and [ps ( )]s are continuous functions for
< eR. Taking the limit of Eq. (15) we obtain,
lim !eR ps = R. Using Eqs. (4) and (11), we further obtain lim !eR Rs = R and lim !eR Ms = 1
for each s. Using Eq. (18), we obtain lim !eR Rf = R. Thus, the risk premium in the limit is zero,
lim !eR E Rs
Rf = 0. However, by Eq. (19), E Rs
Rf > 0 for each < eR. It follows that reducing
increases the risk premium in a lower neighborhood of = eR, completing the proof.
Proof of Proposition 6. The analysis in the main text shows that dx=d < 0 and dp2 =d < 0, that is,
increasing reduces x and p2 (see Figure 3). Combining these results with Eq. (30), E Rs also declines.
Next consider the e¤ect on Rf . Combining Eqs. (31) and (27), we obtain,
Rf

=

where E [Ms ]

=

u0 (1 x)
E [Ms ]
(1
+ R=p3 ) + (1

) (1

+ R=p2 ) .

First consider the e¤ect on the numerator. Since dx=d < 0, we have d (u0 (1
the e¤ect on the denominator, which can be evaluated as,
dE [Ms ]
=
d

R
p3

R
p2

(1

)

x)) =d < 0. Next consider

R dp2
> 0.
2
(p2 ) d

Here, the inequality follows since p3 < p2 and dp2 =d < 0. Combining the two e¤ects shows dRf =d < 0,
that is, increasing reduces Rf .
Finally, consider the e¤ect on the risk premium, E Rs
Rf . Following similar steps as in the proof
of Proposition 5, we have lim !0 E Rs
Rf = 0, and E Rs
Rf > 0 for any > 0. This shows that

24

increasing
proof.

also increases the risk premium, E Rs

Rf , in a neighborhood of

= 0, completing the

The following lemma is used in the proofs of Propositions 7, 9, and 10 analyzed in Section 7 and Online
Appendix A.4. The lemma considers the system of equations (40) and (41) in the main text, which we
reproduce below,
X

qs ((1

s) R

+

s ps )

X

=

s2S

qs ((1

s) R

+

s ps ) ,

(A43)

s2S

1
1

s

+

s

+

R
sp
s
R
s ps

u0 (c0 )
for each s 2 S = fs 2 S
u0 (c0 )

=

j

s

> 0g .

(A44)

Here, c0 ; (ps )s2S correspond to the equilibrium variables in regular countries characterized in Proposition
1. The set S
S includes the aggregate states in which liquidity shocks happen with strictly positive
probability. In Section 7, we assume 1 > 0 which implies S = S. In Online Appendix A.4, we assume
1 = 0 which implies that S corresponds to all states except for state 1, that is, S = S n f1g.
Lemma 4. Under Assumption 2, there exists a unique solution to the system of equations (A43 A44),
denoted by c0 ; (ps )s2S . When R = R, the solution satis…es c0 = c0 and ps = ps for each s 2 S. When
u0 (c )
R > R, the solution satis…es u0 (c00 ) > RR > 1, and ps =ps < 1 for each s 2 S. It also satis…es ps =ps < ps0 =ps0
for each s; s0 2 S with s < s0 (that satis…es s < s0 ).
Proof. We …rst show that a unique solution exists. Throughout, (c0 ; (ps )s ) are …xed (and characterized by
Proposition 1). Note that, for any …xed C0 2 (0; c0 ] and state s, Eq. (A44) has a unique solution for ps . We
denote the solution with the function Ps (C0 ) de…ned over the range C0 2 (0; c0 ]. Note also that Ps (C0 ) is
strictly increasing in C0 and it satis…es limC0 !0 Ps (C0 ) = 0 and Ps (c0 ) = RR ps ps .
We next substitute Ps (C0 ) into Eq. (A43) and put all terms on the same side to obtain the function,
F (C0 ) =

X

qs ((1

s) R

+

s Ps

X

(C0 ))

s

qs ((1

s) R

+

s ps ) .

s

The equilibrium level of consumption in the special country is determined as the zero of this function over
the range (0; c0 ], that is, F (c0 ) = 0.
Next note that F (C0 ) is strictly increasing over C0 2 (0; c0 ]. Moreover, at the upper bound of this
range, it is weakly positive, F (c0 ) 0, since R
R and Ps (c0 ) ps . Conversely, at the lower bound of
the range, it is weakly negative. To see this, note that,
lim F (C0 )

C0 !0

=

X

qs (1

s) R

s

X

X
s

qs (1

s ) (R

s

R)

qs ((1
X

s) R

qs

s

+

s ps )

=e

s

< 0.

=e [cf. Eq. (15)], and the
Here, the …rst line uses limC0 !0 Ps (C0 ) = 0, the second line follows from ps
last line follows from Assumption 2. It follows that there exists a unique level of consumption, c0 2 (0; c0 ],
that satis…es F (c0 ) = 0. This in turn implies that the induced level of asset prices, (Ps (c0 ))s2S , solves the
system (A43 A44).
Next suppose R = R. In this case, it is easy to check (by guess and verify) that the solution features
c0 = c0 and ps = ps for each s 2 S.

25

Next suppose R > R. In this case, we …rst show that
0

u0 (c0 )
u0 (c0 )

>

R
R

. To prove this inequality, let c0

(c0 )
denote the level of consumption that satis…es uu0 (c
= RR . From our earlier analysis, it
0)
0
R
0)
F (c0 ) > 0. To this end, we substitute uu0 (c
(c0 ) = R into Eq. (A44) and observe that Ps

(1

s)

1
R

1
R

+

s

1
Ps (c0 )

1
ps

s ) (R

R) +

s

(Ps (c0 )

ps )

=

(1
(1

=

(c0 ) satis…es,

= 0.

Since R > R, this equation implies Ps (c0 ) ps , with strict inequality if
ps < R < R (see Proposition 1). Using these expressions, we obtain,
(1

su¢ ces to show that

s

(R
R)
+
R R
(R
R)
+
s)
R R
s)

(A45)
< 1. Note also that we have

(Ps (c0 ) ps )
R R
(Ps (c0 ) ps )
s
Ps (c0 ) ps
s

0,

with strict inequality if s < 1. Here, the inequality follows because Ps (c0 ) ps 0 and Ps (c0 ) ps < R R,
and the last line follows from Eq. (A45). After multiplying the previously displayed inequality with qs and
summing over s (and observing that s < 1 for at least one state), we obtain F (c0 ) > 0. This proves that
u0 (c )
c0 < c0 and thus u0 (c00 ) > RR .
This analysis also implies that ps =ps < 1 for each s 2 S, because
ps = Ps (c0 ) < Ps (c0 )

ps .

Here, the …rst inequality follows since the function Ps ( ) is strictly increasing and the second inequality
follows from Eq. (A45).
We next show that ps =ps is strictly increasing in s. To reach a contradiction, suppose there exist s; s0 2 S
with s < s0 (and thus, 0 < s < s0 ) such that,
ps =ps

ps0 =ps0 :

(A46)

Note that this implies ps0 ps ppss0 < ps (since ps0 < ps for regular countries). Using the inequalities ps0 < ps
and ps0 < ps ; together with R > R; ps < ps ; ps0 < ps0 , we further obtain,
R
R
R
R
>
:::
> .
ps0
ps ps0
ps
Here, the notation with three dots means that we cannot compare the terms,
inequalities hold. Next note that (A46) implies the inequality,
R R
ps0 ps

R R
.
ps ps0

26

(A47)
R
ps

and

R
ps 0

, but all the other

(A48)

Combining this with the ordering in (A47), we also obtain the inequality,7
R
R
+
ps0
ps

R
R
+
.
ps
ps0

(A49)

Using these inequalities, we next obtain,
u0 (c0 )
u0 (c0 )

=

<

1

s

+

1

s

+

1

s0

+

1

s0

+

1

s0

+

1

s0

+

R
sp
s
R
s ps
R
s0 p
s
R
s 0 ps
R
s0 p
s0

=

R
s0 p 0
s

u0 (c0 )
,
u0 (c0 )

which yields a contradiction. Here, the …rst and last equalities follow from Eq. (A44). The inequality in the
R
0
second line follows since R
ps > ps and s > s . The inequality in the third line follows from the inequalities
in (A48) and (A49).
This proves by contradiction that the opposite of (A46) must hold, that is, ps =ps < ps0 =ps0 for each
0
s; s 2 S with s < s0 . This completes the proof of the lemma.
Proof of Proposition 7. First consider banks’decisions in period 0. Following similar steps as in Section
4, they solve the following problem,

x

;

max

;xout;

;y ;(zs )s

where c0 + x

;

;

u (c0 ) + x

R +

X

s

xout; Rs + y + zs Ms ,

s

+x

out;

+ qf y +

X

qs zs = 1 + qf

s

and Ms

1

s

+

s

R
.
ps

P
P
and using the pricing relations s qs Rs = 1 and s qs = qf , the
Substituting ls = xout; Rs + y + zs
problem reduces to solving the following problem (which we also state in the main text),
x

;

max

0;(ls

)s

where c0 + x

;

u (c0 ) + x
+

X

;

R +

X

s ls Ms ,

(A50)

s

qs ls = 1.

s

Here, the constraint ls
follows since banks are required to have nonnegative consumption.
;
We next show that x = 0, that is, banks in the special
also strictly prefer foreign risky assets
h country
i
(in period 0) to local risky assets. By Eq. (32), we have E Rs qs = 1. This implies that one of the following
s

two conditions must hold: (i) there exists an aggregate state s~ such that Rs~ qs~ < 1, or (ii) Rs qs = 1 for each
s
~
s
s.
7
To prove this, consider four numbers ordered according to, a > b:::c > d, and that satisfy ad
bc. Without
loss of generality, suppose also b > c (the other case is symmetric). We claim that a + d
b + c. To reach a
contradiction, suppose a + d < b + c. This implies d < c (a b). Multiplying this with a (a b) = b, we obtain
ad (a b) d < bc (a b) b. Since ad bc and d > b (and a b > 0), this yields a contradiction and proves
that a + d b + c.

27

First suppose (i) holds so that there exists an aggregate state s~ such that Rs~ qs~ < 1. From problem (A50),
s
~
the marginal value from investing in the Arrow-Debreu security for state s~ is given by qs~s~ Ms~ . Combining
this with the inequality Rs~ qs~ < 1, we obtain,
s
~

s~

qs~

Ms~ > Ms~ Rs~

R .

Here, the second inequality follows since Lemma 1 shows Ms~ Rs~ > R if s~ 2 (0; 1), and we can check that
Ms~ Rs~ = R if s~ = 0 or s~ = 1: Thus, in this case, investing in the aggregate state s~ strictly dominates
investing in the local risky asset.
Now suppose (ii) holds so that Rs qs = 1 for each s. Let s be a state with s 2 (0; 1). Then, the marginal
s
value from investing in the Arrow-Debreu security for state s is given by
s

qs

Ms = Ms Rs > R ,

where the second inequality follows from Lemma 1. Thus, in this case, investing in the aggregate state s
strictly dominates investing in the local risky asset.
Combining the two cases, we conclude that x ; = 0. Next consider the optimal liquidity holdings, ls .
Assuming there is an interior solution, the optimality conditions for problem (A50) result in Eqs. (34) listed
in the main text.
Next consider banks’ and distressed sellers’ decisions in period 1. Banks spend all of their available
liquidity in period 1 to purchase risky assets, which implies s = (ls + ) =ps . Distressed sellers’optimal
demand, ~ s , is determined by Eq. (36). Substituting these expressions (as well as x ; = 0) into Eq. (7),
we obtain the market clearing condition (35).
It remains to show that (under Assumption 2) there exists a unique solution, xin; ; c0 ; (ls )s ; (ps )s ; (~ s )s ,
to the equations listed. Note that Eqs. (32) and (34) correspond to the system of equations analyzed in
Lemma 4. Using the lemma, there exists a unique solution to these equations that satis…es c0
c0 and
ps ps for each s 2 S (note that S = S since 1 > 0). Given prices, Eq. (36) uniquely determines distressed
sellers’demand levels, ~ s .
To characterize the remaining allocations, we multiply the market clearing conditions (35) by qs and
aggregate over all states to obtain,
X

qs ps e

~ s + xin;

s

=

X

qs (

+ ls ) = 1 + qf

c0 .

(A51)

s

Here, the second equality follows from the budget constraint (33). Hence, the in‡ows solve the equation,
G xin; = 0, where we de…ne the function
G X in =

X

qs ps e

~ s + X in + c0

(1 + qf

).

s

Note that G X in is increasing in X in with limx~in !1 G X in = 1. Note also that
G (0)
=

X

qs ps e + c0 (1 + qf )
X
1 + qf
qs ps x (1 + qf
s

= qf (

)

X
s

28

qs ps x < 0.

)

(A52)

Here, the …rst line follows since ps
ps ; c0
c0 ; ~ s
0; the second line follows since the analogue of Eq.
(A51) also holds for regular countries; and the last line follows from Assumption 2. It follows there exists a
unique solution, xin; > 0, to the equation G xin; = 0, which determines the equilibrium level of in‡ows.
Finally, using Eq. (35), we obtain the equilibrium liquidity holdings,
ls = ps e

~ s + xin;

for each s.

These liquidity holdings satisfy the budget constraint (33) since xin; satis…es Eq. (A51). This characterizes
the equilibrium and completes the proof of Proposition 7.
Proof of Proposition 10. Most of this proof parallels the proof of Proposition 7. Speci…cally, the same
steps as in that proof imply that x ; = 0 in this case as well. It remains to show that (under Assumption
2) there exists a unique solution, xin; ; c0 ; (ls )s ; (ps )s ; (~ s )s , to the equations listed.
First consider the consumption level, c0 , as well as the …re-sale prices, ps , for states s > 1 (that feature
>
0). Note that Eqs. (32) and (A24) correspond to the system of equations analyzed in Lemma 4. Using
s
ps for each s
the lemma, there exists a unique solution to these equations that satis…es c0
c0 and ps
with s > 0.
Next consider the state s = 1 (that features 1 = 0). For this state, the price is characterized by Lemma
4 and Eq. (A25). When R = R, we have an interior solution with c0 = c0 and p1 = p1 . When R > R, we
have a corner solution with c0 < c0 ; l1 =
. This also implies p1 = 0 in view of Eq. (35).
It follows that the equilibrium consumption level and prices, c0 ; (ps )s2S , are uniquely characterized and
they satisfy c0 c0 and ps ps for each s. The rest of the proof follows the steps in the proof of Proposition
7. In particular, distressed sellers’levels of demand ~ s , are determined by Eq. (36) given prices. The in‡ows
are characterized as the unique solution to G xin; = 0 (where G ( ) denotes the function de…ned in (A52)).
There exists a unique and strictly positive solution to this equation because ps ps ; c0 c0 ; ~ s 0 and the
parameters in the special country satisfy Assumption 2. The equilibrium liquidity purchases are determined
, given the remaining allocations.
by ls = ps e ~ s + xin;
Proof of Proposition 8. We can check that Eqs. (38) solve the equation system (32 36). By Proposition
7, this solution correspond to the equilibrium in the special country. The remaining statements in the
proposition follow by inspecting the closed-form solution.
Proof of Proposition 11. Eqs. (38) solve the equation system (32 36) after replacing Eq. (34) with
Eqs. (A24 A25). By Proposition 10, this solution corresponds to the equilibrium in the special country.
The remaining statements in Proposition 8 follow from inspecting the closed-form solution. We provide the
proof for the comparative static results with respect to in Online Appendix A.4.
Proof of Proposition 9. The results regarding prices follow directly from Lemma 4. Note that the
lemma also implies c0 < c0 , which in turn implies xout; = 1 c0 > x = 1 c0 . It remains to show that
xin; > xout; = 1 c0 . To this end, consider the function G ( ) de…ned by Eq. (A52) in the proof of
Proposition 7. Recall that the in‡ows are de…ned as the solution to G xin; = 0. We have established
in the proof of 7 that this equation has a solution. We next claim that evaluating the function at out‡ows
leads to the inequality, G xout; < 0. Since G ( ) is an increasing function, combining this claim with the
equality, G xin; = 0, implies that the in‡ows exceed the out‡ows, that is, xin; > xout; .

29

It remains to prove the remaining claim, G xout;
G xout;

X

=

< 0. To this end, note that Eq. (A52) implies,

~ s + xout;

qs e

ps + c0

(1 + qf

)

s

X

<

qs e + xout;

ps + c0

s

= c0

c0 + xout;

x

X

(1 + qf )
qs ps

s

=

(c0

X

c0 ) 1

s

qs ps

!

.

Here, the second line uses ps < ps ; ~ s
0;
= ; the third line follows since the analogue of Eq. (A51)
also holds for the regular countries; and the last line substitutes xout; = 1 c0 and x = 1 c0 . Next note
P
Rs , with strict inequality for states with s > 0, this implies
that s qs Rs = 1 [cf. Eq. (32)]. Since ps
P
out;
< 0. This completes the proof.
s qs ps < 1. Combining this with c0 < c0 , we obtain G x

Proof of Proposition 12. Note that Eqs. (40) and (A27) are a special case of the system of equations
analyzed in Lemma 4 when S = f1; 2; 3g and 1 = 0 (so S = f2; 3g). Applying the lemma, there exists a
unique solution, (c0 ; p2 ; p3 ), that features c0 < c0 and p2 =p2 < p3 =p3 < 1. Since c0 < c0 , by Eq. (A25), we
also have l1 =
. By Eq. (35), this also implies p1 = 0. The inequalities, xin; > xout; and xout; > x,
follow from the same argument as in the proof of Proposition 9.
It remains to establish the comparative statics with respect to R and . First consider a decrease in R.
Let p~2 = p2 =R denote the price-to-return ratio in state 2. Then, equations (27) and (28) (that characterize
the equilibrium in regular countries) can be written in terms of (~
p2 ; x) as,
u0 (1

x) = R

and p~2 =

+ (1

=R + x (1
e + x (1

) (1
)
)

+ p~2 ) 1

+

1
p~2

,

.

As before, the …rst equation describes p~2 as a decreasing function of x, the second equation describes p~2 as
an increasing function of x, and the equilibrium corresponds to their intersection. Moreover, decreasing R
strictly decreases the …rst curve for each x, and (under Assumption 1) strictly increases the second curve for
each x. It follows that decreasing R decreases the equilibrium level of foreign investment, x. Therefore, by
+Rx(1
)
market clearing, decreasing R also decreases the price level, p2 = e+x(1
) , while leaving p3 = min R; e
unchanged.
Next note that Eq. (A28) implies,
p
R

p
1
=
R

M1 + M2 (1
)
.
M2 (1
) + M3

(A53)

This implies that Rp p R < 1
since M1 < M2 < M3 . After substituting for Ms = 1
equation can also be written as,
p
R

p
R1

=

1
R

+ (1
) (R)
, where (R) = (1
(1
) (R) + p13

)

s

+

R
s ps ,

the

1
1
+
.
R
p2

Increasing (R) increases the right-hand side (since the right-hand side is less than one). Thus, decreasing

30

R increases the ratio on the left-hand side, Rp p R , both directly via the 1=R term in the numerator on the
right-hand side, and indirectly by increasing (R) = (1
) R1 + p12 . Note also that decreasing R increases
the denominator of the ratio, Rp p R . Thus, it can increase the ratio only if it increases the numerator. It
follows that decreasing R increases p p . Equivalently, it decreases p
p, which corresponds to the special
country’s relative weighted average …re-sale price.
Next consider a decrease in . By Proposition 6, this increases x, which in turn increases p2 and leaves
p3 unchanged. Thus, M2 decreases M1 and M3 are unchanged.
Inspecting Eq. (A53) illustrates that decreasing tends to increase Rp p R by decreasing the weight on
the smaller marginal value (M1 ) in the numerator as well as decreasing the weight on the larger marginal
value (M3 ) in the denominator. However, decreasing
generates an indirect e¤ect as well since it also
decreases M2 . The indirect e¤ect tends to decrease Rp p R , counteracting the direct e¤ect. We conjecture
that the indirect e¤ect does not overturn the direct e¤ect, that is,

d
d

p p
R
R

< 0, which in turn implies

that decreasing decreases p p (equivalently, increases p
p).
To prove this conjecture, we di¤erentiate Eq. (A53) with respect to , which implies that
if and only if,
M1 + dd (M2 (1
))
M1 + M2 (1
)
>
.
d
M2 (1
) + M3
))
M3 + d (M2 (1

d
d

p p
R
R

<0

We make a second conjecture that dd (M2 (1
)) < 0. Under this conjecture, the above inequality holds
because,
))
M1 + dd (M2 (1
M1 + M2 (1
)
M1
>
>
.
d
M2 (1
) + M3
M3
M3 + d (M2 (1
))
Here, the …rst equality follows from M1 < M2 < M3 , and the second inequality uses M1 < M3 together with
d
)) < 0.
d (M2 (1
Hence, it remains to prove the second conjecture, dd (M2 (1
)) < 0. To this end, note that Eq. (27)
in Section 6 implies,
u0 (1 x) = R + ((1
) R + p2 ) (1
) M2 .
Taking the derivative with respect to , and using
R+

dp2
(1
d

du0 (1 x)
d

) M2 + ((1

< 0 (since increasing

) R + p2 )

2
) M2 > 0 implies that
From here, note that R + dp
d (1
conjecture follows from a third conjecture,

(1

)

dp2
d

d
(M2 (1
d
d
d

(M2 (1

decreases x), we obtain,

)) < 0.
)) < 0. That is, our second

M2 < R.

(A54)

To prove the third conjecture, note that Eq. (27) can also be written as,
u0 (1 x)
=
R

+ (1

) 1

31

+

p2
R

1

+

R
p2

.

Taking the derivative with respect to , and using

(1

)

dp2
d

du0 (1 x)=R
d

1
M2
<
R

+

p2
R

1
(1

The last inequality follows since it is equivalent to 1
holds since 1

+

which in turn implies

R
p2
d
d

< pR2 and (1
p p
< 0.
R
R

)

1
R

+

1
p2

<

< 0, we obtain,
1

+

1
)R
+

+
1
p2 .

+

p2
R

1
p2

R
p2

(1

1
< 1.

1
) R1 +

1
p2

<

R
,
p22

which in turn

This establishes the third conjecture in (A54),

This completes the proof.

32

R
p22

R
p2

Online Appendix B: Data
In this appendix, we present the details of the data sources and variables’construction used in Section 2. We
then describe the details of our regression analysis and present the empirical results (tables) omitted from
Section 2. Finally, we present additional empirical analysis on the evolution of cross-country correlations of
risky asset prices (beta), which we discuss in Section 6.

B.1.

Data sources and variables’construction

Capital ‡ows. We obtain this data from the IMF’s Balance of Payments (BOP) database. This dataset
contains, among other things, the …nancial transactions between residents and nonresidents for individual
countries. In particular, there is data on the residents’ net lending to nonresidents in di¤erent functional
categories, which can be combined to obtain a measure of capital out‡ows by residents. There is also data
on the residents’net borrowing from nonresidents in di¤erent functional categories, which can be combined
to obtain a measure of capital in‡ows by nonresidents.8
Speci…cally, to replicate and extend the analysis in Broner et al. (2013a), we obtain data at annual
frequency for 1970-2017. We de…ne capital out‡ows as the sum of the following items (all measured in
nominal US dollars):
Net direct investment by domestic agents. IMF indicator code: “BFDA_BP6_USD”. Indicator name:
“Financial Account, Net Lending (+) / Net Borrowing (-) (Balance from Financial Account), Direct
Investment, Net Acquisition of Financial Assets, US Dollars”
Net portfolio investment by domestics agents. IMF indicator code: “BFPA_BP6_USD”. Indicator
name: “Financial Account, Direct Investment, Net Acquisition of Financial Assets, US Dollars.”
Net other investment by domestics agents. IMF indicator code: “BFOA_BP6_USD”. Indicator name:
“Financial Account, Other Investment, Net Acquisition of Financial Assets, US Dollars.”
Net change in o¢ cial reserves: IMF indicator code: “BFRA_BP6_USD”. Indicator name: “Financial
Account, Reserve Assets, US Dollars.”
Likewise, we de…ne capital in‡ows as the sum of the following items (all measured in nominal US dollars):
Net direct investment by foreign agents. IMF indicator code: “BFDL_BP6_USD”. Indicator name:
“Financial Account, Net Lending (+) / Net Borrowing (-) (Balance from Financial Account), Direct
Investment, Net Incurrence of Liabilities, US Dollars”
Net portfolio investment by foreign agents. IMF indicator code: “BFPL_BP6_USD”. Indicator name:
“Financial Account, Direct Investment, Net Incurrence of Liabilities, US Dollars.”
Net other investment by foreign agents. IMF indicator code: “BFOL_BP6_USD”. Indicator name:
“Financial Account, Other Investment, Net Incurrence of Liabilities, US Dollars.”
8

The IMF BOP data is calculated by reporting countries in accordance with the sixth
edition of the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual,
BPM6
(https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/bop/2007/pdf/bpm6.pdf).
The functional categories for net lending
and net borrowing are described in Chapter 6.

33

Capital ‡ow to GDP ratios (CIF and COD). Following Broner et al. (2013a), we
scale the capital in‡ow and out‡ow measures by trend GDP. Speci…cally, for each country, we obtain nominal GDP in US dollars from the World Bank’s national accounts database (available at https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ny.gdp.mktp.cd. World Bank indicator code:
“NY.GDP.MKTP.CD”). We compute trend GDP by applying the Hodrick-Prescott …lter to this series
with a parameter of 6.25.9 We then divide the capital in‡ow and out‡ow series with trend GDP in the
corresponding year to obtain yearly series for capital in‡ow to GDP and capital out‡ow to GDP ratios.
Following Broner et al. (2013a), we refer to these scaled measures as capital in‡ows by foreigners (CIF) and
capital out‡ows by domestic agents (COD). Figure 1 plots these measures for three countries.
Standardized CIF and COD. To obtain meaningful units for our regression analysis, we construct standardized versions of the CIF and COD series. We standardize each measure by using its mean and standard
deviation within each country over the period between 1970 and 2017.
Stock price index and the dividend yield. We obtain this data from Global Financial Data’s GFDATABASE (GFD). This is a proprietary database that contains a wealth of information on various asset
prices (see https://www.global…nancialdata.com for details).
Speci…cally, we focus on the 30 OECD countries for which the GFD has information on dividend-to-price
ratio (typically constructed for a broad sample of stocks chosen by the GFD). We obtain this data at monthly
frequency, and convert to yearly frequency by averaging over all months within the year. We then combine
this information with data on stock price indices. Speci…cally, we pick a popular stock price index for each
country (based on Internet searches). We obtain daily price data on this index from the GFD. This data is
daily, and we convert it to yearly frequency by taking the value for the last (trading) day of the year. Figure
1 plots these stock index measures for three countries.
The GFD tickers corresponding to our selection of stock indices are as follows:
United States: GFD ticker “_SPXD” (S&P500 Index)
United Kingdom: GFD ticker “_FTSED” (UK FTSE100 Index).
Australia: GFD ticker “_AXJOD” (Australia S&P/ASX 200 Index).
South Korea: GFD ticker “_KS11D” (Korea SE Stock Price Index: KOSPI).
Germany: GFD ticker “_GDAXIPD” (Germany DAX Price Index).
New Zealand: GFD ticker “_NZ15D” (NZSX-15 Index).
France: GFD ticker “_FCHID” (Paris CAC-40 Index).
Denmark: GFD ticker “_OMXC20D” (OMX Copenhagen-20 Index).
Finland: GFD ticker “_OMXH25D” (OMX Helsinki-25 Index).
Sweden: GFD ticker “_OMXS30D” (OMX Stockholm-30 Index).
Israel: GFD ticker “_TA125D” (Tel Aviv SE 125 Broad Index).
Italy: GFD ticker “_BCIJD” (Milan SE MIB-30 Index).
Spain: GFD ticker “_IBEXD” (Madrid SE IBEX-35 Index).
9

Broner et al. (2013a) apply the Hodrick-Prescott …lter using a di¤erent parameter (100). We use the parameter
6.25, following the recommendation from Ravn and Uhlig (2002) for annual data.

34

Ireland: GFD ticker “_ISEQD” (Ireland ISEQ Overall Price Index).
Belgium: GFD ticker “_BFXD” (Belgium CBB Bel-20 Index).
Greece: GFD ticker “_ATGD” (Athens SE General Index).
Netherlands: GFD ticker “_AEXD” (Amsterdam AEX Stock Index).
Norway: GFD ticker “_OSEAXD” (Oslo SE All-Share Index).
Japan: GFD ticker “_N225D” (Nikkei 225 Stock Index).
Switzerland: GFD ticker “_SSMID” (Swiss Market Index).
Canada: GFD ticker “_GSPTSED” (Canada S&P/TSX 300 Index).
Austria: GFD ticker “_ATXD” (Austrian Traded Index: ATX).
Chile: GFD ticker “_IGPAD” (Chile General Stock Price Index: IGPA)
Czech Republic: GFD ticker “_PXGLD” (Prague PX Index)
Hungary: GFD ticker “_HTLD” (Hungarian Traded Index: CHTX)
Mexico: GFD ticker “_MXXD” (Mexico IPC Index)
Poland: GFD ticker “_WIG20D” (Warsaw WIG20 Index)
Portugal: GFD ticker “_PSI20D” (Portugese PSI20 Index)
Slovakia: GFD ticker “_SAXD” (Slovakia SAX Index)
Turkey: GFD ticker, “_XU100D”(Borsa Istanbul 100 Index). We drop the stock price data for Turkey
before 2000 since the high in‡ation in 1990s led to extreme outliers in measured stock returns.

Stock return in local currency. We construct stock returns in local currency by combining the data on
dividend-to-price ratio with the data on the stock price index. Speci…cally, for each country j and year t,
we calculate the corresponding gross stock return as follows,
1 + Rtj = DPtj +

Ptj
Ptj

,
1

where DPtj denotes the dividend-to-price ratio in year t (obtained by averaging over the year) and Ptj denotes
the stock price index at the end of year t. This gives the return in local currency because stock price indices
are based on the local currency. In our regression analysis, we use log returns de…ned as,
rtj = log 1 + Rtj .
In particular, our dependent variables correspond to the annualized log returns over the h-year forward
horizon, de…ned as,
!
h
X
j
j
=h.
rt;h
=
rt+i
i=1

35

Exchange rate with respect to US dollar. We obtain this data from the Bank for international Settlements’(BIS) dataset on US Dollar Exchange Rates (available at https://www.bis.org/statistics/xrusd.htm).
This dataset includes the value of the US dollar in terms of local currency for a large number of countries.
We obtain the data at daily frequency, and we convert to yearly frequency by taking the value for the last
(trading) day of the year.
Stock return in US dollars. We construct the stock return in US dollars by combining the stock return
in local currency with the exchange rate with respect to the US dollar. Speci…cally, for each country j and
year t, we calculate the corresponding gross return in US dollars as,
Xtj;U1SD

1 + Rtj;U SD = 1 + Rtj

Xtj;U SD

,

where 1 + Rtj denotes the stock return in local currency (calculated earlier) and Xtj;U SD denotes the value
of the US dollar in terms of local currency at the end of year t. We de…ne the log return in US dollars as,
rtj;U SD = log 1 + Rtj;U SD .
We also de…ne the annualized log return over the h-year forward horizon as,
j;U SD
rt;h

=

h
X

j;U SD
rt+i

i=1

B.2.

!

=h.

Details of the regression analyses in Section 2

Sample selection. Our full sample covers 170 countries from 1970 until 2017 for which we have both
capital in‡ow and out‡ow measures. Our OECD sample covers 30 countries over the same period for
which we have stock returns in addition to capital in‡ows and out‡ows. Tables A1 and A2 below describe
the summary statistics that enter our regression analysis for, respectively, the full sample and the OECD
sample. Both samples are unbalanced due to imperfect data coverage (especially in earlier years).
Correlations between capital ‡ows. To quantify the correlations between ‡ows, we regress capital
out‡ows on capital in‡ows. Speci…cally, we estimate equations of the type:
j

(COD-std)t =

j

t or

j

t+

t

+

j

(CIF -std)t + "jt :

(A55)

Here, j denotes the country, t denotes the year, and COD-std and CIF -std denote capital in‡ow and
out‡ow measures scaled by GDP and standardized within the country (de…ned in Online Appendix B.1). In
all speci…cations, we include country-speci…c linear time trends, since Figure 1 suggests di¤erent countries
are subject to di¤erent time trends. We exclude time …xed e¤ects in our baseline analysis but we include
these e¤ects in subsequent analysis.10 Throughout, we estimate the coe¢ cient via ordinary least squares,
and we report double clustered standard errors by country and year (that is, we allow for correlated shocks
10
We do not include country …xed e¤ects since the capital ‡ow variables are already standardized within each
country.

36

across countries for a given year, as well as correlated shocks over time for a given country). We also report
R2 values from within-country variation.
The …rst two columns of Table 1 in the main text describe our estimation results without time …xed
e¤ects for the full sample (…rst column) as well as the OECD sample (second column). The estimated is
statistically signi…cant and large in both cases, which means that out‡ows in a country are highly correlated
with in‡ows. The magnitude of is greater for the OECD sample than in the full sample, which means that
the ‡ows in OECD countries are more correlated than in other countries.
The last two columns of Table 1 describe the results when we also include time …xed e¤ects. The
estimated coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant and similar in magnitude to their counterparts in the
…rst two columns. This means that in‡ows and out‡ows are highly correlated, even after controlling for the
average ‡ows in sample countries (see Section 2 for further discussion).
Return predictions from capital ‡ows. To investigate the relationship between ‡ows and expected
stock returns, we regress future realized stock returns on current capital ‡ows. Speci…cally, we estimate
equations of the type:
r~tj =

j

+

j

t or

j

+

j

t+

t

+

j

fCIF -std or COD-stdgt + "jt :

(A56)

Here, the dependent variable, r~tj , denotes an annualized measure of log stock returns in subsequent years.
In the main text, we focus on the annualized log stock return in local currency over the …ve-year forward
j
horizon, that is, r~tj = rt;5
. The main explanatory variable is either CIF -std or COD-std, which respectively
denote capital in‡ow and out‡ow measures scaled by GDP and standardized within the country (de…ned
in Online Appendix B.1). We include country …xed e¤ects as well as country-speci…c linear time trends in
all speci…cations. We exclude time …xed e¤ects in our baseline analysis but we include these e¤ects in the
subsequent analysis. We run these regressions for the OECD sample because we do not have stock return
data for the remaining countries.
The …rst two columns of Table 2 in the main text describes our estimation results without time …xed
e¤ects and with capital in‡ows (…rst column) or capital out‡ows (second column) as the main explanatory
variable. The estimated is statistically signi…cant and negative in both cases, which means that a decline
in in‡ows or out‡ows in an OECD country is associated with an increase in stock returns in the subsequent
…ve years (see Section 2 for further discussion).
The last two columns of Table 2 describe the results when we also include time …xed e¤ects. The
estimated coe¢ cients remain statistically signi…cant and negative but with a smaller magnitude than their
counterparts in the …rst two columns. This means that a local decline in capital ‡ows in an OECD country
is associated with high future local stock returns even after controlling for the average ‡ows and average
stock returns in other OECD countries. The smaller magnitudes suggest that “a local shock” that lowers
capital ‡ows in an individual OECD country without an e¤ect on the average ‡ows in OECD countries is
associated with a smaller increase in stock returns compared to “a global shock” that lowers the average
‡ows in OECD countries.
These results are robust to using alternative measures of future stock returns. Table A3 below presents
analogous results when annualized log stock returns are measured in US dollars as opposed to local currency,
j;U SD
that is, r~tj = rt;5
(de…ned in Online Appendix B.1). The estimated coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant
and similar in magnitude to their counterparts in Table 2. Table A4 presents analogous results when
j
annualized log stock returns are calculated over a three-year forward horizon instead of …ve, that is, r~tj = rt;3
.
The results are similar to their counterparts in Table 2.

37

Table A1: Summary statistics for the full sample (170 distinct countries)
In‡ows/trend GDP (percent)
Out‡ows/trend GDP (percent)
In‡ows/trend GDP (std)
Out‡ows/trend GDP (std)

N
5102
5102
5102
5102

Mean
12.16
10.02
0.00
-0.00

Std
69.73
70.69
0.98
0.98

P10
0.00
-1.83
-1.06
-1.08

P50
5.91
3.04
-0.10
-0.12

P90
19.43
16.46
1.23
1.26

Table A2: Summary statistics for the OECD sample (30 distinct countries)
In‡ows/trend GDP (percent)
Out‡ows/trend GDP (percent)
In‡ows/trend GDP (std)
Out‡ows/trend GDP (std)
Log stock return (local currency)
Log stock return (dollars)
Log stock return in next 5 years (annualized, local currency)
Log stock return in next 5 years (annualized, dollars)
Log stock return in next 3 years (annualized, local currency)

38

N
838
838
838
838
838
835
716
715
776

Mean
10.85
10.54
0.10
0.12
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09

Std
18.72
18.77
1.01
1.01
0.25
0.28
0.10
0.11
0.14

P10
0.97
0.64
-1.03
-1.03
-0.23
-0.26
-0.03
-0.03
-0.08

P50
7.13
6.10
-0.02
0.03
0.13
0.13
0.09
0.08
0.10

P90
21.91
23.63
1.45
1.46
0.36
0.38
0.22
0.22
0.25

Table A3: Analogue of Table 2 with returns measured in US dollars

In‡ows/trend GDP (std)
Out‡ows/trend GDP (std)
Time FE
Country FE
Country speci…c linear trend
Observations
R2 (adjusted, within country)

Log stock return in next 5 years (annualized, dollars)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.030**
-0.022**
(0.006)
(0.006)
-0.028**
-0.016**
(0.006)
(0.006)
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
715
715
715
715
0.21
0.20
0.56
0.55

Note: The sample is an unbalanced panel of 30 OECD countries between 1970 and 2017 (see Online Appendix B for
details). Estimation is via OLS. Standard errors are in parentheses and double-clustered by country and year. * and
** indicate signi…cance at 0.05 and 0.01 levels, respectively.

Table A4: Analogue of Table 2 with returns measured over a 3-year horizon

In‡ows/trend GDP (std)
Out‡ows/trend GDP (std)
Time FE
Country FE
Country speci…c linear trend
Observations
R2 (adjusted, within country)

Log stock return in next 3 years (annualized, local currency)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.041**
-0.020**
(0.009)
(0.006)
-0.040**
-0.018**
(0.009)
(0.006)
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
776
776
776
776
0.17
0.16
0.54
0.53

Note: The sample is an unbalanced panel of 30 OECD countries between 1970 and 2017 (see Online Appendix B for
details). Estimation is via OLS. Standard errors are in parentheses and double-clustered by country and year. * and
** indicate signi…cance at 0.05 and 0.01 levels, respectively.

39

B.3.

Additional analysis on cross-country price correlations

In our baseline model (with symmetric countries), capital ‡ows are driven by a liquidity insurance motive.
Therefore, as we formalize in Section 6, an increase in the likelihood of global shocks ( ) reduces capital ‡ows.
This can help explaining the decline of gross capital ‡ows in the aftermath of the global …nancial crisis (GFC),
because the GFC arguably increased (real or perceived) correlations of …nancial shocks across countries. In
this appendix, we further evaluate this claim by empirically analyzing the cross-country correlations between
stock prices. In particular, we estimate the beta coe¢ cient of the stock price changes of OECD countries
(other than the U.S.) with respect to the S&P 500 index, and we investigate how the average beta coe¢ cient
has evolved over time.
As we describe in Section B.1, we have stock price index data for 30 OECD countries at daily frequency.
Therefore, we estimate betas using daily data. Speci…cally, our time unit is US trading days denoted by d
(which we infer from our S&P 500 price data).
Since we also have exchange rate data with respect to the U.S. dollar at daily frequency (see Section
B.1), we measure daily price changes in U.S. dollars. Speci…cally, for each country j and trading day d, we
de…ne our price change variable as,
pjd = log

j;U SD
Pdj Xd 1

Pdj

1

Xdj;U SD

!

:

Here, Pdj denotes the stock price index at day d, and Xdj;U SD denotes the value of the U.S. dollar in terms
of local currency at day d. Hence, pjd denotes the log daily stock price change in country j on trading day
S
d evaluated in U.S. dollars. For the U.S., pU
simply corresponds to the log change of the S&P 500 price
d
index on day d.
We then estimate equations of the following type,
pjd =

+

j
S
pU
d + "d .

(A57)

Since our goal is to analyze the evolution of over time, we estimate Eq. (A57) separately for each year.
Speci…cally, given country j and year t, we estimate Eq. (A57) over all trading days within year t. The
j
estimated coe¢ cient ^ t provides a measure of the correlation between stock price changes in country j and
the U.S. in year t (in particular, it is equal to the sample covariance of the log price changes divided by the
sample variance of the log change of the S&P index).
We then take an (unweighted) average of the estimated betas across all OECD
n ocountries in our sample
(excluding the U.S.) to obtain a yearly time series of the average beta coe¢ cient, ^ t . Figure A1 illustrates
t
the evolution of the average beta over time together with the (unweighted) average of capital in‡ow and
out‡ow to GDP ratios across all OECD countries in our sample (including the U.S.). There is a clear increase
in the average beta starting in 2009, shortly after the peak of the GFC.11 Moreover, in the years following the
GFC, the average beta remains elevated while the average gross capital ‡ows are depressed. This provides
suggestive evidence in favor of our claim that part of the decline in gross capital ‡ows after the GFC can be
attributed to an increase in correlations of …nancial shocks across countries.
^ using
We also perform a more detailed analysis by estimating Eq. (A57) separately for each trading day d,
a sample of the 252 trading days d immediately before d^ (approximately one year). This analysis reveals that the
average beta started to increase in late 2008, around the peak of the GFC.
11

40

.8

40

.6

30

.2

.4

20

0

10
0

1970

1978

1986

1994

2002

2010

2018

Average capital inflows scaled by trend GDP (percent)
Average capital outflows scaled by trend GDP (percent)
Average stock price change beta with respect to S&P 500

Figure A1: The dotted line illustrates the average of stock price changes in OECD countries
excluding the U.S. with respect to the S&P 500 index (right y-axis). The solid and dashed lines
illustrate the average capital ‡ow-to-GDP ratio in OECD countries including the U.S. (left y-axis).

41

