NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVIDENCE FOR THE EFFECTS OF MERGERS ON MARKET POWER AND EFFICIENCY
Bruce A. Blonigen
Justin R. Pierce
Working Paper 22750
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22750

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016

This paper has benefitted from conversations with Peter Schott and Nicholas Sly, as well as
participants of seminars at the London School of Economics, the School of Advanced
International Studies, the Stanford RDC Conference, and the Annual Meeting of the International
Industrial Organization Society. We thank Brian Hand and Dominic Smith for outstanding
research assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Board of Governors, its
research staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to
ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Bruce A. Blonigen and Justin R. Pierce. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Evidence for the Effects of Mergers on Market Power and Efficiency
Bruce A. Blonigen and Justin R. Pierce
NBER Working Paper No. 22750
October 2016
JEL No. D22,G34,L22
ABSTRACT
Study of the impact of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) on productivity and market power has
been complicated by the difficulty of separating these two effects. We use newly-developed
techniques to separately estimate productivity and markups across a wide range of industries
using detailed plant-level data. Employing a difference-in-differences framework, we find that
M&As are associated with increases in average markups, but find little evidence for effects on
plant-level productivity. We also examine whether M&As increase efficiency through
reallocation of production to more efficient plants or through reductions in administrative
operations, but again find little evidence for these channels, on average. The results are robust to
a range of approaches to address the endogeneity of firms’ merger decisions.

Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu
Justin R. Pierce
Federal Reserve Board
20th and C Street NW
Washington, DC 20551
justin.r.pierce@frb.gov

1

Introduction

Merger and acquisition (M&A) activity by firms is a widespread and economically
important phenomenon in the global economy, involving over four trillion dollars of
worldwide assets annually.1 In turn, this phenomenon leads to a substantial reallocation of economic activity among firms over time, especially for advanced economies.
Maksimovic and Phillips (2001), for example, find that about 4% of large manufacturing plants in the United States change ownership every year. Relatedly, cross-border
M&A activity is a primary mode by which multinational firms engage in foreign direct
investment (FDI).2
Fundamental questions in finance and industrial organization concern the motivation for and effects of M&A activity. And perhaps the most fundamental issue is the
potential tradeoff between increased market power versus efficiency gains in the wake
of a M&A transaction. While changes in market power and efficiency due to M&As
have important implications for welfare, estimating these effects empirically is difficult.
Prior studies estimating effects of M&As across industries have been hampered by an
inability to separately estimate market power and productivity effects. Case studies of
specific firms or industries have attempted to disentangle these effects using detailed
data or specific circumstances, but they may not be generally representative.
This paper combines an analysis of M&As across all U.S. manufacturing industries
with a new approach to estimate efficiency and market power. We begin by applying techniques recently developed by De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) to separately
estimate productivity and markups in a unified framework with minimal structural
assumptions – only cost minimizing behavior is needed. We generate these estimates
using plant-level data from the U.S. Census Bureau covering the entire manufacturing
sector over the 1997 to 2007 period. These data are linked to information on M&A
activity from the SDC Platinum database maintained by Thomson Reuters.3 Importantly, each of these datasets includes data for both publicly traded and privately
owned firms.
We use a differences-in-differences (DID) approach to identify the effects of M&A on
1

The Wall Street Journal recently reported that the value of global M&A activity in 2015 was the
highest on record, exceeding US$ 4.3 trillion (Farrell 2015).
2
See the World Investment Report published annually by the United Nation’s Conference on Trade
and Development.
3
Around 50% of all U.S. M&As are in the manufacturing sector over recent decades, including our
sample period from 1997 to 2007.

2

acquired plants relative to several potential comparison groups. Our analysis includes
a rich set of fixed effects including plant, industry by year, and plant size by year fixed
effects. These controls isolate the effect of M&As by capturing time-invariant plant
characteristics, as well as shocks that affect plants in particular industries or size classes
in a given year.
We find that M&As significantly increase markups on average, but have no statistically significant average effect on productivity. The magnitude of the markup increase
is economically significant as well: The increase in markups for acquired plants relative
to non-acquired plants ranges from 15 percent to over 50 percent of the average markup
in the sample. These results are robust to comparison of acquired plants to several
conceptually different control groups, and to different criteria for linking the M&A and
Census data. We explore whether the M&A effects we estimate differ for horizontal
M&As, where the merging firms are in the same industry, versus other types of M&As.
We find evidence that markup effects of M&As are strongest with horizontal M&As as
one might expect. We also find some evidence that M&As have positive impacts on
plant-level productivity for M&As that are not horizontal.
We pursue several approaches to address the difficult issue of the endogeneity of
firms’ merger decisions with respect to current and expected changes in productivity
and market power, a concern that is often not considered in earlier work on M&A
effects. Our primary method is to compare acquired plants to plants in three separate
control groups using our DID framework. The first control group consists of plants
selected by propensity score matching procedures. While this is a familiar strategy
in other settings, its use has been relatively limited in studies examining the effect of
M&As on productivity and market power. The second control group is composed of
plants for which an acquisition is announced, but never completed. Such plants have
all the attributes necessary to lead to an announced acquisition, eliminating a portion
of potential sample selection bias.4 The third control group is made up of plants that
will be acquired in subsequent years. This is a valid strategy if the attributes that
make a plant more likely to be a target exist for a few years before a successful match
with an acquirer is made. In addition to consideration of these three control groups, we
employ an instrumental variables strategy, in which we instrument for successful merger
completion – relative to announced mergers that are not completed – using interactions
4

The identifying assumption for this control group is that the reason for non-completion of the
M&A is independent of future productivity and market power. Below we provide further discussion
for why this may be a reasonable assumption.

3

of year dummies and the post-merger indicator to capture possible regulatory changes
that may affect M&A activity.
Each of these approaches has strengths and weaknesses, but by showing that the
results are robust – in terms of sign, significance and magnitude – across a range of
conceptually different approaches, they offer compelling evidence that the results are
not driven by statistical bias. We also note that an additional advantage of our data
with respect to addressing potential endogeneity is that it is plant-level, whereas M&A
decisions are typically made at the firm-level. Many of the firms in our sample have
multiple plants, which makes the M&A decision more independent of the performance
of any one plant. While some prior studies have employed plant-level data, most have
not.5
M&As may have efficiency effects other than those observed via changes in the
productive efficiency of existing manufacturing plants. Our data allow us to explore
two other ways in which M&A activity may have efficiency effects. First, an acquiring
firm may reallocate resources within the firm to more efficient plants and/or shut down
less-efficient plants. In this way, an M&A could increase efficiency across the firm even
if plant-level productivity was unaffected. Second, efficiency gains from M&A may arise
through realization of economies of scale with nonmanufacturing activities of the firm
(management, marketing, advertising, etc.) after an M&A. We are able to examine
evidence for these additional efficiency effects using data available to us.
With regards to firm-level efficiency effects through reallocations of activity across
plants, we undertake two analyses. First, we aggregate our plant-level data to the firm
level and then use an analogous DID estimation to estimate M&A effects. As in the
plant-level results, we find no effects of M&A on productivity at the firm-level, though
the positive effect of M&As on markups is also less precisely estimated at the firm-level.
Second, we use a DID framework to determine whether lower productivity plants are
more likely to exit after an M&A and find no evidence for this channel.
With regards to economies of scale for non-manufacturing activities of the firm,
we examine the relationship between M&A and employment at the non-manufacturing
establishments of the target firm using data from the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD). Specifically, we examine whether M&A allows for a reduction in employment
for non-manufacturing establishments as the fixed costs of tasks such as accounting
and marketing are consolidated in one firm. We find no evidence for efficiency gains
5

We also present a placebo test that verifies that pre-existing trends for merging versus non-merging
plants are not driving the results, a common concern with DID estimation.

4

operating through this non-manufacturing employment channel.
In summary, we find evidence that M&As increase markups on average across U.S.
manufacturing industries, but find little evidence for channels often mentioned as potential sources of productivity and efficiency gains. We view our finding of a positive
markup effect, on average, as novel given the heterogeneous motivations for M&As and
the fact that the effect is estimated across a broad set of plants, firms and industries.
Our work builds on several approaches that have been used to estimate potential
effects of M&A activity, each with their own strengths and weaknesses. In the 1980s
and 1990s, a finance literature developed that used stock market event studies to
examine the impact of a variety of phenomena on firms’ profitability, including the
impact of M&A activity. These studies examine changes in returns to firm share
prices after an announced M&A, generally finding that M&A activity leads to greater
firm profitability, with the bulk of the profit gains accruing to shareholders of the
target firm (see Ravenscraft and Scherer 1987, for an overview). The methodology
of empirical event studies is simple to implement consistently across a wide range of
settings. However, this approach is unable to identify whether the source of profitability
changes from M&A activity is due to changes in market power, cost efficiencies, or some
other factor.
Given these concerns, more recent analyses of the effects of M&A activity have taken
primarily a case study approach, where the researcher can examine more closely the
particular features of the firms and market where the M&A takes place. Ashenfelter,
Hosken and Weinberg (2014) document 49 such studies, which have mainly focused
on a few key sectors (primarily airlines, banking, hospitals, and petroleum), because
these are the sectors for which researchers can find detailed firm- and product-level
price data.6 Most of these studies focus on price and market share changes to infer
market power effects, typically finding evidence for increased market power by the firms
involved in the M&A activity with the exception of M&A activity in the petroleum
sector. While these studies contribute to our understanding of the effects of M&A
activity, they have limitations. They typically focus on high profile acquisitions, making
it more likely that their results suffer selection bias and are therefore not generally
representative of M&A effects on market power. Additionally, as mentioned, their
data and analyses are specific to the particular market they study. Finally, with only
6

Some prominent examples include airlines (Borenstein, 1990; Kim and Singal, 1993, Kwoka and
Shumilkina, 2010), appliances (Ashenfelter et al., 2013), banking (Focarelli and Panetta, 2003), cement
(Hortacsu and Syverson, 2007), and cotton spinning (Braguinsky et al. 2015).

5

a few exceptions, data are not available to estimate efficiency effects of M&A activity.7
There have been only a few analyses of the average effects of M&A activity on
productivity and market power using micro-level data for a broad set of firms (or plants)
across the economy, including McGuckin and Nguyen (1995), Maksimovic and Phillips
(2001), Gugler et al. (2003), and Bertrand (2008). With the exception of Gugler et al.
(2003), these papers use detailed plant- or firm-level data on the manufacturing sector
to estimate the effect of M&A activity on total factor (or labor) revenue productivity,
finding that M&A activity positively impacts these productivity measures. Gugler et
al. (2003) use firm-level accounting data for publicly traded firms in Compustat to
examine the effect of mergers on profitability and sales, and then use these results to
draw inferences about efficiency, finding mixed results depending on whether mergers
are horizontal or conglomerate. One challenge faced in these studies, which we find to
be important in our setting as well, arises from the use of revenue as a proxy for output.
In particular, when estimating the effect of M&A on traditional revenue productivity
measures, the market power effect–operating through output prices–makes it impossible
to identify whether changes in observed revenue productivity are due to changes in true
productive efficiency or market power.8
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we discuss
the data we use to examine the effects of M&A on manufacturing plants. We then
describe our two-stage estimation process that begins with estimation of plant-level
productivity and markup measures and is then followed by use of these measures as
dependent variables in a DID framework. Next, we present and discuss our main
results, as well as a number of specifications with alternative control groups and other
robustness analyses. Finally, we provide evidence on the effects of M&As on other
possible channels of efficiency gains – reallocation of production across plants within
the firm and rationalization of headquarter services – before concluding.
7
The exceptions of which we are aware are Jaumandreu (2004), which found some efficiency effects
from M&A activity in the Spanish banking industry, Braguinsky et al. (2015), which examines the
effect of acquisitions on productivity and profitability in the Japanese cotton spinning industry, and
Kulick (2015), which finds positive effects on both prices and efficiency resulting from horizontal
mergers in the concrete industry using output data measured in physical units of quantity.
8
Bertrand and Zitouna (2008) also examine the impact of M&A activity on profits, but use accounting data on earnings, which can be affected by changes in accounting practices after an M&A
transaction.

6

2

Data

To provide estimates of the effects of M&A across a broad set of industries, we make use
of two rich datasets covering the entirety of the manufacturing sector. First, to calculate
productivity and markups for U.S. manufacturing firms, we employ confidential data
from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Census of Manufactures (CM). The CM collects plantlevel data for every U.S. manufacturer including, for example, total value of shipments,
value added, cost of materials, employment, investment and the book value of capital.9
The CM is conducted every five years, in years ending in 2 and 7, and this analysis
employs data from the 1997, 2002, and 2007 CMs.
Our second dataset, Thomson Reuters’s SDC Platinum database (SDC), contains
information on merger and acquisition transactions involving both publicly-traded and
private firms.10 For each transaction, SDC provides data for merger target firms including the name, address and major industry, along with additional information for
the firms’ corporate parents if applicable. SDC also reports a variety of detailed information about the transaction, including the dates the merger was announced and
completed, the share of the target that was purchased and the share owned after completion of the merger. Moreover, SDC contains information for mergers that were
announced but later withdrawn. As mentioned above, we use the set of firms involved
in these withdrawn mergers as a control group in some portions of the analysis. Finally,
the SDC data allow us to observe the timing of mergers with more precision than is
possible with only Census data, and the use of Census data allows us to include data
for privately owned firms, which is not possible with datasets of publicly traded firms
such as Compustat.
For purposes of this paper, we focus on the set of merger transactions in which a U.S.
manufacturer is the target, since these are the firms for which CM production and input
data are available. The sample is further restricted to mergers in which the acquirer
is a manufacturer to avoid transactions such as buyouts by financial firms. Lastly, we
limit our analysis to merger transactions in which the entire target firm is purchased
by the acquirer. Without this restriction, it would be impossible to determine in the
Census data which portion of the target firm was acquired in the merger.
9

As is standard in research using the CM, we omit observations from so-called “administrative
records” for which much of the data is imputed.
10
Thomson Reuters collects these data from governmental regulatory filings, media reports, and
reporting arrangements with investment banks. The resulting dataset theoretically includes data for
all M&A transactions.

7

In terms of time period, we consider merger transactions that were completed or
withdrawn from 1998 to 2006. This timeframe ensures that we are able to observe each
target firm both before and after they are acquired. It is also a period that includes
both periods of high M&A activity in the late 1990s and lower activity connected with
a general slowdown of the world economy in the early 2000s. The sample period ends
just before the start of the Great Recession.
Because the CM data are available in five year increments, the length of time since
an acquisition has occurred can vary across observations. We show an example in Figure
1, where an acquisition occurs in the year 2000. Plants involved in the acquisition will
be coded as not subject to an M&A in the first year of our sample, 1997, but then
coded as subject to M&A in 2002 and 2007. As one can see, this structure means that
we will estimate M&A effects for the average period since the plant was acquired.11
The merger transaction data in SDC are linked to the CM data via a name and
address matching procedure, where the Census Bureau’s Business Register is used as
a bridge. Our matching procedure is similar to others that have been used to link
firm-level information to Census data via name and address matching (see e.g. Davis
et al. 2014). In our baseline results, we consider firms to be matched if one of three
criteria is met: 1) There is an exact match in both the firm name and address; 2)
There is an exact match in the firm name, and the city and state in both datasets; 3)
There is an exact match of the firm address, and at least two words in the firm name
match. While any name and address matching procedure is necessarily imperfect, we
perform robustness checks to ensure that the details of the matching procedure are
not driving the results. In particular, we obtain qualitatively similar results when we
limit the sample to the set of observations with both exact name and address matches,
and when we expand the sample to include firms with less exact name and address
matches, provided they are determined to be accurate by a research assistant’s manual
review. Our matching procedure yields successful matches to the CM for 51 percent of
manufacturing mergers in the SDC data.12
11
We have experimented with estimating differential effects of mergers based on the time that has
passed since acquisition, but have found little evidence for heterogeneity in this dimension.
12
The set of mergers from which coefficient estimates are identified is smaller as it is limited to
mergers in which an entire firm is acquired, and plants that are present both before and after the
merger takes place.

8

3

Empirical Framework for Estimating Markups and
Productivity

Our empirical analysis proceeds in two major steps. We first estimate plant-level
markups and productivity following the methods of De Loecker and Warzynski (2012)
and De Loecker (2011), which we briefly describe below. We then use these estimates
in a second-stage DID framework to assess the impact of M&A on plant-level markups
and productivity.
We follow the framework developed by De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) – DLW
hereafter – to separately identify a plant’s markup from its productivity.13 Using their
notation, we begin with a production function
1
Qit = Q Xit,

V
. . ., Xit , Kit , ωit



,

(1)

where Xit1 , . . . , XitV are the V variable input choices by plant i in time period t;
Kit is the plant’s capital stock; and ωit is a productivity parameter. Assuming cost
minimization, one can write the associated Lagrangian,

1
L Xit,

. .

V
 X
V
V
X
,
K
,
ω
,
λ
PitX XitV + rit Kit + λit (Qit − Qit (.)) ,
=
it
it
it
., it

(2)

v=1

1

V

where PitX , . . . , PitX and rit are the variable input prices and cost of capital, respectively. The first-order condition for any given variable input (V ) is
∂Qit (.)
∂Lit
V
= PitX − λit
= 0.
V
∂Xit
∂XitV

(3)

Rearranging the first-order conditions, one can write:
V

∂Qit (.) XitV
1 PitX XitV
=
.
λit Qit
∂XitV Qit
13

(4)

This contrasts with literature that makes more specific assumptions on consumer preferences and
market structure to study a particular industry. Perhaps the most well-known example is the seminal
work of Berry et al. (1995) and Goldberg (1995) to model and estimate structural parameters of
market behavior in the automobile market.

9

Define the markup as µit ≡ Pλitit , where λit is the marginal cost of production.
Substituting in the expression for the markup yields
V

∂Qit (.) XitV
PitX XitV
=
µ
.
it
Pit Qit
∂XitV Qit

(5)

The left-hand side of equation (5) is the elasticity of output with respect to a
variable input (which we denote as θitX ), while the ratio on the righthand side is the
share of expenditures on the variable input in total sales of the firm (which we denote as
αitX ). As a result, DLW note that one can express the plant’s markup as a surprisingly
simple function of these two elements:
µit = θitX αitX

−1

.

(6)

In order to obtain consistent estimates of the production function parameters, DLW
follow the methods proposed by Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazier (2006). For tractability,
they restrict attention to production functions with a Hicks-neutral scalar productivity
term and assume common technology parameters for plants (within the same NAICS
3-digit industry):
1
Qit = F Xit,

V
. . ., Xit , Kit ; β)


exp(ω it .

(7)

Taking logs and assuming a random error term, one can express the production
function as:
yit = F (xit , k it ; β) + ωit + it .

(8)

Productivity and shocks to productivity are unobserved to the econometrician, but
may be endogenous with input choices made by the plant. This is handled through a
control function approach. In particular, we follow DLW in assuming that the plant’s
current choice of materials depends on the current level of any dynamic variables (here,
capital stock), productivity, and any other observable variables that could affect opti-

10

mal material demand: mit = mt (kit , ωit , zit ) . Inverting this function yields
ωit = ht (mit , kit , zit ) ,

(9)

which serves as a proxy indexing a plant’s productivity, provided that material
demand is monotonic in productivity after conditioning on a plant’s capital stock and
other observables in the vector, zit .
We now assume that productivity follows a simple law of motion:
ωit = gt (ωit−1 ) + ξit .

(10)

Using labor as the variable input and assuming a translog production function, one
can then derive current productivity as a function of our parameters via equation (8):
ωit (β) = φ̂it − βl lit − βk kit − βll lit2 − βkk kit2 − βlk lit kit .

(11)

Using this, we can derive an expression for the unobserved productivity shock as a
function of the production function parameters. Last period’s input decisions should
be highly correlated, but independent, of this period’s input decisions. Thus, one can
use these as instruments and form the following moments
















E ξit (β) 









lit−1
kit
2
lit−1
kit2
lit−1 kit






 = 0





(12)

and then use General Method of Moment (GMM) estimation techniques to recover
consistent estimates of our production function parameters. With these in hand, we
can construct consistent estimates of our index of productivity and markups.
A few observations are worth noting. First, we re-iterate that this method is general
enough to apply across a broad range of heterogeneous industries. It only requires

11

assumptions of cost minimization and some basic functional forms for the production
function. However, following previous studies using this technique, we do not assume
common production function parameters across all plants in our sample, but estimate
separate parameters for each NAICS 3-digit sector. The method above also assumes
production of a single product. A recent paper by De Loecker et al. (2016) highlights
the complications when applying these techniques to multiproduct firms because one
often has only information on a firm’s total input usage, not input usage by each
product it produces. Here, we have plant-level, rather than firm-level data, which
allows us to largely avoid the issue. Production for most plants is highly concentrated
in a single product, and our results are robust to whether we exclude plants that have
substantial production in more than one product.

4
4.1

Empirical Strategy and Results
First-stage estimates of markups and productivity

We begin by using the methods in DLW as described in section 3.1 to estimate a
markup and a measure of productivity for each of the 187,100 manufacturing plants
in our full sample. Table 1 provides the mean and standard deviation of these DLW
measures of markup and productivity. The measure of DLW productivity is simply an
index from a translog production function. Thus, its level is not meaningful per se,
but changes in the index will reflect percentage changes in the plant’s productivity.
As indicated by the sizable standard deviations, there is substantial variation in this
productivity measure across plants.
The markups measure how much more is the price charged by the firm than its
marginal cost. We find quite high markups, with an average markup (the ratio of price
to marginal cost) of around 5.5 with a standard deviation over 7. The range of these
markups is much higher than what DLW find for Slovenian firms, and about twice as
high on average as that found by De Loecker et al. (2016) for Indian firms. However,
an important difference is that we estimate these markups at the plant-level, rather
than the firm-level as in those papers. While the price is what the firm can charge, the
(marginal) costs are specific to the plant. Inputs used and costs incurred by the firm
for headquarter services, such as advertising, distribution, central management and
R&D, will typically not be accounted for in these production plants. In other words,
we should expect larger markups at the plant-level because the price has to not only
12

cover the plant’s costs, but also the firm’s non-production costs. Therefore, like our
DLW productivity measure, we are not as interested in the level per se, but how the
markup changes with an M&A.
For comparison purposes, we will be examining the impact of M&A on more traditional revenue productivity measures; specifically, the log of total factor productivity,
which we calculate using the same methodology as Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson
(2008), and a simple measure of log labor productivity. Table 1 also provides the mean
and standard deviation of these measures.
For the purpose of controlling for potential sample selection bias, one method we
employ is a sample of only the plants where an M&A deal was announced, using plants
of M&A deals that subsequently fail as our control group. This reduces our sample
substantially to 4,200 plants. The last two columns of Table 1 provide the mean
and standard deviation of our markup and productivity parameters for this sample
of plants.14 There are not large differences in these descriptive statistics between
this reduced sample and the full sample, though both average markup and all three
productivity measures are slightly higher in the smaller sample of plants subject to an
announced M&A deal, suggesting that there is targeting of firms with plants that have
higher than average markups and productivity.

4.2

Second-stage DID estimates of M&A effects: Baseline estimates

We now take these first-stage estimates and use a DID specification to examine the
impact of M&As on the three measures of productivity and the DLW estimate of
markups. Our estimating equation can be expressed as:
yit = β1 Postt × Targeti + β2 Postt + θi +

X

γj × τt + α + εit .

(13)

j

The dependent variable, yit , is the markup or productivity measure calculated as
described above. The first term on the right-hand side is the DID term of interest,
the interaction of an indicator for the post M&A period (Postt ) and an indicator for
plants that are merger targets (Targeti ). The coefficient β1 denotes the effect of M&A
14

As robustness checks, we employ a number of other strategies to control for endogenous selection
that lead to other alternative samples. Due to disclosure concerns, we have refrained from reporting
descriptive statistics for other samples beyond these two.

13

on productivity or markups.15 Time-invariant plant-level characteristics are controlled
for by plant-fixed effects (θi ). Effects that are specific to the post-merger periods are
captured by including the level of the variable Postt .16 Finally, as in Davis et al.’s (2014)
study of the effect of private equity purchases, we include a set of fixed effects that
P
interact year dummies with indicators for plant characteristics ( j γj × τt ), specifically
year x (3-digit NAICS) industry and year x plant size category. This approach yields
what we believe to be a tight identification that nets out time-varying changes in
outcomes associated with industry, size and age categories, thus controlling for a wide
range of potentially omitted variables. Unless otherwise indicated, standard errors are
clustered at the firm-level, as the decision to merge is made at that level.
Table 2 provides results for our full sample of plants, where all non-merging plants
form a control group for comparison to merging plants.17
The first two columns of Table 2 provide estimates of the impact of M&A on
traditional revenue-based measures of productivity, log revenue TFP and log labor
productivity. We estimate positive, but statistically insignificant, M&A effects on both
log revenue TFP and log revenue labor productivity. As mentioned, these traditional
revenue-based measures can confound changes in market power with changes in true
productivity.
To address this, the second two columns of Table 2 provide results from estimating
equation (13) for the separate estimates of a measure of productivity and markup for
each plant, calculated as in DLW. The results reveal important information. Like the
other two productivity measures, we also estimate a statistically insignificant effect of
M&A on the DLW productivity measure. However, the estimated M&A effect on the
DLW markup measure is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. The
magnitude of the markup effect is also sizeable in economic terms, with the coefficient
estimate of 0.706 corresponding to an increase for acquired plants relative to nonacquired plants that is equivalent to 13% relative to the average markup.
15

In our tables of results, we label this interaction variable, “Target Firm in the Post M&A Period.”
The coefficient for the “Post M&A Period” indicator can be separately identified from the other
fixed effects because the post-M&A period begins in different years for different plants, depending on
the timing of their acquisition.
17
Because we cannot define a specific year between 1997 and 2007 in which non-merging plants can
be classified as “post-merger,” for this full sample, we only consider the years 1997 and 2007, which
can be unambiguously defined as belonging to the pre- or post-merger period, respectively. This
restriction is not required in subsequent samples that we consider.
16

14

4.3

Second-stage DID estimates of M&A effects: Propensity
score matching

Our baseline estimates do not control for sample selection issues, other than through
inclusion of the fixed effects that capture time-invariant characteristics of plants and
time-varying characteristics of industry and plant size bins. The concern is that acquiring firms find targets that are trending towards higher future productivity and/or
markups so that an increase in these variables after the M&A could be spuriously assigned to an M&A effect, when none exists. Of course, the bias could also go the other
way, mitigating any positive M&A effect, if firms are more likely to acquire targets
with productivity or markups trending downward. Recent evidence by Blonigen et al.
(2014) suggests that negative trends in these variables may be more likely.
One way to address this type of sample selection bias is through use of propensity
score matching (PSM), where one forms a control group of “untreated” observations
that are most similar to treated observations in terms of observables. PSM has been
used in a wide variety of settings to control for sample selection bias, including a
number of studies estimating the effects of M&As on firms and plants.18
The PSM procedure that we implement first runs a logit regression for all plants in
the sample to estimate the probably that a plant will be acquired in a particular time
period. We include a set of baseline covariates related to both the plant’s characteristics
and the characteristics of the firm to which the plant belongs.19 In particular, we
include log revenue TFP, log wage, log capital intensity (capital/labor ratio), log skill
intensity (other employment/total employment ratio), firm age, an exporting indicator
variable and 3-digit NAICS dummies. Predicted values from this first step generate
a propensity score for each observation. “Treated” observations (i.e., acquired plants)
are then matched to observations with the nearest propensity scores (i.e., a “neighbor”)
that serve as controls and an average treatment estimate (ATE) is calculated.
The first row of Table 3 provides the ATE for our variables of interest when merger
targets are matched to a single nearest neighbor via the PSM approach. The ATEs for
both log labor productivity and log revenue productivity are positive and strongly significant, unlike in the full sample. These results are in line with those of McGuckin and
Nguyen (1995) who find that mergers are associated with gains in revenue productivity.
18

Such studies include Heyman, Sjöholm, and Tingvall (2007), Bertrand and Zitouna (2008), Arnold
and Javorcik (2009), Bandick and Görg (2010), and Fresard, Hoberg, and Phillips (2013).
19
Firm-level characteristics are constructed by aggregating across all the manufacturing plants
owned by the firm.

15

However, as with the full sample, the M&A effects on the productivity and markup
terms estimated in our first-stage DLW approach are quite different. The ATE for productivity is negative and statistically significant, while the markup term is positive and
marginally insignificant (p-value of 0.16). The second row of Table 3 reports results
when we use the nearest three neighbors as controls for our treated plants. Adding
additional neighbors might increase precision on one hand by increasing the number of
observations, but could hurt precision by including control observations that are not “as
close” to the treated observation as the nearest single neighbor. The estimated ATEs
are qualitatively identical to the first row, but have more precision, with the ATE on
markup now statistically significant at the 5% level. Overall, the PSM approach points
out that M&A effects on the separately identified productivity and markup measures
from our first-stage regression can provide a much different picture of M&A effects
than standard log labor and log revenue productivity measures.

4.4

Second-stage DID estimates of M&A effects: Alternative
control groups

Propensity score matching controls for sample selection bias by conditioning on observables. However, sample selection bias may remain if there are unobserved factors
that are correlated with the selection of treatment or our focus outcome variables (i.e.,
future markups and productivity) for both the treated and control observations. In
fact, the PSM approach may not be able to do better than – and can be specified
to be essentially equivalent to – the rich set of controls we use based on Davis et al.
(2014). As an alternative, we construct two different control groups that we argue
could be plausibly identical to treated plants in both observed and unobserved baseline attributes and the trajectory of outcome variables ex ante. Both of these control
group strategies are novel in the literature to our knowledge.
The first of these approaches is to use plants that we know will be part of an M&A
in the future as control observations. These plants may have observed and unobserved
characteristics in common with plants recently acquired (our “treated” group), since
they will soon be acquired, but simply have not found (or pursued) a match with a
partner firm.20 With our data, this means that we compare outcomes over the 199720

It seems likely that many firms may have desirable attributes for an M&A, but do not become
merger targets. There are a number of reasons why this may be true, from a costly process of finding
suitable matches to market conditions (such as business cycles) that can significantly delay pursuit of

16

2002 period of plants that are part of an M&A during this same period to plants
that we know will be part of an M&A in the 2002 to 2007 period. As with our full
sample regression above, we also control for a rich set of fixed effects and cluster at the
firm-level. This alternative sample has only 3,100 observations and is therefore much
smaller than the full sample.
As indicated in panel A of Table 4, DID estimates of the M&A effect on the productivity and markup terms for this alternative sample are qualitatively identical to
the full sample results. The log revenue TFP and log labor productivity effects are not
statistically significant, nor is the effect on the DLW productivity term. In contrast,
the M&A effect on the DLW markup term is positive and statistically significant with
a coefficient that is nearly identical to that estimated in the full sample.
The second novel identification approach we pursue is the construction of a control
group that consists of plants in firms that were announced as targets of M&A, but
for which the merger was ultimately withdrawn. We call this the “announced M&A”
sample, where completed transactions are the “treated” observations and withdrawn
transactions are the “controls.” As with the first approach using plants that will experience an M&A in the future, plants that were part of an announced M&A that
was ultimately withdrawn likely share many to most of the same attributes – observed
and unobserved – that lead them to be targeted for an M&A transaction. And the
number of failed deals is not trivial. For example, Branch and Yang (2003) show that
about 11% of the over 1000 U.S. mergers they evaluate over the 1991-2000 period fail
to complete. We again include a rich set of fixed effects and cluster at the firm level.
Unlike the approach with future M&A plants as controls, we can use our full sample
of years, 1997-2007, which allows us to better control for time effects. Yet, this sample
is also much smaller than the full sample with 4,200 observations.
A key worry with the announced M&A sample is that there may be factors unobserved to us that become observed to the involved firms -- especially with respect to
the target firm -- that lead to a M&A deal failure. If there is a systematic reason for
withdrawn M&A deals that is correlated with productivity or markups, our withdrawn
plants would be a poor control group. However, the small literature that evaluates
failure of M&A deal completion does not turn up much evidence for such an unobserved variable.21 Most of the covariates with explanatory power are solely related to
a suitable M&A deal.
21
Additional studies beyond those listed in the text includes Mitchell and Pulvino (2001), Officer
(2007), and Branch, Wang, and Yang (2008). Hoberg and Phillips (2016) show that mergers with

17

the acquiring firm, including the type of financing it uses to fund the deal, its size,
and measures of their attitude toward completing the deal, which Baker and Savasoglu
(2002) indicate is the best single predictor of deal completion. There is not any obvious
correlation between these factors related to the acquiring firm and the future market
power and/or productivity of the target plants, which is the focus of our study. The
media often reports that disputes between managers of the two firms (often termed
“social issues”) can lead to failed M&A deals, a reason that again seems unlikely to be
correlated with our outcomes of interest.22
Estimates obtained with the announced M&A approach are qualitatively identical
to those obtained with the full sample and our sample using future acquired plants
as controls. As shown in panel B of Table 4, we estimate statistically insignificant
coefficient estimates for the DID effect in regressions for log revenue TFP, log labor
TFP, and DLW productivity. In contrast, the DID coefficient in the regression for
DLW markups is positive and highly statistically significant. With this sample, the
markup coefficient is around 2.8, approximately four times larger than the other samples and specifications we have estimated above. Part of this can be attributed to
higher markups in this sample relative to the full sample. Markups average 7.2 in this
announced M&A sample, whereas they average about 5.5 in the full sample (see Table
1), Nonetheless, this still implies a larger M&A effect in percentage terms. Specifically, these estimates suggest that the relative M&A effect on markups is about a 40%
increase on the average markup in the announced sample.

4.5

Second-stage DID estimates of M&A effects: Additional robustness checks

We conduct two additional robustness exercises with this sample of plants that are
subject to an announced M&A deal. First, to confirm that the results are not driven
by spurious matches between the Thomson Reuters and Census data, we construct a
sample composed only of firms with an exact match between the two databases (i.e.
matching on firm name, address, city and state). Requiring the stricter criterion of an
high product integration risk are more likely to experience negative outcomes like lower profitability
and a higher propensity to divest assets.
22
The inherent problem is that there are two sets of all senior managers coming into an M&A and
this duplication must be eliminated. Willis, A. (2001) “’Social issue’ may be key to bank mergers,”
The Globe and Mail (Canada), August 28, p. B17 is an example article in the business press on this
issue.

18

exact match gives more certainty of the match quality, but also reduces our sample by
a fair amount. In Panel A of Table 5 we show results when we limit our announced
M&A sample to only those observations that meet a strict match criterion. This limits
the number of observations even further from 4,200 to just 1,900. Nevertheless, the
estimates are qualitatively identical to those in Panel B of Table 4, with the less strict
match criteria, though the magnitude of the markup effect falls by about one third.23
A second robustness check involves taking an additional step to control for sample
section bias via a 2SLS strategy that instruments for whether an announced deal is
completed or not.24 In particular, we instrument for M&A completion by interacting
the “Post M&A Period” variable with indicator variables for the year the M&A deal was
announced for the plant. The intuition for this approach is that secular trends, such as
business cycles and changes in antitrust enforcement in the year that the M&A deal is
announced could affect whether the deal is completed, conditional on its announcement.
The results of these 2SLS estimates, reported in Panel B of Table 5, are qualitatively
identical to the OLS-estimated M&A effects – statistical insignificance in regressions
for the various productivity measures but a large and statistically significant markup
effect. In fact, this 2SLS estimate suggests that the relative M&A effect on markups
may be over 70% on the average markup.
In summary, our results are robust to a number of alternative specifications meant
to address various concerns, primarily endogenous selection of targets. They give a
consistent message that acquired plants do not experience statistically significant effects
on productivity, on average, but do experience positive and statistically significant
effects on markups that are substantial in magnitude.
23

The results in this panel also point to the possibility that estimates of the effect of M&A on
traditional revenue productivity measures – such as those in column 1 – may be inaccurately boosted by
concomitant increases in markups (column 4). This topic is explored generally, by Foster, Haltiwanger
and Syverson (2008), in the context of international trade by De Loecker (2011), Pierce (2011), Smeets
and Warzynski (2013), and Goldberg et al. (2016), and in the case of horizontal mergers in the concrete
industry by Kulick (2015).
24
Our M&A observations vary in when they take place over the five-year window. However, we do
not find significant differences in the M&A effects depending on when an M&A takes place in this
five-year window.

19

4.6

Second-stage DID estimates of M&A effects: Exploring heterogeneity with our announced M&A sample

To this point, we have been estimating M&A effects averaged over all manufacturing
sectors. While we are limited in the extent to which we can explore subsamples of our
data to avoid disclosing confidential information, we now consider how M&A effects
may vary for transactions that involve firms in the same industry. Such horizontal
M&A transactions are most likely to lead to increases in markups, and they may also
have different M&A effects on productivity than non-horizontal M&As.25 We estimate
these effects by adding a triple-difference term in equation (13), Postt × Treati × SICi ,
where the SIC term is either the plant’s 2-digit or 4-digit SIC industry.
Panels C and D of Table 5 provide results examining whether M&A effects differ
for firms in the same 2-digit or 4-digit SIC industry, respectively. Approximately 39%
of all M&As are by firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry in the entire SDC database,
whereas about 26% of all M&As are by firms in the same 4-digit SIC industry. We
caution that these are not precise ways of defining horizontal M&As, as there may be
substantial purchasing of inputs (i.e., upstream-downstream relationships) from firms
in the same 2-digit SIC, and even with in the same 4-digit SIC.
The results indicate interesting heterogeneity across merger types. First, the M&A
effects on markups are consistent with the hypothesis that they will be larger with
horizontal M&A activity. In the 2-digit SIC interactions in Panel C of Table 5, we now
estimate an insignificant markup effect in general, but a statistically significant positive
difference in markup for plants in M&As by firms in the same 2-digit SIC. The total
M&A effect for M&As within the same 2-digit SIC is the sum of the two coefficients
(3.349) and is in the same range as we estimate as the general effect for the sample
in Panel B of Table 4. In the 4-digit interactions in Panel D of Table 5 we now see a
positive markup effect on the general DID coefficient that is significant at the 10% level
and a positive (though insignificant) coefficient on the 4-digit SIC interaction. Taken
together, this suggests that the markup effects are primarily due to horizontal M&As
involving firms from the same industry, consistent with where one might expect M&As
to have the greatest potential to raise markups. These increases in market power for
horizontal mergers are consistent with theoretical work by Farrell and Shaprio (1990)
25

The main non-horizontal M&A types are vertical, involving firms from industries where there is a
strong upstream-downstream relationship, and conglomerate, where firms are from relatively unrelated
industries.

20

and empirical work for the concrete industry by Kulick (2015).
Exploring heterogeneity also uncovers significant differences in the M&A productivity effect. Both results in Panel C and D of Table 5 suggest that non-horizontal
M&As see a positive and significant productivity effect at the plant level. In contrast,
there is a negative and significant coefficient on the interaction of the DID effect with
indicators that the M&A is between firms of the same industry (i.e., horizontal M&As).
The net M&A effect on productivity for 2-digit horizontal M&As is zero, while it is
negative for 4-digit M&As. Thus, horizontal M&As not only increase markups, but
may also have negative effects on productivity.

4.7

A Placebo Test

Finally, we examine whether pre-existing secular trends for the treatment and control
group could be driving spurious correlations for our estimated M&A effect, a common
concern for DID analyses. To address this concern we construct a placebo test in
which we add data for Census years 1987 and 1992 to our announced M&A sample
and then add interactions of the indicator for plants that were merger targets between
1997 and 2007 with indicators for the years 1992 and 1997. These are years prior to
when the targeted plants were acquired and, hence, the interactions constitute placebo
treatments. If there are significant coefficients on these placebo treatments, it would
cast doubt on the validity of the estimated effect we are obtaining for the true treatment
variable. Relatedly, if significant, these variables would indicate pre-trend differences
in our treated and control groups, which is a concern for any DID analysis. In other
words, this particular placebo test is also a test for pre-trend differences.
As results in Table 6 show, our estimates pass this placebo and pre-trend test. The
first four columns show the results when we include the placebo variables, “Target Firm
in 1992” and “Target Firm in 1997.” Estimated coefficients on these placebo variables
are statistically insignificant for all three measures of productivity and our markup
measure. This sample of observations is somewhat different from our previous samples
discussed above due to the additional years of 1987 and 1992. So columns 5 through
8 of Table 6 verify that our base specification yields qualitatively identical results to
our previous analysis when it is applied to the expanded sample of years. As shown in
the table, we continue to find no M&A effects on DLW productivity, but significant,
positive M&A effects on markups.

21

5

Exploring Other Channels of Efficiency Gains from
M&A

To this point our analysis has examined plant-level productivity as a measure of potential efficiency gains associated with mergers. However, there are other efficiency gains
that an M&A may bring to the merged firm. In this section we examine two other
possible sources or such gains: 1) firm-level efficiency gains from reallocating production to more efficient plants or closing down low-productivity plants, and 2) firm-level
efficiency gains from combining non-production activities.

5.1

Evidence for Firm-Level Efficiencies from Reallocating Production?

M&As could have no impact on plant-level productivity, but could lead to firm-level
efficiency gains if they allow the merged firm to shut down poorly performing plants
and reallocate production to more efficient plants in its newly expanded portfolio of
plants.26 We examine whether there is evidence for this channel in two ways. First,
we calculate firm-level productivity estimates as a shipment-weighted average of all
the estimated plant-level productivities of the firm’s plants. A firm can change these
weights (via reallocation across plants) to improve firm-level productivity after an M&A
even if average plant-level productivities do not improve, as indicated by our evidence
above.
Table 7 provides results when we conduct this analysis using our announced M&A
sample, where cumulating across plants leaves us with 2200 firm-level observations. As
indicated in Panel A of the table, we find no evidence for M&A effects on productivity
through this firm-level channel. We also interact the DID term with indicators for a
horizontal merger at the 2-digit or 4-digit level in Panels B and C, respectively, again
finding no effect of M&As on firm-level productivity. In terms of the firm-level impact
of M&As on markups, the estimated effects, while still positive, are less precisely
estimated than at the plant-level. The coefficient on the DID term is not statistically
26

A number of studies, including Kaplan and Weisbach (1992) and Maksimovic et al. (2011), show
that a significant number of plants are sold or closed in the wake of M&A activity. Using data on
plants from the U.S. Census’ Longitudinal Research Database from 1981 through 2000, Maksimovic
et al. (2011) find evidence that retained plants see increases in productivity after M&A, but that sold
plants do not.

22

significant in panels A or B, but is positive and statistically significant at the ten
percent level in panel C.
A second exercise we undertake is to examine any M&A effect on plant-level exit
probabilities. We regress an indicator for plant exit on the same set of variables and
fixed effects as in our regressions above, with results shown in Table 8. As column 1
indicates, there is some evidence (significant at the 10% level) that exit probabilities go
up for plants that are part of an M&A, ceteris paribus, indicating that merger targets
are more likely to be shut down than plants in the control group.
If firms use M&As as an opportunity to close down low-productivity plants and
allocate production to higher productivity plants, we would expect an M&A effect on
exit that is inversely correlated with a plant’s productivity. In column 2, we interact our
M&A DID effect with the pre-merger level of plant-level productivity, but surprisingly
find exactly the opposite – the probability of exit associated with M&A rises in the
plant’s productivity level. Columns 3 and 4 examine whether the M&A effect on exit
probabilities differs across horizontal and non-horizontal measures. We do not find any
differences in the effect for M&As undertaken by firms in the same 2-digit SIC versus
other M&As. However, we find evidence that M&As that are not in the same 4-digit
industry have higher plant exit probabilities after an M&A, while those by firms in the
same 4-digit industry see no change in exit probabilities. Overall, we see little evidence
in these analyses that M&As are associated with greater exit probabilities in ways that
would lead to greater efficiency at the firm level by reallocating production to higher
productivity plants.

5.2

Changes in non-manufacturing employment?

A final possible channel of firm-level efficiencies from M&A activity that we explore
is from the possibility of realizing economies of scale in non-production activities. In
other words, firms might eliminate “redundancies” as a result of M&As (e.g., the merged
firm only needs one headquarters and one accounting department). In our sample of
manufacturing plants and firms, this should show up as declines in employment at the
non-manufacturing establishments of the firm.
Table 9 provides results from estimating equation (13) at both the plant- and
firm-level, where the dependent variable is now the log of employment at firms’ nonmanufacturing establishments. We show results from both the full sample (columns 1

23

and 2) and from the announced M&A sample (columns 3 and 4).27 We find no significant M&A effects on non-production employment of the M&A plants and firms, ruling
out efficiency effects from realizing scale economies in headquarter services after an
M&A. We explore heterogeneity in these effects across M&As involving firms from the
same 2-digit or 4-digit SIC, and do not uncover any statistically significant differences
in this dimension either.

6

Conclusion

While mergers and acquisitions affect a substantial portion of economic activity worldwide, there is limited systematic evidence of their effect on productivity and market
power. The existing literature has often focused on studies of specific firms or industries, making it difficult to infer average effects across broad sets of industries.
Moreover, estimating separate effects on productivity and markups has been difficult,
and endogeneity concerns have challenged the consistency of some estimates.
This paper estimates the effects of M&A on productivity and markups of plants and
firms across all U.S. manufacturing industries. Our analysis makes use of high-quality
U.S. Census Bureau data covering the universe of U.S. manufacturing plants, which are
matched to the set of private and public mergers and acquisitions tracked by Thomson
Reuters in their SDC Platinum database. We use techniques developed by De Loecker
and Warzynski (2012) to separately identify productivity and markups for plants and
firms across a wide variety of industries in a consistent framework.
We find that evidence for increased average markups from M&A activity is significant and robust across a variety of specifications and strategies for constructing
control groups that mitigate endogeneity concerns. In contrast, we find little evidence
for plant- or firm-level productivity effects from M&A activity on average, nor for
other efficiency gains often cited as possible from M&A activity, including reallocation
of activity across plants or scale efficiencies in non-productive units of the firm.
27

As the full sample in this case is composed of essentially all nonmanufacturing establishments in
the U.S., the number of observations is much larger than the earlier analysis using only manufacturing
establishments.

24

References
[1] Ackerberg, D. A., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2006). Structural identification of
production functions. Mimeo.
[2] Arnold, J. M., & Javorcik, B. S. (2009). Gifted kids or pushy parents? Foreign
direct investment and plant productivity in Indonesia. Journal of International
Economics, 79 (1), 42-53.
[3] Ashenfelter, O. C., Hosken, D. S., & Weinberg, M. C. (2013). The price effects of
a large merger of manufacturers: A case study of Maytag-Whirlpool. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5 (1), 239-61.
[4] Ashenfelter, O. C., Hosken, D., & Weinberg, M. C. (2014). Did Robert Bork understate the competitive impact of mergers? Evidence from consummated mergers.
Journal of Law and Economics, 57 (S3), S67-S100.
[5] Baker, M., & Savaşoglu, S. (2002) "Limited arbitrage in mergers and acquisitions."
Journal of Financial Economics, 64 (1), 91-115.
[6] Bandick, R., & Görg, H. (2010). Foreign acquisition, plant survival, and employment growth. Canadian Journal of Economics, 43 (2), 547-573.
[7] Bertrand, O., & Zitouna, H. (2008). Domestic versus cross-border acquisitions:
which impact on the target firms’ performance? Applied Economics, 40 (17), 22212238.
[8] Blonigen, B. A., Fontagné, L., Sly, N., & Toubal, F. (2014). Cherries for sale: The
incidence and timing of cross-border M&A. Journal of International Economics,
94 (2), 341-57.
[9] Borenstein, S. (1990). Airline mergers, airport dominance, and market power.
American Economic Review, 82 (2), 400-4.
[10] Braguinsky, S., Ohyama, A., Okazaki, T. & Syverson, C. (2015). Acquisitions, productivity and profitability: Evidence from the Japanese cotton spinning industry.
American Economic Review 105 (7), 2086-2119.
[11] Branch, B., & Yang, T. (2003). Predicting successful takeovers and risk arbitrage.
Quarterly Journal of Business and Economics, 42 (1/2), 3-18.
25

[12] Branch, B., Wang, J., & Yang, T. (2008). A note on takeover success prediction.
International Review of Financial Analysis, 17 (5), 1186-1193.
[13] Davis, S. J., Haltiwanger, J. , Handley, K., Jarmin, R., Lerner, J., & Miranda,
J. (2014). Private equity, jobs, and productivity. American Economic Review,
104 (12): 3956-90.
[14] De Loecker, J. (2011). Product differentiation, multi-product firms and estimating
the impact of trade liberalization on productivity. Econometrica, 79 (5), 1407-1451.
[15] De Loecker, J. (2011). Recovering markups from production data. International
Journal of Industrial Organization 29, 350-355.
[16] De Loecker, J., & Warzynski, F. (2012). Markups and firm-level export status.
American Economic Review, 102 (6), 2437-71.
[17] De Loecker, J., Goldberg, P. K., Khandelwal, A. K., & Pavcnik, N. (2016). Prices,
markups and trade reforms. Econometrica, 84 (2), 445-510.
[18] Farrell, M. (2015). 2015 Becomes the Biggest M&A Year Ever. The Wall
Street Journal, December 3, 2015. Available online at http://www.wsj.com/
articles/2015-becomes-the-biggest-m-a-year-ever-1449187101. Accessed
July 29, 2016.
[19] Farrell, J. and C. Shapiro. (1990). Horizontal Mergers: An Equilibrium Analysis.
American Economic Review, 80 (1), 107-126.
[20] Focarelli, D., & Panetta, F. (2003). Are mergers beneficial to consumers? Evidence
from the market for bank deposits. American Economic Review, 93 (4), 1152-1172.
[21] Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., & Syverson, C. (2008). Reallocation, firm turnover,
and efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability? American Economic
Review, 98 (1), 394-425.
[22] Fresard, L., Hoberg, G., & Phillips, G. (2013). The incentives for vertical mergers
and vertical integration. Research Policy, 2, 452-466.
[23] Fresard, L., Hoberg, G., & Phillips, G. (2015). Innovative activities and the incentives for vertical acquisitions and integration. Mimeo.

26

[24] Gugler, K., Mueller, D. C., Yurtoglu, B. B., & Zulehner, C. (2003). The effects of
mergers: an international comparison. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21 (5), 625-653.
[25] Heyman, F., Sjöholm, F., & Tingvall, P. G. (2007). Is there really a foreign ownership wage premium? Evidence from matched employer–employee data. Journal
of International Economics, 73 (2), 355-376.
[26] Hoberg, G., & G. Phillips. (2016). Merger integration and merger success. Mimeo.
[27] Hortacsu, A. & C. Syverson. (2007). Cementing relationships: Vertical integration,
foreclosure, productivity, and prices. Journal of Political Economy, 115 (2), 250301.
[28] Jaffe, S., & Weyl, E. G. (2012). The first-order approach to merger analysis.
Mimeo, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
[29] Kaplan, S. N., & Weisbach, M. S. (1992). The success of acquisitions: Evidence
from divestitures. The Journal of Finance, 47 (1), 107-138.
[30] Kim, E. H., & Singal, V. (1993). Mergers and market power: Evidence from the
airline industry. American Economic Review, 83 (3), 549-569.
[31] Klette, T. J. (1999). Market power, scale economies and productivity: estimates
from a panel of establishment data. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 47 (4),
451-476.
[32] Kwoka, J., & Shumilkina, E. (2010). The Price Effect of Eliminating Potential
Competition: Evidence from an Airline Merger. Journal of Industrial Economics,
58 (4), 767-793.
[33] Kulick, Robert B. (2015). Horizontal mergers, prices, and productivity. Mimeo.
[34] Maksimovic, V., & Phillips, G. (2001). The market for corporate assets: Who
engages in mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains? Journal of
Finance, 56 (6), 2019-2065.
[35] Maksimovic, V., Phillips, G., & Prabhala, N. R. (2011). Post-merger restructuring
and the boundaries of the firm. Journal of Financial Economics, 102 (2), 317-343.

27

[36] Malmendier, U., Moretti, E., & Peters, F. (2013). Winning by losing: Evidence
on overbidding in mergers. Mimeo.
[37] McGuckin, R. H., & Nguyen, S. V. (1995). On productivity and plant ownership change: New evidence from the longitudinal research database, The RAND
Journal of Economics, 26 (2), 257-276.
[38] Mitchell, M., & Pulvino, T. (2001). Characteristics of risk and return in risk
arbitrage. Journal of Finance, 56 (6), 2135-2175.
[39] Officer, M. S. (2007). Are performance based arbitrage effects detectable? Evidence from merger arbitrage. Journal of Corporate Finance, 13 (5), 793-812.
[40] Pierce, J. (2011). Plant-level responses to antidumping duties: Evidence from U.S.
manufacturers. Journal of International Economics, 85(2): 222-233.
[41] Smeets, V. and F. Warzynski. (2013). Estimating productivity with multi-product
firms, pricing heterogeneity and the role of international trade. Journal of International Economics, 90(2): 237-244.
[42] Thomson Reuters. (2012). SDC Platinum Database. Accessed November 26, 2012.
[43] Weinberg, M. C., & Hosken, D. (2013). Evidence on the accuracy of merger simulations. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95 (5), 1584-1600.
[44] Werden, Gregory J. (1998). Demand elasticities in antitrust analysis. Antitrust
Law Journal, 66 (2), 363-414.

28

FIGURE 1: Data and Coding of M&A Treatment
Acquisition
(Year=2000)

Census
Years

1997

2002

Pre‐Acquisition
Observation

2007

Post‐Acquisition
Observations

Table 1: First‐stage Measures of Markups and Productivity
Sample With Only
Announced M&A
Full Sample
Deals
Standard
Standard
Variable
Mean Deviation Mean
Deviation
Log revenue total factor productivity
4.07
0.60
4.38
0.63
Log labor productivity
4.33
0.65
4.69
0.69
DLW productivity measure
‐0.74
1.87
‐1.67
2.57
DLW markup
5.49
7.97
7.20
11.27
Notes: Table displays summary statistics of productivity and markup measures.
Log revenue TFP is estimated at the 3‐digit NAICS level using the methodology of
Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008). Labor productivity is the total value of
shipments divided by total employment. The DLW markup and productivity
measures are estimated at the 3‐digit NAICS level using the techniques in De
Loecker and Warzynski (2012). There are 187,100 observations in the full sample
and 4,200 observations in the sample that only includes plants that were part of
announced M&A deals. Source: Authors’ calculations using CM and Thomson
Reuters SDC Platinum data.

29

Variables

Table 2: Baseline Results with Full Sample of Plants
Log
Revenue
Log Labor
DLW
TFP
Productivity Productivity

Target Firm in Post M&A
Period

0.022
(0.016)

0.006
(0.029)

0.023
(0.067)

DLW
Markup
0.706***
(0.254)

Observations
187,100
187,100
187,100
187,100
R‐squared
0.91
0.83
0.95
0.88
Notes: Table displays results of OLS regressions of dependent variables noted in
column headings on the interaction of a target firm indicator and post‐M&A indicator,
post‐merger indicator and set of fixed effects (plant, industry by year, and size by
year). Estimates for the constant, post‐merger indicator and fixed effects are
suppressed for brevity. Standard errors, displayed in parentheses, are clustered at
the firm‐level. Statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent
levels are denoted by ***, **, and * respectively. Source: Authors’ calculations using
CM and Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum data.

Table 3: Average Treatment Effects Using a Propensity Score Matching Approach
Log
Revenue
TFP

Log Labor
Productivity

DLW
Productivity

DLW
Markup

Average Treatment Effect
on Target Plant (Nearest
Neighbor)

0.174***
(0.037)

0.282***
(0.037)

‐0.339**
(0.171)

0.496
(0.354)

Average Treatment Effect
on Target Plant (Nearest
Three Neighbors)

0.209***
(0.029)

0.284***
(0.033)

‐0.258**
(0.102)

0.720**
(0.289)

Variables

Notes: Table displays the average treatment effect of M&A on the dependent variables
noted in column headings. Propensity score matching is conducted for the nearest
single neighbor (first row) and nearest three neighbors (second row). Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent,
and 10 percent levels are denoted by ***, **, and * respectively. Source: Authors’
calculations using CM and Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum data.

30

Table 4: M&A Effects on Alternative Control Group Strategies
Log Revenue
Log Labor
DLW
DLW
Variables
TFP
Productivity Productivity
Markup
PANEL A: Using Plants That Will Merge Next Period as Controls
Target Firm in Post M&A
‐0.021
‐0.016
‐0.012
0.716**
Period
(0.021)
(0.032)
(0.070)
(0.278)
Observations
R‐squared

3,100
0.91

3,100
0.80

3,100
0.96

3,100
0.81

PANEL B: Using Plants Where the M&A Was Withdrawn as Controls
Target Firm in Post M&A
0.089
0.116
0.100
Period
(0.081)
(0.084)
(0.126)

2.789**
(1.185)

Observations
4,200
4,200
4,200
4,200
R‐squared
0.89
0.76
0.93
0.86
Notes: Table displays results of OLS regressions of dependent variables noted in column
headings on the interaction of a target firm indicator and post‐M&A indicator, post‐
merger indicator and set of fixed effects (plant, industry by year, and size by year).
Estimates for the constant, post‐merger indicator and fixed effects are suppressed for
brevity. Standard errors, displayed in parentheses, are clustered at the firm‐level.
Statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels are denoted by
***, **, and * respectively. Source: Authors’ calculations using CM and Thomson Reuters
SDC Platinum data.

31

Table 5: Exploring Robustness and Heterogeneity of M&A Effects Using the
Announced M&A Sample
Log Revenue
Log Labor
DLW
DLW
Variables
TFP
Productivity Productivity
Markup
PANEL A: Using Stricter March Criteria
Target Firm in Post M&A
0.195*
0.196
0.132
1.797***
Period
(0.114)
(0.143)
(0.205)
(0.614)
Observations
R‐squared

1,900
0.88

1,900
0.70

1,900
0.93

1,900
0.81

0.095
(0.213)

0.157
(0.281)

‐0.395
(0.610)

5.253**
(2.630)

4,200

4,200

4,200

4,200

PANEL C: M&As Within the Same 2‐digit SIC
Target Firm in Post M&A
‐0.025
Period
(0.182)

0.017
(0.241)

0.660**
(0.268)

‐2.415
(3.018)

Target Firm in Post M&A
Period × Same 2‐Digit SIC

0.115
(0.200)

0.101
(0.255)

‐0.644**
(0.299)

5.764*
(3.471)

4,100
0.88

4,100
0.76

4,100
0.93

4,100
0.86

PANEL D: M&As Within the Same 4‐digit SIC
Target Firm in Post M&A
0.237*
Period
(0.139)

0.261*
(0.143)

0.461***
(0.120)

1.966*
(0.614)

Target Firm in Post M&A
Period × Same 4‐Digit SIC

‐0.239
(0.159)

‐0.715***
(0.195)

1.308
(2.057)

PANEL B: Using a 2SLS Approach
Target Firm in Post M&A
Period
Observations

Observations
R‐squared

‐0.258*
(0.149)

4,100
4,100
4,100
4,100
Observations
R‐squared
0.88
0.70
0.93
0.86
Notes: Table displays results of regressions of noted dependent variables on reported
covariates. Additional interaction terms and fixed effects are included in regression but
suppressed for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm‐level. Statistical
significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels denoted by ***, **, and * respectively. Source:
Authors’ calculations using CM and Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum data.

32

Table 6: Placebo Regressions Using Data from 1987 through 2007

Variables
Target Firm in Post
M&A Period
Target Firm in
Year 1992
Target Firm in
Year 1997

Log
Revenue
TFP

Log Labor
Productivity

DLW
Producti‐
vity

0.079
(0.081)

0.135
(0.096)

0.036
(0.132)

1.301**
(0.662)

‐0.007
(0.041)

0.012
(0.061)

0.068
(0.076)

0.575
(0.442)

‐0.094
(0.082)

‐0.140
(0.097)

0.027
(0.131)

‐0.777
(0.623)

DLW
Markup

Log
Revenue
TFP

0.079
(0.073)

Log Labor
Productivity

DLW
Producti‐
vity

0.123
(0.086)

0.006
(0.123)

DLW
Markup

1.519**
(0.751)

6,200
6,200
6,200
6,200
6,200
6,200
6,200
6,200
0.86
0.73
0.93
0.79
0.86
0.73
0.93
0.79
Notes: Table displays results of OLS regressions of dependent variables noted in column headings on the interaction of a
target firm indicator and post‐M&A indicator, post‐merger indicator and set of fixed effects (plant, industry by year, and size
by year). The first four columns also include interactions of the target firm indicator with indicators for the years 1992 and
1997. Estimates for the constant, post‐merger indicator and fixed effects are suppressed for brevity. Standard errors,
displayed in parentheses, are clustered at the firm‐level. Statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent
levels are denoted by ***, **, and * respectively. Source: Authors’ calculations using CM and Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum
data.

33

Table 7: Firm‐level Estimates of M&A Effects Using the Announced M&A Sample
Log Revenue
Log Labor
DLW
DLW
Variables
TFP
Productivity Productivity
Markup
PANEL A: Baseline Estimates
Target Firm in Post M&A
‐0.127
‐0.096
‐0.013
1.552
Period
(0.10)
(0.12)
(0.17)
(2.16)
Observations
R‐squared

2,200
0.72

2,200
0.89

2,200
0.86

PANEL B: M&As Within the Same 2‐digit SIC
Target Firm in Post M&A
‐0.059
Period
(0.22)

‐0.104
(0.26)

‐0.176
(0.33)

0.632
(1.13)

Target Firm in Post M&A
Period × Same 2‐Digit SIC

‐0.105
(0.24)

0.006
(0.28)

0.257
(0.40)

1.35
(3.07)

2,200
0.87

2,200
0.72

2,200
0.89

2,200
0.86

PANEL C: M&As Within the Same 4‐digit SIC
Target Firm in Post M&A
‐0.091
Period
(0.12)

‐0.03
(0.15)

‐0.091
(0.19)

1.48*
(0.76)

Target Firm in Post M&A
Period × Same 4‐Digit SIC

‐0.22
(0.24)

‐0.348
(0.45)

0.242
(6.87)

Observations
R‐squared

2,200
0.87

‐0.12
(0.20)

2,200
2,200
2,200
2,200
Observations
R‐squared
0.87
0.72
0.89
0.86
Notes: Table displays results of firm‐level OLS regressions of noted dependent variables
on reported covariates. Additional interaction terms and fixed effects are included in
regression but suppressed for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm‐level.
Statistical significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels denoted by ***, **, and * respectively.
Source: Authors’ calculations using CM and Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum data.

34

Table 8: Exit probabilities after M&A

Variables
Target Firm in Post M&A Period
Target Firm in Post M&A Period
× Productivity

Baseline

With
Productivity
Interaction

Same 2‐
digit SIC

Same 4‐
digit SIC

0.078*
(0.047)

0.115*
(0.067)

‐0.01
(0.257)

0.245***
(2.474)

0.056***
(0.016)

Target Firm in Post M&A Period
× Same SIC 2‐Digit Industry

0.091
(0.265)

Target Firm in Post M&A Period
× Same SIC 4 Industry

‐0.247***
(0.073)

Observations
2,400
2,400
2,400
2,400
R‐squared
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
Notes: Table displays results of regressions of an indicator for plant exit on reported
covariates. Additional interaction terms and fixed effects are included in regression
but suppressed for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm‐level. Statistical
significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels denoted by ***, **, and * respectively.
Source: Authors’ calculations using CM and Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum data.

Table 9: The Effect of M&A on Employment in Nonmanufacturing Activities
Announced M&A
Full Sample
Only
Plant
Firm
Plant
Firm
Target Firm in Post M&A Period

‐0.012
(0.022)

‐0.109
(0.290)

‐0.008
(0.023)

0.046
(0.410)

Number of Observations
5,268,200 3,737,600
13,500
200
R‐squared
0.97
0.96
0.97
0.97
Notes: Table displays results of regressions of the log of nonmanufacturing
employment on noted on the interaction of target firm and post‐M&A indicators.
Additional interaction terms and fixed effects are included in regression but
suppressed for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm‐level. Statistical
significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels denoted by ***, **, and * respectively.
Source: Authors’ calculations using LBD and Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum data.
35

