NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF AIR POLLUTION ON INVESTOR BEHAVIOR:
EVIDENCE FROM THE S&P 500
Anthony Heyes
Matthew Neidell
Soodeh Saberian
Working Paper 22753
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22753

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016

Anthony Heyes receives ongoing financial support from the Canada Research Chair (CRC)
program operated by the Government of Canada for his work in environmental economics. He is
also part-time Professor of Economics at the University of Sussex. We are grateful to Josh Graff
Zivin, Michaela Pagel, Juan-Pablo Montero, Roberton Williams III, Bernard Sinclair-Desgagne,
Charles Mason and seminar participants at University of Paris, University of Wisconsin at
Madison and CIRANO Montreal for constructive discussions. Errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Anthony Heyes, Matthew Neidell, and Soodeh Saberian. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Air Pollution on Investor Behavior: Evidence from the S&P 500
Anthony Heyes, Matthew Neidell, and Soodeh Saberian
NBER Working Paper No. 22753
October 2016
JEL No. G02,J24,Q53
ABSTRACT
We provide detailed empirical evidence of a direct effect of air pollution on the efficient
operation of the New York Stock Exchange, linking short-term variations in fine particulate
matter (PM2.5) in Manhattan to movements in the S&P 500. The effects are substantial – a one
standard deviation increases in ambient PM2.5 reduces same-day returns by 11.9% in our
preferred specification – and remarkably robust to a variety of specifications and a battery of
robustness and falsification checks. Furthermore, the intra-day effects that we observe are
difficult to reconcile with competing hypotheses. Despite investors being dispersed
geographically we find strong evidence that the effect is strictly local in nature, consistent with
the high concentration of market influencers in New York. While we are agnostic as to the
underlying mechanism, we provide evidence suggestive of the role of decreased risk tolerance
operating through pollution-induced changes in mood or cognitive function.
Anthony Heyes
Department of Economics
University of Ottawa
Faculty of Social Sciences
120 University, Room 9029
Ottawa CANADA K1N 6N5
Anthony.Heyes@uottawa.ca
Matthew Neidell
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
722 W 168th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
mn2191@columbia.edu

Soodeh Saberian
Department of Economics
University of Ottawa
120 University Private
Ottawa, Canada K1N 6N5
saberian.soodeh@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Despite the long-standing theoretical appeal of the efficient market hypothesis
(Fama, 1965), researchers have uncovered significant empirical deviations from it.
Findings have included unexplained movements in aggregate prices, such as excessive
price volatility (Shiller, 1981) and the equity premium puzzle (Mehra and Prescott,
1985), inadequate incorporation of new information (Roll, 1984), the inexplicable role of
location specific factors (Froot and Dabora, 1999), and the influence of trader emotions
due to external stimuli (Saunders, 1993; Kamstra et al., 2003; Cueva at al., 2015).
Building on emerging economic evidence that links air pollution with a wide range of
human impacts, including cognition, mood and worker productivity (Graff Zivin and
Neidell, 2012; Chang et al., 2016; Lavy et al., 2014), we push this one step further by
looking at the effect of local air pollution on stock market returns. While we remain
largely agnostic on the precise mechanisms at play, we hypothesize that pollution
decreases the risk attitudes of investors via short-term changes in brain and/or physical
health.
Specifically, we estimate the effect of plausibly exogenous short-run changes in
fine particulate matter (PM2.5) in Manhattan over a 15 year period on daily returns of the
S&P 500, one of the most commonly used benchmarks for the overall New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE). 2 The stocks quoted on the S&P 500 come from firms widely
differentiated by activity and geography, making it unlikely that daily variations in the
fundamentals that determine the fair value of those firms could be correlated with daily

2

Some recent correlational studies on air pollution and investor behavior include Lepori (2016), Li and
Peng (2016), and Demir and Ersan (2016). Our analysis extends on this research through extensive
attention to potential sources of confouding.

2

variations in air quality in the vicinity of Wall Street. We control flexibly for a wide
range of potentially-confounding meteorological considerations and other air pollutants
to isolate the effect of PM2.5 from competing environmental factors. Furthermore, by
controlling for time-specific factors using day of week fixed effects and year-by-week
fixed effects, our analysis excludes many additional potential confounding factors, such
as the well-established effect of length of day on investor mood (Kamstra et al., 2003).
We find a significant negative effect of PM2.5 on S&P 500 returns. In our
preferred specification, a one standard deviation increase in daily ambient PM2.5
concentrations causes a statistically significant 11.9% reduction in daily percentage
returns. The magnitude is comparable to estimates of the effect of variations in daily
weather conditions on returns (Goetzmann and Zhu, 2005; Hirshleifer et al., 2003). The
result proves remarkably robust to a variety of different assumptions about confounding
and a variety of falsification checks. We drill further into the data by conducting an intraday analysis. We find that PM2.5 concentrations throughout the day, but not the other
environmental variables, affect returns; this pattern is consistent with PM2.5 having indoor
penetration rates of over 90%, making it difficult to reconcile with competing hypotheses.
Critics of such local-based effects point out that any inefficient behavior by
Manhattan-based investors creates arbitrage opportunities for those located elsewhere.
This would imply our results are spurious, and air quality in New York City serves as a
proxy for more general changes in the fundamental value of stocks traded in the S&P
500. Since these stocks come from firms whose activities are widely dispersed across the
country and beyond, we can explore this threat by testing specifically for a local effect.
Using data from all pollution monitors across the U.S., we find that pollution in New

3

York City has by far the largest effect and is the only significant one. This makes it
implausible that unobserved variations in macroeconomic conditions – which could in
theory influence air quality and stock price movements simultaneously – are driving the
results. This points to the primacy of the attitudes of Manhattan-based market-makers, or
the particular concentration of investors and those exercising discretion in investment
decisions who work in and around Wall Street, in influencing price movements
(consistent with Goetzmann and Zhu, 2005).
Although several candidate mechanisms may explain the results, we investigate
the potential role that pollution-induced changes in risk aversion may play by examining
the effects of PM2.5 on movements in the volatility index (VIX). The VIX, which
measures the expected stock market volatility, is widely considered a measure of fear
amongst traders. We find that increases in PM2.5 lead to increases in the VIX.
Furthermore, decomposing the VIX into its risk and uncertainty elements, we find that
the effects only exist for the ‘pure’ risk aversion component. These findings suggest that
pollution-induced changes in risk appetite may be an important part of the story.
The results are important for at least two reasons. First, recent research on the
effect of pollution on worker productivity has focused either on work in outdoor settings
and/or in low skilled occupations (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2012; Chang et al., 2016). As
such, the existing results are only pertinent for a small subset of employment in the U.S.
and comparably developed economies. By focusing on financial market professionals, we
extend this to include a set of indoor workers in a highly-skilled, cognitively-demanding
occupation, suggesting the detrimental effect of pollution on workplace performance is
even more widespread than previously believed.

4

Second, at a macroeconomic level, an effect of pollution on stock returns points to
another channel through which a polluted natural environment undermines the efficient
operation of a modern economy. Stock price variations send investment signals across the
whole of the U.S. and international economy - that is their purpose - and a wellfunctioning stock market is a fundamental foundation for the efficiency claims made for
market-based economies. Thus, a significant impact of pollution upon daily returns
implies departure from the efficient markets hypothesis. In short, variations in air quality
in Manhattan – by affecting the investment sentiments of NYSE-based traders – causes
inefficient price signals rippling out across the wider economy.
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. In Section 2 we review the evidence
that points to a link from individual exposure to PM2.5 to stock market returns. In Section
3 we outline data sources. In Section 4 we set out our empirical strategy. Section 5
presents the main results and those from a series of robustness checks. Section 6
concludes.

2. Pollution Exposure and Stock Market Returns
In order for daily local pollution levels to influence stock market returns on the
same day, a link from local pollution to an aspect of decision making relevant for stock
market returns must exist. In this section, we describe several mechanisms that might
underpin such a link. Though later we will have something to say about the possible role
of risk appetite, the contribution of this paper is not to choose between mechanisms, as a
number of the candidates might sensibly be expected to work in the same direction.

5

In brief, we posit that changes in air pollution have a variety of well-established
impacts on the human body and mind. These changes can affect investor decision making
via changes in factors such as risk appetite, choice bracketing behavior and mood. Such
changes in decisions by marginal investors or market-makers – physically located in New
York – affect movements in prices on the NYSE.

2.1. Pollution and health
We focus on fine particulate matter (PM2.5), which consists of solid and liquid
particles in the air less than 2.5 micrometers in diameter. Although natural sources, such
as forest fires, contribute to PM2.5 levels in New York City, the bulk of PM2.5 comes from
anthropogenic sources resulting from fossil fuel combustion by automobiles, industry,
and commercial and residential heat sources. According to the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, about 70% of PM2.5 in the city comes from sources
outside the urban area (US EPA 2004a, Figure 5), transported by wind and air
movements from the surrounding region.
Wall Street traders face PM2.5 exposure at various times during the day. Although
spending time outdoors, such as when traveling to work, is one important period of
exposure, indoor time is also pertinent. Given its diminutive size, PM2.5 easily enters
buildings, with penetration ranging from 70–100 percent (Thatcher and Layton, 1995;
Ozkaynak et al., 1996; Vette et al., 2001). Unlike other common air pollutants - which
either remain outside or break down very rapidly once indoors - going inside reduces
one’s exposure to PM2.5 only minimally.

6

The tiny sizes of the particles that make up PM2.5 also make this pollutant
particularly pernicious. It penetrates deep into human lungs and passes beyond into the
circulatory system to induce both respiratory and cardiovascular effects (Seaton et al.,
1995). A large body of toxicological and epidemiological evidence suggests that
exposure to PM2.5 harms a range of health outcomes (see US EPA 2004b for a review).
These risks may manifest themselves in clearly defined episodes, such as asthma attacks
and heart attacks, which lead to hospitalizations and mortality (Dockery and Pope, 1994;
Pope, 2000). They also lead to more subtle effects, such as changes in blood pressure,
irritation in the ear, nose, throat, and lungs, and mild headaches (Pope, 2000; Sorenson et
al., 2003); Ghio et al., 2000). These milder effects, which arise from exposure to lower
levels of PM2.5, are generally unobserved by the econometrician – they typically do not
lead to healthcare encounters – and in some cases may be largely unnoticed even by the
individual experiencing them. These more subtle effects may instead show up in, for
example, diminished work performance (Chang et al., 2016).
Symptoms from PM2.5 exposure can arise soon after exposure, but can also
sustain for hours and even days afterwards. This points to the need the need to allow for
contemporaneous and lagged effects of pollution in our analysis.
More recent evidence also links PM2.5 with cognitive effects. While cognitive
effects may arise indirectly through impaired respiratory functioning, a direct route exists
through changes in blood flow and circulation (Pope and Dockery, 2006). For example,
since the brain consumes a large fraction of the oxygen needs of the body, any
deterioration in blood supply can affect cognitive output (Clarke et al., 1999).

7

Furthermore, unlike other pollutants, the size of PM2.5 also allows it to travel up the
olfactory axon and enter the brain directly (Wang et al., 2007).
Empirical evidence documents cognitive effects on humans shortly after
exposure. Lavy et al. (2014) show that increased same-day PM2.5 in the vicinity of an
exam venue significantly decreases exam scores of Israeli students in the standardized
national Bagrut test. Archsmith et al. (2016) show that the decision-making accuracy of
Major League Baseball umpires falls as ambient PM2.5 in the vicinity of the baseball
stadium increases on game-day. In recent experimental evidence, Allen et al. (2016)
randomly assigned professional-grade employees to work in simulated office
environments with artificially manipulated indoor air quality. 3 They found that cognitive
scores - particularly in the domains of ‘strategy’ and ‘information usage’ - declined
significantly on days with worse indoor air quality.

2.2. Health and decision making
The changes in health of the body and brain induced by pollution exposure can
affect decision-making in various ways. Indirectly, health can affect decision-making
through changes in resource allocation (Grossman, 1972). More directly, health can
affects one’s mood and emotions through the physical discomfort caused by the onset of
illness, which can affect decision making.
While the effects of cognition on some dimensions of decision-making are selfevident – decision-making is in itself a cognitive function – there are additional channels
relevant for investor behavior. Dohmen et al. (2010) elicited measures of risk appetite
3

The study did not investigate PM2.5 directly but instead studied volatile organic compounds - a key
precursor for PM2.5 in urban centers - and carbon dioxide.

8

and time preference, finding that risk appetite and degree of patience were increasing in
how well a subject scored in a cognitive task administered on the same day. While they
offer the theory of ‘choice bracketing’ – making decisions by comparing choices in
isolation rather than as a group – as an explanation for this effect (Tversky and
Kahneman, 1981), bracketing may also be part of the change in decision-making induced
by diminished cognition. For example, Rabin and Weizsacker (2010) and Abeler and
Marklein (2016) show that improved math performance, an important part of an
investor’s toolkit, reduces narrow bracketing.

2.3. Decision making and stock market returns
There is a well-established link from changes in risk aversion to financial decision
making. Increased risk aversion leads investors to shift away from risky assets such as
stocks, which lowers the returns on the market. An exogenous increase in risk aversion
among a subset of investors would be expected to reduce same-day return. This occurs as
the newly more risk averse investors move to reduce their risk exposure. Patience is also
long viewed as an essential ingredient in stock choices; it enables investors to focus on
the long term and ride out the short-run ups and downs. Similarly, choice bracketing can
also affect the type of stocks chosen as traders shift away from more complex choices
into simpler choices with lower returns.
More generally much of the recent behavioral finance literature focuses on the
emotional and visceral influences on financial behavior - how trading is influenced by
“how people are feeling.” The link from mood to stock returns has been the subject of a
large and robust literature; see Saunders (1993) and the subsequent studies. Central to

9

these articles is the notion that changes in mood induced by the weather affect the
decisions of investors, in particular inducing them to shift to safer bets. Again, the effect
of mood is conjectured to work through induced increases in risk aversion (see, for
example, Kamstra (2003)).
Last, it is worth making explicit that the proposed link hinges on the existence of
a local effect from air quality. Although many traders are physically present at the NYSE,
others are located elsewhere and trade electronically. Moreover, even those physically
present on the trading floor might be receiving instructions from people located anywhere
in the world. Consistent with Saunders (1993), we assume that the marginal investors
trade in New York, such that traders physically present can be expected to significantly
influence stock prices. In addition, even those geographically dispersed investors need to
contract with a physically present trader, and traders seek to affect prices in favor of their
investors (Hirshleifer et al., 2003).
A counter-acting effect is that the inefficient behavior of local investors creates an
arbitrage opportunity for investors outside the city (Goetzmann and Zhu, 2005; Loughran
and Schultz, 2004; Jacobsen and Marquering, 2008; Chang et al., 2008; Cao and Wei,
2005). To the extent that this counter-action were perfect we would see no net effect of
local air quality on aggregate returns, suggesting that the null hypothesis would prevail.
We will take great care to build a convincing case for a local effect of PM2.5
concentrations on stock market returns in the same location.

3. Data
The central part of our analysis exploits daily level data from a variety of sources.

10

3.1 Stock market returns
The main dependent variable of interest is the daily percentage returns on the U.S.
S&P 500. The S&P 500 index, the most widely-cited NYSE index, is designed to
measure performance of the broad domestic economy through changes in the aggregate
market value of 500 stocks representing all major industries.
We use the value-weighted daily records from January 2000 through November
2014 to compute the daily returns. 4 We obtain the data on the S&P 500 from Datastream
(https://forms.thomsonreuters.com/datastream/). Table 1 shows the daily percentage
return of .025 over the sample period, a value comparable to previous estimates.
In our investigation of risk aversion as a potential mechanism we use the Chicago
Board Options Exchange (CBOE) Volatility Index (VIX). The VIX represents the
expected range of movement in the S&P 500 index over the next year. It is a widely used
proxy for market risk aversion, popularly referred to as the “fear index” or the “investor
fear gauge” (Coudert and Gex, 2008; Whaley, 2009). The daily VIX index data is
obtained from Factset (http://www.factset.com/) for the same dates as the S&P 500.
Table 1 also reports the daily mean VIX of 21.22.
Given the time-series nature of the data we first seek to verify the stationarity of
each series to rule out the possibility of spurious results due to time trends. We begin
with a graphical analysis. Figure 1 plots the daily percentage return of the S&P 500 for
the study period. Although the plot shows significant activity around major stock events,

4

We begin our analysis in 2000 because this is when PM2.5 became routinely reported on a daily basis from
the pollution monitor we use.

11

it appears stationary in pattern, a finding consistent with previous studies. 5 The results of
a Dickey-Fuller test presented in Table 1 indicate that we can formally reject the null
hypothesis of the existence of a unit root. Likewise, Figure 2 plots the daily VIX price
for the study period. The increase in VIX around the financial crisis supports the
construct validity of this measure. Again there is no obvious drift present, a finding also
supported by the results of a Dickey-Fuller test presented in Table 1.

3.2 Air quality and weather
Air quality data is obtained from the New York State monitoring network
designed to comply with the federal regulations set forth by the US Environmental
Protection Agency. We collect hourly measures of PM2.5, carbon monoxide, and ozone at
the Division Street monitoring station in Lower Manhattan (monitor number 36-0610134), the station closest to the NYSE (located only 0.72 miles away). 6
Weather data is obtained from two sources. Hourly observations for air
temperature, dew point, air pressure and wind speed are retrieved from the Air Quality
System (AQS) of the US Environmental Protection Agency. They are drawn from the
weather monitoring station at Susan Wagner High School, Staten Island (monitor number
36-085-0067), which is the closest station to the NYSE with consistent data throughout
our study period. Data for cloud cover and precipitation come from LaGuardia airport

5

We performed an analysis omitting the period of the financial crisis (October to December 2008
inclusive) and estimates were largely undisturbed.
6
In a robustness check instead of using the pollution measure from the closest air quality monitoring
station we use a measure of Manhattan-average pollution levels by constructing an inverse distanceweighted average level of PM2.5 records at the three monitoring stations within 10 miles of the NYSE (until
December, 2006, there were only two monitoring stations within 10 miles of the NYSE). Results using the
Manhattan average were very close to those presented here.

12

monitoring station (monitor number USW00014732) of the Quality Controlled Local
Climatological Database of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA).
For all environmental variables, we compute the daily average as the twenty-four
hour period from 4:00 PM to 3:59 PM to match the end of the NYSE trading day. Rather
than start the daily measure when the NYSE opens, we allow for the possible delay in
effects within a day from PM2.5 exposure, as the effects of PM2.5 take some time before
manifesting. This definition also excludes concentrations that arise after trading closes,
which logically can have no effect. In addition we perform a more flexible analysis by
using all environmental variables in two-hour blocks.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for all environmental variables. Air quality
has improved greatly in New York over time. The mean daily PM2.5 over the time period
is 11.53, below the annual air quality standards of 15 that applied at this time. 7 The
maximum PM2.5 during this period is 75.86, with 66 days where daily values exceeded
the daily air quality standard of 35.

4. Econometric Model
To investigate the effect of PM2.5 levels on daily returns, we estimate the
following equation via ordinary least squares (OLS):

(1)

7

rt = β0 + β1rt−1 + β2rt−2 + β3PM2.5t + Wtβ4 + Ptβ5 + Φt + εt.

The current annual standard is 12.0.

13

The variable rt is the S&P 500 percent return on date t. Following standard practice, we
include two lags of the dependent variables (rt−1 and rt−2) to control for any residual autocorrelation. 8 The independent variable of interest is the daily measure of fine particulate
matter, PM2.5. Our main interest lies in the parameter β3, which relates daily PM2.5 to
daily stock market returns.
Weather conditions are known to influence stock market returns. We control for
them in the vector Wt which contains temperature, dew point, precipitation, wind speed,
air pressure and cloud cover. The vector Pt contains measures of other pollutants that
might have an independent effect on returns: daily mean measures of 1-hour ozone and 8hour carbon monoxide.
The vector Φt contains various time fixed-effects. It includes day of the week
dummy variables to flexibly allow for different returns throughout the week. It also
includes a “tax dummy” that indicates the first five trading days and the last trading day
of the tax year to account for tax-loss selling. 9 Moreover, it includes year-by-week
dummy variables to capture seasonality and other temporal patterns. 10 Amongst other
things, the year-by-week dummy variables serve to control fully for any possible impact
of length of day on returns, of the sort studied by Kamstra et al. (2003) and pursuant

8

For examples see Goetzmann and Zhu, 2005; Loughran and Schultz, 2004; Jacobsen and Marquering,
2008; Chang et al., 2008; Kamstra et al., 2003; Saunders, 1993; Hirshleifer et al., 2003.
9
Consistent with the tax-loss selling hypothesis, US firms have been show to experience higher returns
during the first few trading days of January (Reinganum, 1983).
10
The seasonality of stock market returns is well-established (Kamstra et al., 2012; Heston and Sadka,
2008; Wang et al., 1997; and Kohers and Patel, 1999). However, the results of Levy and Yagil, 2012; Brusa
and Liu (2004) point to year-by-week dummies as the most appropriate controls in this setting.

14

literature. Finally, εt is an error term that allows for arbitrary serial correlation within a
week using Newey-West standard errors. 11
Our main assumption for identifying β3 is that PM2.5 is uncorrelated with ε
conditional on the covariates included. One potential threat is that stock market returns
are driven by the fundamentals of a firm – none of which we observe – and
environmental policy affects these fundamentals (as well as PM2.5). For example,
complying with environmental policy might raise the general operating costs to a firm,
leading to worker layoffs and plant closure, but also lower pollution levels. While such an
argument might have credibility if we were studying annualized or other lower frequency
data, our focus on high-frequency (daily and even hourly) variation in PM2.5 eliminates
this concern. Also note that the firms that comprise the S&P500 have headquarters and
operations all over the country and the wider world. What we identify is a specifically
local effect, as we link air quality particular to New York to stock price movements, and
not air quality at other locations.
A second concern is that PM2.5 is correlated with other local environmental
influences that vary on a daily basis, such as weather and other pollutants. As already
noted, weather has a well-known relationship with stock returns. It is also seems
plausible that other pollutants might affect returns through similar mechanisms as PM2.5.
To limit this concern, we control directly for weather and co-pollutants in equation (1).
Furthermore, for temperature and humidity - which we expect to be the most likely
confounders - we control flexibly by way of a series of indicator ‘bins’ of width 2.5
degrees. This allows for possible threshold effects and other non-linearity in impacts.
11

Using different lengths of time for the Newey-West correction had a minimal impact on our standard
errors.

15

Moreover, the year-by-week indicators also further control for weather to the extent that
it is constant within a week. For example, weather is highly serially correlated over a few
days, so controlling for the year-week allows us to compare different PM2.5 levels within
that small time period where weather remains stable. To further challenge the
specification we conduct a pair of further tests. First, a sensitivity analysis where we
exclude all meteorological variables and co-pollutant controls. Second, to further probe
the possibility that we are failing to adequately capture the effect of rain we re-estimate
our preferred specification on that subsample of days where realized precipitation was
zero.
We further isolate the role of PM2.5, as opposed to other daily varying
confounders, by performing intra-day analysis using hourly data. The advantage of this
specification is that, because the NYSE is a climate controlled environment, most
environmental factors do not penetrate indoors. Of the environmental factors we
consider, PM2.5 is the only one that penetrates effectively. Therefore, we would expect
weather and co-pollutant conditions at, say, 10am to have no effect on returns, whereas
PM2.5 levels at 10am should have an effect on returns, if it has an effect at all. 12
The upper panel in Figure 3 plots daily PM2.5 levels and the lower panel the daily
PM2.5 residuals after controlling for weather controls and time dummies. The lower panel
makes clear that there is plenty of variation in pollution levels that is independent of
weather conditions. It is this variation that underpins our identification.

12

Our continued focus on daily returns is inconsequential for the hourly analysis: any effect on hourly
returns should be reflected in daily returns. Note that we cannot predict the differential magnitude of the
hourly effects since this would require us to know the speed at which exposure translates into changes in
decision making.

16

5. Results

5.1 Main Results
Table 2 contains our main results, with the estimates in column 1 corresponding
with equation (1). The coefficient on PM2.5 of -.0171 is statistically significant at the 1%
level. This estimate indicates that a one unit increase in PM2.5 decreases the daily
percentage returns by 1.7%. Put differently, a one standard deviation increase in PM2.5
decreases the daily percentage returns by 11.9%, a substantial effect on daily NYSE
returns.
As PM2.5 can remain in the body for several days and may have a delayed effect
on health, in columns two and three we include one and two lags of PM2.5, respectively.
Since we are already controlling for lagged returns, this specification will capture any
cumulative effects to the extent they exist. Although the lags are also negative in
direction, they do not obtain statistical significance at conventional levels. Furthermore,
the contemporaneous effect remains more or less unchanged, suggesting the immediacy
of the effects of PM2.5 on returns.
As a falsification test, we add one and two leads of PM2.5. Pollution in the future
should not affect returns today, so finding an effect from future returns would suggest
model misspecification. Shown in columns four and five, we find that the coefficients on
the leads are small in size, mixed in sign, and never statistically significant. Again the
coefficient on contemporaneous PM2.5 remains more or less unchanged.

5.2 Sensitivity analysis

17

A concern already noted is the possible confounding role played by weather
variables and other pollutants. We already include a wide suite of controls (including
flexible controls for temperature and dew point) in the main specification, but to further
probe this issue we conduct three robustness checks, with the results summarized in
Table 3.
First, we exclude all weather variables entirely. If weather variables correlated
with PM2.5 are important confounders then omitting them should appreciably change our
results. The results of this exercise, summarized in column 1, shows minimal changes in
our estimates, from -.0171 to -.0178. This suggests that although weather may have an
influence on returns it is not in a way that is correlated with PM2.5. 13 While we cannot
rule out some other unobserved meteorological confounder, the fact that omitting the six
major meteorological factors does not disturb our result limits this concern.
Second, we dig deeper into the possible confounding role of precipitation.
Precipitation may impact mood directly, and also plays an important role in influencing
PM2.5 levels. As a further check we conduct a sub-sample analysis by limiting ourselves
to days on which no precipitation occurred. 14 The results, shown in column three, provide
an estimate of -.0145, again quite close to our original estimate. This suggests that
precipitation is unlikely to be a major source of confounding.
In column 3 we present the results of a third exercise, similar to the first except
now focusing on the role of co-pollutants. Since many pollutants have short-term health
impacts, and fossil fuels contribute to their formation, it is possible that we are falsely

13

We present the coefficients for weather in the appendix table and the hourly analysis.
Recall that we have defined a day not by the calendar but as the twenty four hour block of time from 4
PM one day to 4 PM the next.
14

18

attributing some of the effect of those to PM2.5. Again, although we cannot test whether
other, unobserved pollutants confound this relationship, we can test the extent to which
the pollutants we do observe confound this relationship. Excluding the co-pollutant
controls from the regression causes the estimate on our coefficient of interest to rise from
-.0171 to -.0205. This rather minimal change suggests that other pollutants are unlikely to
represent a source of omitted variable bias.
Another potential concern is the role of traffic; traffic increases pollution, but can
also lead to stress, which may affect returns. To assess this, we add to our regression
daily traffic data, obtained from the 3 traffic monitors located in Manhattan. 15 Shown in
column (4) of Table 3, adding traffic scarcely affects the coefficient on PM2.5, suggesting
traffic is not a source of confounding.
An additional concern in interpreting our results is that the volume of stocks
traded may also change as a result of in response to pollution, potentially conflating our
estimates as both a volume and a price effect. To assess this possibility, we re-estimate
equation (1) using the volume of stocks traded as the dependent variable. Shown in
column (5) of Table 3, we find a small, statistically insignificant relationship between
PM2.5 and trade volume. Furthermore, if we include trade volume as a covariate in our
main specification, the coefficient on PM2.5 remains largely similar (not shown). These
results suggest that our results are capturing a pure price effect.

15

Continuous volume traffic data is obtained from the Department of Transportation (DOT) for the New
York Metropolitan Transportation Council (NYMTC), available at
https://www.dot.ny.gov/divisions/engineering/technical-services/highway-data-services/hdsb. The traffic
monitors are Manhattan Span (id: 040920), Exit 29A Manhattan Bridge (id: 104745), and Manhattan
Bridge Over (id: 127951).

19

Although we hypothesize that PM2.5 affects stocks prices through investor
behavior, the fundamental value of each stock has not changed. Therefore, stock prices
should recover in the days after an increase in pollution occurs. To assess this, we replace
the dependent variable in equation (1) with future S&P 500 returns. If the stock market
recovers, then we expect pollution today to have a positive effect on returns in the future.
Table 4 presents results consistent with this. Returns on day t+1 are positive and
statistically significant, and completely offset the negative effect from day t. As we move
further into the future the coefficients are all statistically insignificant, and become
increasingly smaller in magnitude.

5.3 Placebo tests
A potential challenge to our inference is that unobserved macroeconomic changes
may impact both PM2.5 levels in New York and NYSE price movements. Exogenously
occurring positive macroeconomic news today might lead to both a rise in the price of
stocks and at the same time an increase in pollution in urban centers as real economic
activity expands. Failing to account for such news in our regression could lead us to
claim a spurious causal relationship from air pollution to stock price movements.
Although this seems unlikely given the high frequency of data used, to further limit any
such concerns we execute two placebo checks. 16
First, we re-estimate our preferred specification 43 times, in each case replacing
the New York PM2.5 series with the analogous series from each of 43 other US cities. We

16

Note that macroeconomic fluctuations, to the extent they might bias our results, would likely bias them
downward. Insofar as the story just told was to pass muster, it would imply a positive association between
daily PM2.5 and stock price movements, whereas our analysis generates negative coefficients throughout.

20

chose those cities that (a) were over 250 miles from New York City and (b) were such
that data was available to provide daily measures for 80% of days in our study period. 17
Insofar as macroeconomic variations mattered, we would expect these to be reflected in
air quality in cities across the country, not just in New York, and so would expect to
detect pollution levels in other locations affecting S&P 500 returns. The upper panel in
Figure 4 plots the estimated coefficients on the respective PM2.5 placebo series by city. 28
of the placebo series generate a positive coefficient, 15 negative. In terms of size all are
much smaller than the baseline estimate using the New York series – the next largest
coefficient is -.00646, which is a third of the size of our main estimate. The lower panel
plots the associated p-values for the placebo PM2.5 coefficients and show that none obtain
significance at the 10% level, and only a small number at the 20% level. Together this
leads us to conclude that the effect we identify is indeed a local one.
As a second test, we conduct a similar exercise by replacing the same-day New
York PM2.5 series with the series taken from that same city but on 1,000 different,
randomly-selected dates. We do this by randomly re-ordering the PM2.5 values within
New York, and re-estimating the preferred version of the model but using the falsely
assigned PM2.5 levels. Insofar as our claim of a contemporaneous effect of air quality on
investor behavior and stock market outcomes is valid, we would not expect this placebo
series to have significant explanatory power. Figure 5 confirms that this is indeed the
case. The upper panel plots the estimated coefficients on the placebo series, ordered by
magnitude. It can be seen that roughly half generate positive coefficients, half negative.

17

Some locations monitor PM2.5 every 3 or 6 days. We excluded cities less than 250 miles from New York
because they could reasonably be affected by New York activity. Nonetheless, the estimates using data
from these closer cities also supported our results (available upon request).

21

The lower panel again plots the associated p-values, and we observe that in 40 out of
1,000 cases the placebo series prove significant at the 5% level. This is roughly what we
would expect of the coefficient estimates obtained for a series of irrelevant regressors
inserted in turn into the regression.

5.4 Non-linear estimates
In our baseline specification we have assumed a linear relationship between PM2.5
and investor behavior. We probe for possible non-linearity by including separate
indicators for every 5 µg/m3 of PM2.5 (with > 25 as the highest bin). In addition to
enabling us to test for any non-linearity, such as threshold effects, this also serves as a
robustness check: if PM2.5 affects returns, then higher levels of PM2.5 should have larger
effects. The results from this analysis, shown in Figure 6, while somewhat noisy,
generally support a linear effect of PM2.5 as the coefficients are nearly monotonically
increasing in PM2.5. Only estimates from the two highest bins are statistically significant,
though both are below the current daily air quality standard of 35 µg/m3. This suggests
that effects arise even when PM2.5 complies with environmental regulations.

5.5 Intra-day analysis
While the central results thus far presented rely on daily variations in pollution
and weather, the fine-grained nature of the data gives us the opportunity to explore intraday effects. Since exposure to the elements can have nearly immediate effects, we
investigate this by constructing average pollution and weather measures over two-hour
time blocks. Using these measures, we modify equation (1) as follows:

22

(2)

rt = β0 + β1rt−1 + β2rt−2 + ∑jβ3jPM2.5tj + ∑jWtjβ4j + ∑jPtjβ5j + Φt + εt.

In this equation, we enter PM2.5, weather (W), and other pollutants (P) in two-hour
blocks, ranging from j = 12:00 AM – 1:59 AM to 10:00 PM to 11:59 AM. 18
The key feature of this analysis is the difference in the ability of environmental
variables to penetrate indoors. Investors are largely outdoors when traveling to work at
the NYSE and thus exposed to all elements at that time. Once on the trading floor, the
climate-controlled environment in the NYSE significantly reduces exposure though does
not eliminate all sources. In fact, of the variables considered we only expect PM2.5 to
have an effect during the day because of its high indoor penetration rates. 19 Therefore, we
only expect weather to affect traders during commuting hours while PM2.5 might affect
traders even once indoors.
One concern with this analysis is whether there is sufficient independent variation
in hourly pollution. Figure 7 plots average hourly PM2.5, both for the entire year and only
for the summer months (July and August). Two immediate patterns suggest ample
variation in PM2.5. First, PM2.5 peaks at 8 AM and at 7 PM, a very different pattern from
temperature, which peaks midday. Second, PM2.5 levels decrease in the summer, again
very different from temperature, which increases in the summer.

18

To keep the number of coefficients feasible, we restrict all environmental variables to enter linearly. Note
that solar radiation is entered daily rather than hourly.
19
For example, imagine a day that has a constant temperature of 85F and constant PM2.5 level of 10 µg/m3
every. As workers travel to the office they are exposed to both this temperature and PM2.5 level. Once
workers reach the NYSE, the temperature to which they are exposed changes to that indoors at the climatecontrolled exchange, while the PM2.5 to which they are exposed remains approximately unchanged.

23

Note that we cannot predict the relative magnitudes of the hourly PM2.5 responses
for three reasons. One, penetration rates are not 100%, and we do not have measures of
indoor PM2.5 at the exchange. Two, although the effects from PM2.5 can be expected to
reveal themselves in the first few hours after exposure, we cannot pinpoint the exact time
at which it affects workers. Three, there may be cumulative effects from PM2.5 exposure
within the day that we cannot disentangle with an additively separable model. 20
In Figure 8 we display estimates from equation 2 for the hourly measures of
PM2.5, temperature and ozone. 21 Several findings stand out. First, consistent with prior
literature, temperature has a significant and positive effect, but only from 8 – 10 AM,
prime commuting hours. Warmer temperature on the journey to work - the usual story
would say - improves mood, reduces risk aversion and so in turn increases daily returns.
Second, ozone, a pollutant that does not penetrate indoors (and is not generally believed
to have cognitive effects) is never statistically significant. Third, PM2.5 has a statistically
significant effect from 6 – 8 AM, 8 – 10 AM, and 10 AM – 12 PM, which include a
period after traders and most other financial professionals are at work. The effect
becomes considerably smaller throughout the afternoon, possibly reflecting the delay
with which PM2.5 affects the body. Last, as expected we do not see effects in the evening
hours after the exchange has closed, a finding consistent with our lead tests from Table 2.
These hourly results further support our contention that PM2.5 has a causal effect on stock
market returns.

20

A richer model with interactions terms is not feasible given the number of additional variables and the
correlation in PM2.5 through the day.
21
Intra-day results for all environmental variables are available upon request.

24

5.6 Exploring risk aversion as mechanism
In Section 2 we summarized research that potentially links human exposure to
PM2.5 to decreased returns via increased risk aversion. Though we recognize the
possibility of other mechanisms - and indeed it may be that several mechanisms are at
work simultaneously - in this section we probe the idea that pollution-induced changes in
risk appetite may be playing a role by using data on the VIX index, a widely used proxy
for market risk aversion (Coudert and Gex, 2008); Whaley, 2009).
We estimate our main regressions using the VIX index as the dependent variable.
Our hypothesis of risk aversion as a potential mechanism underpinning our central results
would imply a positive coefficient on PM2.5. Table 5 reports the results from this analysis,
repeating the structure in Table 2. Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that PM2.5 has
a statistically significant positive relationship with the VIX. It implies that a one unit
increase in PM2.5 concentration increases the value of VIX by 1.9%. Similar to our
previous results, we find that adding leads and lags of PM2.5 does not substantially alter
our findings.
While the VIX is commonly used as a proxy for risk aversion, it reflects both
changes in taste for risk and in anticipated market volatility. We decompose the overall
measure into these two elements, referred to as the ‘risk aversion’ and ‘uncertainty’
components, respectively (Bekaert et al., 2013). 22 The results of re-estimation using each
of those components as dependent variables in turn are presented in Table 6. They
indicate that PM2.5 significantly increases the pure risk aversion component, but is

22

Following Bekeart et al (2013) we regress realized variance (computed using daily percentage returns)
on the 22-day lagged squared VIX and realized variance. The fitted value from this regression is the
estimated measure of ‘uncertainty’ and the residual is our ‘risk aversion’ proxy.

25

statistically unrelated to the uncertainty component. Sensitivity analyses including leads
and lags (not shown) mirror previous results that only contemporaneous PM2.5 matters.23
While not definitive, these results support pollution-induced risk aversion as a possible
mechanism linking changes in PM2.5 to changes in stock market returns.

6. Conclusion
The efficient markets hypothesis is a central tenet of neoclassical economics. We
provide the first empirical evidence of a causal link from air quality and the efficient
operation of financial markets. In particular, poor air quality in the city in which a stockmarket is based causes market prices to diverge from prices based on fundamentals.
When Manhattan-based traders are exposed to higher levels of PM2.5, the return on the
S&P 500 on that day is lowered. This is consistent with an induced fall in risk appetite
among a subset of traders, plausible given existing research on the role short-term
exposure to air pollution can have on brain health, cognition and risk attitude. The effects
are economically significant - a one standard deviation increases in ambient PM2.5
concentrations reduces same-day returns by 11.9% in our preferred specification - and
prove robust to a variety of specifications and a battery of robustness and falsification
checks. In the daily analysis which is central in the paper we take particular care to
isolate the role of pollution from weather factors - already known to affect mood and
trading behavior - using a variety of methods. Furthermore, the intra-day effects that we
observe are difficult to reconcile with competing hypotheses.

23

Results are also robust to the confounding sensitivity analysis done in Table 3.

26

Investors are widely dispersed. There is however a very strong concentration of
those who exercise financial discretion working in offices in New York - not just those
trading at the NYSE but wealth managers and other market-influencers more generally
(for example Blackrock, the world’s largest wealth management company is Manhattanbased). Furthermore the market-making activities are largely New York based. As such
we were particularly careful to investigate the geography of the effect. The results point
to a strictly local effect, as pollution levels in a wide set of other American cities are
unrelated to S&P 500 returns. This also rules out that the analysis is picking up
unaccounted for variations in macroeconomic circumstances that contemporaneously
influence stock market and pollution levels across cities.
The results can be seen as interesting on a number of levels. First, they provide
further evidence of the ubiquitous influence that the natural environment has on
important social and economic outcomes. Variations in the quality of air in Manhattan
systematically distort investment signals being sent out across the whole economy.
Second, if we consider returns as a metric for the productivity of an NYSE trader, the
results point to a detrimental effect of diminished air quality on the work performance of
this class of employee, so significantly extending the insight of recent research showing
similar impacts on the productivity of low-skilled workers.

27

7. Bibliography
Abeler, J. and F. Marklein (2016). Fungibility, Labels and Consumption. Forthcoming
Journal of the European Economic Association.
Allen, J. G., P. MacNaughton, U. Satish, S. Santanam, J. Vallarino and J. D. Spengler
(2016). Associations of Cognitive Function Scores with Carbon Dioxide, Ventilation and
Volatile Organic Compound Exposure in Office Workers: A Controlled Exposure Study
of Green and Conventional Office Environments. Environmental Health Perspective
124(6).
Archsmith, J., A. Heyes, A. and S. Saberian (2016). Air Quality and Error Quantity:
Pollution and Performance in a High-skilled, Quality-focused Occupation. Mimeograph,
Department of Economics, University of California at Davis.
Bekaert, G., M. Hoerova and M. L. Duca (2013). Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy.
Journal of Monetary Economics 60(7): 771–788.
Benjamin, D. J., O. Heffetz, M. S. Kimball and A. Rees-Jones (2012). What Do You
Think Would Make You Happier? What Do You Think You Would Choose? American
Economic Review 102(5): 2083–2110.
Bouman, S. and B. Jacobsen (2002). The Halloween Indicator, ‘Sell in May and Go
Away’: Another Puzzle. American Economic Review 92(5): 1618–1635.
Brusa, J. and P. Liu (2004). The Day-of-the-week and the Week-of-the-month Effect: An
Analysis of Investors’ Trading Activities. Review of Quantitative Finance and
Accounting 23(1): 19–30.
Campbell, J. Y., S. Grossman and J. Wang (1993). Trading Volume and Serial
Correlation in Stock Returns. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(4): 905–940.
Chang, S., S. Chen, R. K. Chou and Y. H. Lin (2008). Weather and Intraday Patterns in
Stock Returns and Trading Activity. Journal of Banking and Finance 32(9): 1754–1766.
Chang, T., J. Graff Zivin, T. Gross, T. and M. J. Neidell (2016). Particulate Pollution and
the Productivity of Pear Packers. Forthcoming American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy.
Cao, M. and J. Wei (2005). An Expanded Study on the Stock Market Temperature
Anomaly. Research in Finance 22: 73–112.
Clarke, D. and L. Sokoloff (1999). Circulation and Energy Metabolism of the Brain,
Chapter 31 in Eds. G. Siegel and B. Agranoff, Basic Neurochemistry (sixth edition)
Raven Press: New York.

28

Coudert, V. and M. Gex (2008). Does Risk Aversion Drive Financial Crises? Testing the
Predictive Power of Empirical Indicators. Journal of Empirical Finance 15(2): 167–184.
Cueva, C., R. E. Roberts, T. Spencer, N. Rani, M. Tempest, P. Tobler and A. Rustichini
(2015). Cortisol and Testosterone Increase Financial Risk-taking and May Destabilize
Markets. Nature (Scientific Reports) Article Number 11206.
Demir, Ender and Oguz Ersan (2016). “When stock market investors breathe polluted
air.” Entrepreneurship, Business and Economics 2: 705-720.
Dockery, D. W. and C. A. Pope (1994). Acute Respiratory Effects of Particulate Air
Pollution. Annual Review of Public Health 15(1): 107–132.
Dohmen, T. J., A. Falk, D. Huffman and U. Sunde (2010). Are Risk Aversion and
Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability? American Economic Review 3(100): 1238–
1260.
Eisenberg, T., S. Sundgren and M. T. Wells (1998). Larger Board Size and Decreasing
Firm Value in Small Firms. Journal of Financial Economics 48(1): 35–54.
Fama, Eugene (1965). “The Behavior of Stock-Market Prices.” The Journal of Business
38(1)
Froot, Kenneth and Emil Dabora (1999). “How are stock prices affected by the location
of trade?” Journal of Financial Economics 53(2).
Ghio, A. J., C. Kim and R. B. Devlin (2000). Concentrated Ambient Air Particles Induce
Mild Pulmonary Inflammation in Healthy Human Volunteers. American Journal of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 162(3): 981–988.
Goetzmann, W. N. and N. Zhu (2005). Rain or Shine: Where is the Weather Effect?
European Financial Management 11(5): 559–578.
Grossman, M. (1972). On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for
Health. Journal of Political Economy 80(2): 223–255.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2014). The Value of Corporate Culture. Journal
of Financial Economics 117(1): 60–76.
Hirshleifer, D. and T. Shumway (2003). Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and The
Weather. Journal of Finance 58(3): 1009–1032.
Jacobsen, B. and W. Marquering (2008). Is it the Weather? Journal of Banking and
Finance 32(4): 526–540.
Kamstra, M. J., L. A. Kramer and M. D. Levi (2012). A Careful Re-examination of
29

Seasonality in International Stock Markets: Comment on Sentiment and Stock Returns.
Journal of Banking and Finance 36(4): 934–956.
Kamstra, M. J., L. A. Kramer and M. D. Levi (2003). Winter Blues: A SAD Stock
Market Cycle. American Economic Review 93(1): 324–343.
Kelly, P. J. and F. Meschke, F. (2010). Sentiment and Stock Returns: The SAD Anomaly
Revisited. Journal of Banking and Finance 34(6): 1308–1326.
Kohers, T. and J. B. Patel (1999). A New Time-of-the-month Anomaly in Stock Index
Returns. Applied Economics Letters 6(2): 115–120.
Lavy, V., A. Ebenstein and S. Roth (2014). “The Impact of Short Term Exposure to
Ambient Air Pollution on Cognitive Performance and Human Capital Formation.” NBER
Working Paper #20648.
Lepori, Gabriele (2016). “Air pollution and stock returns: Evidence from a natural
experiment.” Journal of Empirical Finance 35: 25-42.
Levy, T. and J. Yagil (2012). “The Week-of-the-year Effect: Evidence from Around the
Globe.” Journal of Banking and Finance 36(7): 1963–1974.
Li, Q. and C.H. Peng (2016). “The stock market effect of air pollution: evidence from
China.” Applied Economics 48(36): 3442-3461.
Loughran, T. and P. Schultz (2004). Weather, Stock Returns and the Impact of Localized
Trading Behavior. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39(02): 343–364.
Mehra, R. and E. C. Prescott (1985). “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 15 (2).
Ozkaynak, H., J. Xue, J. Spengler, L. Wallace, E. Pellizzari and P. Jenkins (1995).
Personal Exposure to Airborne Particles and Metals: Results from the Particle TEAM
Study in Riverside, California. Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental
Epidemiology 6(1): 57–78.
Pope III, C. A. (2000). Epidemiology of Fine Particulate Air Pollution and Human
Health: Biologic Mechanisms and who is at Risk? Environmental Health Perspectives
108(4): 713–723.
Pope III, C. A. and D. W. Dockery (2006). Health Effects of Fine Particulate Air
Pollution: Lines that Connect. Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association
56(6): 709–742.
Rabin, M. and G. Weizsacker (2009). Narrow Bracketing and Dominated Choices.
American Economic Review 99(4): 1508–1543.
30

Reinganum, M. R. (1983). The Anomalous Stock Market Behavior of Small Firms in
January: Empirical Tests for Tax-loss Selling Effects. Journal of Financial Economics
12(1): 89–104.
Roll, Richard (1984). “Orange Juice and Weather.” American Economic Review 74(5).
Saunders, E. M. (1993). Stock Prices and Wall Street Weather. American Economic
Review 83(5): 1337–1345.
Seaton, A., D. Godden, W. MacNee and K. Donaldson (1995). Particulate Air Pollution
and Acute Health Effects. Lancet 345(8943): 176–178.
Shiller, Robert (1981). ““Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by Subsequent
Changes in Dividends?” American Economic Review 71(3).
Smoski, M. J., A. Rittenberg and G. S. Dichter (2011). Major Depressive Disorder is
Characterized by Greater Reward Network Activation to Monetary than Pleasant Image
Rewards. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 194(3): 263–270.
Thatcher, T. L. and D. W. Layton (1995). Deposition, Resuspension and Penetration of
Particles Within a Residence. Atmospheric Environment 29(13): 1487–1497.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1981). The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of
Choice. Science 211(4481): 453–458.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (2004a). The Particle Pollution Report:
Current Understanding of Air Quality and Emissions Through 2003. Office of Air
Quality Planning and Standards. Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (2004b). Air Quality Criteria for
Particulate Matter. National Center for Environmental Assessment (NCEA). Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina.
Vette, A. F., A. Rea, P. Lawless, C. E. Rhodes, G Evans, V. R. Highsmith and L. Sheldon
(2001). Characterization of Indoor-outdoor Aerosol Concentration Relationships During
the Fresno PM Exposure Studies. Aerosol Science and Technology 34(1): 118–126.
Wang, K., Y. Li and Erickson (1997). A New Look at the Monday Effect. Journal of
Finance 52(5): 2171–2186.
Whaley, R. E. (2009). Understanding the VIX. Journal of Portfolio Management 35(3):
98–105.

31

Figure 1: Daily Variation in S&P 500

Notes: This plot shows the daily percentage return in the S&P 500 over time.

32

Figure 2: Daily Variation in VIX

Notes: This plot shows the daily VIX price over time.

33

Figure 3: Daily Variation in PM2.5

Notes: The upper panel plots unadjusted daily PM2.5. The bottom panel plots PM2.5 adjusted for temperature
(2.5 degree indicators), dew point (2.5 degree indicators), air pressure, wind speed, precipitation, cloud
cover, ozone, carbon monoxide, day of week indicators, year-week indicators, and a tax dummy.

34

Figure 4: Falsely Assigned Pollution by City
A. Coefficients

New York

B. P-values

New York

Notes: Each circle represents the coefficient (panel A) or p-value (panel B) from a regression of that city’s
pollution on S&P 500 returns, controlling for one and two lagged returns, temperature (2.5 degree
indicators), dew point (2.5 degree indicators), air pressure, wind speed, precipitation, cloud cover, ozone,
carbon monoxide, day of week indicators, year-week indicators, and a tax dummy.

35

Figure 5: Falsely Assigned Pollution by Date
A. Coefficients

Correctly
assigned date

B. P-values
Correctly
assigned date

Notes: Each plot represents the coefficient (panel A) or p-value (panel B) from a regression of pollution on
S&P 500 returns, randomly re-assigning dates 1,000 times. The dashed line represents the estimated effect
from the correctly assigned dates. Regressions control for one and two lagged returns, temperature (2.5
degree indicators), dew point (2.5 degree indicators), air pressure, wind speed, precipitation, cloud cover,
ozone, carbon monoxide, day of week indicators, year-week indicators, and a tax dummy.

36

Figure 6: Non-linear Results

Notes: this figure plots the coefficients for PM2.5 indicator variables for each 5 units, with 0-5 as the
reference category. Gray dash lines represent the 95 percent confidence interval based on standard errors
clustered on week. The dependent variable is daily percentage stock market return. The regression includes
controls for temperature (2.5 degree indicators), solar radiation, dew point (2.5 degree indicators), air
pressure, wind speed, precipitation, ozone, carbon monoxide, tax dummy, day of week dummies and weekyear dummies.

37

Figure 7: Hourly PM2.5

All year
Summer
months

Notes: This figure plots the average PM2.5 levels by hour of day using all days in the year (white bars) and
all days in the summer months only (gray bars).

38

Figure 8: Hourly Effects of Temperature, Ozone and PM2.5
a. Temperature

b. Ozone

c. PM2.5

Notes: These graphs plot coefficients for each two-hour block of temperature, PM2.5, and ozone based on
results from one regression. The dependent variable is daily percentage stock market return. The regression
includes controls for solar radiation (daily), dew point (hourly), air pressure (hourly), wind speed (hourly),
precipitation (hourly), carbon monoxide (hourly), tax dummy, day of week dummies and week-year
dummies. Gray whiskers denote 95 percent confidence intervals.

39

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Daily percentage return
Dicky-Fuller test statistic for unit root
VIX price
Dicky-Fuller test statistic for unit root
PM2.5 (µ/m3)
Carbon monoxide 8-hour (ppm)
Ozone 8-hour (ppm)
Air pressure (pa)
Wind speed (km/h)
Average temperature (◦F)
Precipitation (mm)
Dew Point (◦F)
Cloud cover from sunrise to sunset (percent)

Mean
0.02
-64.08
21.22
-5.936
11.53
0.84
0.02
1006.54
99.51
55.58
31.74
82.06
64.15

Std. Dev.
1.28
9.04
6.97
0.40
0.01
9.20
110.70
17.32
90.85
14.54
16.78

Notes: Critical values for the Dickey-Fuller test statistic are -3.43 (1%), -2.86 (5%), and -2.57 (10%).

40

Table 2: Main Regression Results for the Effect of Pollution on S&P 500 Returns
(1)
Daily
-0.0168***
[0.0055]

(2)
1-Day Lag
-0.0166***
[0.0055]

(3)
2-Day Lag
-0.0180***
[0.0054]

(4)
1-Day Lead
-0.0174***
[0.0055]

(5)
2-Day Lead
-0.0178***
[0.0055]

PM2.5,t-1

-

-0.0042
[0.0047]

-0.0033
[0.0044]

-

-

PM2.5,t-2

-

-

-0.0044
[0.0053]

-

-

PM2.5,t+1

-

-

-

0.0028
[0.0045]

0.0033
[0.0046]

PM2.5,t+2

-

-

-

-

-0.0021
[0.0043]

3722

3722

3722

3722

3722

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

PM2.5,t

Observations
Time
Dummies
Weather
Co-pollutants

Notes: The dependent variable is daily percentage return of the S&P500 index. Newey-West standard
errors allowing for arbitrary serial correlation within a week in brackets. Weather covariates include
temperature (2.5 degree indicators), dew point (2.5 degree indicators), air pressure, wind speed,
precipitation and cloud cover. Co-pollutant covariates include ozone and carbon monoxide. Time dummies
include day of week, year-week and tax dummy. All environmental variables are the mean of daily values.
* significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

41

Table 3: Sensitivity Analyses

PM2.5,t
Observations

(1)
No Weather
Controls
-0.0178***
[0.0051]
3722

(2)
Zero Precip.
-0.0142*
[0.0075]
2492

(3)
No Copollutants
-0.0140***
[0.0053]
3722

(4)
Traffic
Inclusion
-0.0167***
[0.0055]
3722

(5)
Volume as
Outcome
-2.573
[5.877]
3722

Notes: The dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is daily percentage return of the S&P500 index and the
volume of trades in column (5). Newey-West standard errors allowing for arbitrary serial correlation within
a week in brackets. See notes to Table 2 for full list of covariates included. Column (1) omits all weather
controls from the regression. Column (2) limits the sample to days when no precipitation occurred over the
24-hour time period. Column (3) excludes all co-pollutants from the regression. Column (4) includes daily
traffic as a regressor. Column (5) uses the volume of stocks traded as the dependent variable. * significant
at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

42

Table 4: Recovery Analysis

PM2.5,t
Obs.

(1)
1-Day
0.0150*
[0.0083]
3722

(2)
2-Day
0.0122
[0.0080]
3722

(3)
3-Day
-0.0121
[0.0082]
3722

(4)
4-Day
-0.00323
[0.0084]
3722

(5)
5-Day
0.00512
[0.0084]
3722

(6)
6-Day
0.000016
[0.0085]
3722

(7)
7-Day
0.00669
[0.0088]
3722

Notes: The dependent variable in Column (1) is S&P500 returns on day (t+1) – returns on day (t), column
(2) is returns on day (t+2) – returns on day (t+1), etc. Newey-West standard errors allowing for arbitrary
serial correlation within a week in brackets. Weather covariates include temperature (2.5 degree indicators),
dew point (2.5 degree indicators), air pressure, wind speed, precipitation and cloud cover. Co-pollutant
covariates include ozone and carbon monoxide. Time dummies include day of week, year-week and tax
dummy. All environmental variables are the mean of daily values. * significant at 10%, ** significant at
5%, *** significant at 1%.

43

Table 5: The Effect of Pollution on the Volatility Index
(1)
Daily
0.0198**
[0.0056]

(2)
1-Day Lag
0.0202**
[0.0057]

(3)
2-Day Lag
0.0209**
[0.0057]

(4)
1-Day Lead
0.0207**
[0.0056]

(5)
2-Day Lead
0.0218**
[0.0058]

PM2.5,t-1

-

-0.0075
[0.0051]

-0.0079
[0.0051]

-

-

PM2.5,t-2

-

-

0.0021
[0.0051]

-

-

PM2.5,t+1

-

-

-

-0.0042
[0.0049]

-0.0067
[0.0048]

PM2.5,t+2

-

-

-

-

-0.0094
[0.0048]

3722
Y

3722
Y

3722
Y

3722
Y

3722
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

PM2.5,t

Observations
Time
Dummies
Weather
Co-pollutants

Notes: The dependent variable is daily volatility index (VIX). Newey-West standard errors allowing for
arbitrary serial correlation within a week in brackets. Weather covariates include temperature (2.5 degree
indicators), dew point (2.5 degree indicators), air pressure, wind speed, precipitation and cloud cover. Copollutant covariates include ozone and carbon monoxide. Time dummies include day of week, year-week
and tax dummy. All environmental variables are the mean of daily values. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

44

Table 6: Pollution and the VIX Components: Risk Aversion and Uncertainty
(1)
Daily

(2)
(3)
1-Day Lag 2-Day Lag
Risk Aversion
0.0870*** 0.0873*** 0.0911***

(4)
Daily
-0.0062

(5)
(6)
1-Day Lag 2-Day Lag
Uncertainty
-0.0061
-0.0059

PM2.5,t
[0.0263]

[0.0267]

[0.0271]

[0.0046]

[0.0046]

[0.0047]

PM2.5,t-1

-

-0.00585
[0.0281]

-0.00813
[0.0281]

-

-0.0027
[0.0046]

-0.0028
[0.0047]

PM2.5,t-2

-

-

0.0116
[0.0249]

-

-

0.00037
[0.0039]

3700
Y

3700
Y

3700
Y

3700
Y

3700
Y

3700
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Obs.
Time
Dummies
Weather
Copollutants

Notes: The dependent variable is VIX separated into risk aversion (column 1-3) and uncertainty (column 46) components. Newey-West standard errors allowing for arbitrary serial correlation within a week in
brackets. Weather covariates include temperature (2.5 degree indicators), dew point (2.5 degree indicators),
air pressure, wind speed, precipitation and cloud cover. Co-pollutant covariates include ozone and carbon
monoxide. Time dummies include day of week, year-week and tax dummy. All environmental variables are
the mean of daily values. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

45

