                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ON THE DEFINITION AND MAGNITUDE
                             OF RECENT CAPITAL FLIGHT




                                  Robert Cumby

                                Richard M. Levich




                             Working Paper No. 2275




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1987




Prepared for the Conference on Capital Flight and Third World Debt sponsored by
the Institute of International Economics, Washington, DC, October 2—4, 1986.
The authors acknowledge Julapa Rungkasiri for dedicated research assistance and
John Cuddington, Alain Ize, Don Lessard and John Williamson for helpful comments
on an earlier draft. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #2275
                                           June 1987



    On the Definition and Magnitude of Recent Capital Flight


                            ABSTRACT

    This paper presents a survey of alternative definitions of
capital flight and empirical estimates of capital flight
utilizing a common database. At the conceptual level, we argue
that the definition of capital flight requires a somewhat
arbitrary distinction between normal capital flows and those
representing capital flight. At the empirical level, our results
illustrate the range of estimates of capital flight that are
possible and how alternative definitions or databases contribute
to the dispersion of estimates. Our results show that for some
countries, differences in definitions or databases may have

substantial effects, causing some estimates of capital flight to
be positive and others negative.

   We argue that an appropriate definition of capital flight is
one that is consistent with the kinds of economic questions under

consideration. In theory, capital flight should be viewed within
the context of a general equilibrium model. When this is done,

capital flight will appear to be a symptom of underlying economic
forces rather than a cause of national welfare losses.


     Robert E. Cumby                    Richard M. Levich
     Graduate School of                 Graduate School of
        Business Administration            Business Administration
     New York University               New York University
     100 Trinity Place                 100 Trinity Place
     New York, NY 10006                New York, NY 10006
     212—285—6159                      212—285—8924
        ON THE DEFINITION AND MAGNITUDE OF RECENT CAPITAL FLIGHT


  I. Introduction and Overview

     The economic performance of the world's lesser developed countries
(LDC5) is now a key factor affecting the future of the international
financial system. And key to LDC performance is their ability to

channel capital funds (from foreign loans, foreign equity, and
domestic sources) into domestic investments, while meeting their
commitments on existing external debt. It is curious that until

recently, the disposition of domestic funds (in particular, the
possibility for large scale domestic capital outflows, or "capital
flight") was not considered seriously within the context of LDC

performance. Perhaps this oversight was aided by the ready
availability of foreign funds or the inadequacy of data on domestic
capital outflows. But even taking the philosophical stance that
private citizens ought to retain the right to invest their funds
globally, it still remains that a country's macroeconomic performance

could be severely effected by a sudden or prolonged outflow of
domestic capital.
    Several studies that we review suggest that LDC private capital
outflows over the last ten years were at least $50 billion and perhaps
$200 billion or even higher. Estimates of this magnitude clearly
support the view that if LDC capital outflows could be reduced or
reversed, the adjustment burden facing LDCs would be eased

substantially. Furthermore, the magnitude of LDC capital outflows has
been observed by commercial bankers, and cited in order to justify a
reduction in further lending to some LDC countries. Thus LDC capital
outflows may be a double cost if foreign sources of funds are cut off.

                                 1
     The purpose of this paper is to survey and analyze the various
 definitions and measures of capital flight that have been offered in
 the recent literature. Our approach is two-fold. First, at the

 conceptual level, we discuss the basis for classifying particular
 domestic capita]. outflows as "capital flight" rather than as "normal"
 flows. It has been pointed out in earlier papers that the selection of

 a particular definition for capital flight ought to be made with
 consideration for the type of research question under examination. We

 explore this issue further, asking whether any of the definitions
 proposed so far are adequate to provide information for the decisions
 facing bankers and government officials.

     The second part of our approach is empirical. We first discuss how
 to operationa].jze the various
                               definitions of capital flight. Our
 objective here is to re—compute alternative estimates of capital

 flight using a common database. Some researchers have adopted an
accounting framework for measuring capital flight that includes only a
designated subset of domestic capital outflows. We replicate these

measurements on a common database for standard
                                                 time periods to show
the dispersion in estimates of capital flight brought about by
alternative definitions. Recent papers by Dooley (1986) and Khan and
Ul Haque (1986) use a more indirect
                                    approach, measuring capital flight
as the difference between all external claims and those external
claims that generate receipts captured in the balance of payments
accounts. These latter calculations could
                                            not be replicated, but they
are reported for the sake of comparison.

    The empirical analysis also reviews the sources of estimation
error that may affect our estimates of capital flight. Evidence on


                                  2
the extent of overinvoicing of imports and underinvoicing of exports
using partner—country trade data comparisons is discussed.
    The plan for the paper is as follows. Section II contains our
discussion of the conceptual issues related to the measurement of
capital flight, and a review of the definitions of capital flight that
have been adopted in the literature. Our empirical results and a

comparison of alternative capital flight estimates are presented in
Section III. The final section offers the policy implications of our
findings and other concluding remarks.
    The major conclusions we reach can be summarized simply. The
empirical evidence suggests that the range of estimates (high - low)
of capital flight resulting from the various definitions for our
sample countries is usually about $10 billion but sometimes greater
than $20 billion. That there is considerable dispersion in the
estimates should be neither surprising nor discouraging since theory
does not offer a unique definition of capital flight. An appropriate
definition will be one that is consistent with the kinds of economic

questions under consideration. In theory, capital flight should be
viewed within the context of a complete (i.e. general equilibrium)

economic model. Without such a model, we can only guess whether
additional lending to LDCs will foster more capital flight, or whether

the same lending might signal an improvement in the prospects for
better economic performance and a reversal of capital flight.




                               3
  II. Alternative Measures of Capital Flight

     A. Conceptual Issues Regarding Capital Outflows.

     Economic principles do not guide us to a unique or natural
 definition for the term "capital flight." Domestic residents in an

 open economy engage in international transactions. Some of these
 transactions lead domestic residents to acquire financial claims

 against non—residents. Which of these transactions ought to be
 classified as domestic capital flight rather than normal capital

 outflows? The list might include all foreign assets (both reported and

 unreported, including financial assets, direct foreign investments,
 and real estate) acquired by the banking and non-bank private sectors
 as well as the public sector, or it could be only a subset of this

 complete list..-' Alternatively, on might attempt to distinguish among
 flows by the circumstances or nature of the investment.

    This classification problem is similar to the dilemma of computing
the balance of payments under
                              a pegged exchange rate regime. How did
economists distinguish between "autonomous" and "accommodating"
international transactions? In practice, some arbitrary decisions were
made to classify the motives behind anonymous accounting entries.V
Assuming that the classification was done correctly, the policy
relevance of such a balance of payments estimate would be primarily as

a signal. Policy making is carried out ex ante to effect future
outcomes, while the balance of payments figure reflects ex post
events. To enhance its relevance for policy, the balance of payments

definition would need to be imbedded within
                                               a complete (i.e. general
equilibrium) model to determine how current and prospective economic
policies might influence the future balance of payments and national
welfare.


                               4
    The analogy to the problem of estimating the magnitude of capital

flight and determining the impact of capital flight on welfare is
clear. Classifying capital transactions to arrive at an estimate of
capital flight will require a certain number of arbitrary
distinctions. Absent a complete model, it should not be clear how
future policies will effect capital flight or how capital flight
effects welfare. And even if capital flight reduces domestic welfare,

the optimal amount of capital flight will not be zero as long as there
are costs to preventing it.

         1. Alternative Classification Measures

    To approach the distinction between "capital flight" and "normal"
capital outflows, one obvious dichotomy is the division between legal
and illegal transactions. It seems fair to say that all illegal

transactions are not "normal." However, illegal transactions need not
be motivated by a desire to avoid domestic financial markets, per se.
The primary motivation for certain current account transactions may be
the evasion of tariffs, quotas, or laws regarding trade in illegal
drugs or other activities, and these transactions necessarily generate
a capital account dimension. However, illegal transactions are not
reported, so it is difficult to determine how much they contribute to

"capital flight." Evidence presented in Gulati (1987) and in Section
III on partner—country trade data provides some indication of which

countries are engaged in overinvoicing imports and underinvoicing

exports, perhaps to effect capital flight.
   Within the category of legal international capital transactions,
our bias would be to classify all freely organized transactions as
"normal." Assuming that domestic investors are risk—averse utility


                               5
  maximizers, portfolio theory strongly suggests that investors will
  hold a well—diversified portfolio of financial assets that maximizes

  real returns for a given level of risk. For investors from small

 countries with poorly developed capital markets, there will be a
 natural demand for assets in other countries with more developed
 capital markets. Where inflation has eroded real returns or real
 wealth, it is normal to expect investors to seek other markets or
 units—of—account that preserve purchasing power. When substantial

 exchange rate changes are expected (in larger industrial countries or

 poorer developing Countries), we expect to find investors positioning
 themselves in advance to make the best of the situation. Whenever

 markets are highly integrated and transaction costs are low, private
 individuals will have strong incentives to circumvent what
                                                            appear to
 be arbitrary barriers to their own utility maximization/
      Our bias for classifying all
                                   freely organized legal transactions
 as "normal" may seem in opposition to the notion that "flight
                                                               capital
 is capital which flees" advanced by Ingo Walter and Charles

Kindleberger elsewhere in this volume. In a market paradigm, the
decisions of investors
                       concerning whether to invest funds at home or
abroad depend on relative returns suitably adjusted for rates of

inflation, expected exchange rate changes, taxes and risk factors.
                                                                     If,
for example, this return differential favors the United States
                                                                over
Mexico, on what basis can we conclude
                                      that capita]. is fleeing from
Mexico rather than being drawn into the United States? In
                                                          general,
economic models presume that private domestic investors are scanning
the environment in search of higher expected returns and that
                                                              capital
movements are motivated by self-interest. In order to justify a
negative connotation ("capital flight") for a subset of capital


                                6
movements, there must be a derogation from the market paradigm, such
as a deviation between private and social welfare.
         2. Capital Flight and Nationalism
   The notion that capital flight represents a source of disutility
focuses on a nationalistic measure of social utility. In a variety of
cases, it can be argued that domestic capital outflows might reduce
domestic social welfare, even though they increase the private welfare
of both domestic and foreign residents who participate in the capital
transfer. Cuddington (1986) outlines several such cases, for example:


         (i) Hot money flows may destabilize financial markets,
        (ii) Social returns on domestic projects may exceed private
             domestic returns,

       (iii) By raising a country's gross borrowing needs, capital
             flight raises the marginal cost of foreign debt (Special
             case of [ii]),

        (iv) Once capital leaves it never returns resulting in lower
             domestic investment and a lower domestic tax base.

   As Cuddington suggests, each of these cases can be refuted by
demonstrating that policies to restrict capital flight would either be
ineffective or second—best policies. Regarding (i), it could certainly
be a possibility that underlying macroeconomic policies and market

fundamentals, rather than capital flight, were responsible for
financial market volatility. Regarding (ii), the first-best policy
would be to attack a distortion of this sort directly by providing
additional incentives to the private rate of return on capital. And
regarding (iv), reversals of capital flight have indeed occured. But

even if they had not, it is an exageration to claim that flight
capital is "lost to the country," and there is no certainty that the


                                7
  alternative placement of flight capital would be in domestic
  investment.

     As noted earlier, any definition of capital flight
                                                        may seem to
 reflect arbitrary distinctions. One way to reduce these is to
                                                               link a
 definition of capital flight to its impact on national utility.
     Under the assumption that funds committed to capital flight
                                                                 would
 have been used for domestic
                             investment, then the total build—up of
 foreign assets scales the magnitude
                                     of national disutility from
 capital flight. This assumption suggests that an expansive definition
 of capital flight that captures the reported and
                                                  unreported increase
 in foreign assets for both the private and public sectors
                                                           would be
 appropriate. Defining capital flight as the total build-up of
                                                                 foreign
 assets implies that (1) foreign assets, even the working
                                                           capita].
balances of source country
                            multinational firms, never yield higher
national utility than domestic assets, and (ii) a build-up of domestic
assets, rather than consumption of
                                     foreign goods or wasteful domestic
spending, was the alternative to
                                   capital flight. Both Erbe (1985) and
the World Bank (1985) use an expansive measure of
                                                    capital flight.
     Dooley (1986) proposes that the stock of claims held on non-
residents that do not gnerate investment income on the
                                                        balance of
payments be taken as a measure of
                                  capital flight. The presumption here
is that the interest earned
                            on legal and normal capital outflows would
be reported in the balance of payments. Interest earned
                                                        on illegal
capital outflows, or outflows motivated by tax avoidance or the demand
for secrecy are assumed to
                             go unreported. Capital flight can be
approximated by capitalizing the stream of ported investment income
and subtracting this from total external claims.
   In one sense, this technique could be viewed as a novel
                                                           approach

                                 8
for measuring the stock of unreported external claims, i.e. capital
flight. But the definition implies that if all capital outflows and
the investment income on them were reported, then there would be zero
capital flight. This suggests that the loss of national utility from
capital flight comes not from the diversion of domestic capital to
offshore investments, but rather from the loss of foreign exchange

receipts upon repatriation of offshore earnings and the loss of taxing
power over these offshore earnings. Even this is somewhat of an
overstatement since domestic residents could reinvest (and report)

their offshore earnings without producing any foreign exchange
earnings for the domestic economy. With Dooley's definition, the
disutility of capital flight seems to correspond with the inability of
a country to generate foreign investment receipts sufficient to
service its own external debt. However, if individuals have
transferred funds offshore at lower yields (reflecting their demand

for secrecy, stability or safe haven), then the country could still
have a debt servicing problem even if all investment income is

reported.

    B. Measuring Capital Flight
    The definitions of capital flight found in the previous literature

can be usefully grouped into two types. The first type does not
distinguish between "normal" capital flows and capital flight and
seeks to measure the acquisition of net foreign assets, or some subset
of these claims, by the private sector. The second type attempts to
make the distinction between "nomal" capital and flight capital by
measuring the stock of foreign claims that does not generate income
that is reported in the balance of payments accounts.


                                  9
     The broadest definition of capital flight has been employed by the
 World Bank (1985) and by Erbe (1985). This measure takes inflows of
 capital in the form of increases in external debt and net foreign

 direct investment and subtracts from these inflows the current account
 deficit and the increase in official reserves. The difference between
 these inflows and the extent to which they are used to finance the

 current account deficit and an increase in reserves is taken to
 reflect an increase in net foreign claims by the private sector. This

 increase in net foreign assets is the measure of capital flight they
 adopt.

     The capital flight definition adopted by Morgan Guaranty (1986)
 also measures capital flight as a residual. In addition to the
 current account deficit and the increase in
                                             official reserves, Morgan
 Guaranty (1986) also subtracts the increase in short term foreign

assets of the banking system from total capital inflows. The Morgan
definition then does not consider acquisition of foreign assets by
banks to be capital flight, while
                                    acquisition of foreign assets by
other agents is considered to be capital flight.
    Cline (1986) critiques the capita]. flight definition adopted by
Morgan and discusses adjustments to the Morgan calculations. He
argues that income from tourism and border transactions should be
excluded from current account earnings since these earnings are beyond
the control of foreign exchange control authorities, and thus should
not be counted when calculating
                                  capital flight. In addition, he
argues that reinvested investment income should not be considered
capita]. flight since this income is also beyond the control of the
authorities and that if residents do not repatriate income from

capital held abroad, this should not be considered additional flight

                               10
of capital.
    What is the justification for these exclusions from the broad

measure of capital flight? Morgan Guaranty (1986) offers no
justification for treating the banking system differently from other
firms and individuals. None will be given here. The question that
dine wishes to address regards the extent to which future inflows of
funds will result in additional capital flight. He wishes to
determine the "   'marginal   propensity' of capital to leave" the country
and argues that "the presence of a tourism surplus not garnered by the

government, and of non—repatriated private interest earnings abroad,
have little to do with the issue of how new capital is used when
obtained."

    One aspect of determining how likely will be future capital flight
is the extent to which capital controls are effective in preventing

acquisition of foreign assets by the private sector. The adjustments
suggested by dine may be relevant to determine the extent to which
the private sector has been able to circumvent exchange controls in
the past..4! If after making these adjustments, the degree of capital

flight is greatly reduced, the evidence would suggest that capital
controls have been somewhat successful in restricting movements of
funds abroad. On the other hand, if we are interested in the extent
to which a country is likely to experience capital flight in the
future, then we should examine how macroeconomic conditions and

government policies underlying capital outflows have changed rather
than attempting to identify particular items that should or should not

be counted as income that is subject to capital flight.

   Cuddington (1986) takes a different approach to measuring capital


                                  11
 flight. His focus is on short-term capital flows, which he believes
 to be the typical meaning of capital flight, rather than all private
 sector acquisition of external claims.    Capital flight, defined to
 consist of acquisition of short—term external assets by the non—bank
 private sector, is calculated by adding the errors and omissions to

 selected short-term capital items that are chosen individually for
 each country he considers.

     Why should the focus be on short—term capital movements rather
 than both short-term and long-term capital? Cuddington (1986) chooses

 to consider only short—term capital since he is examining "hot money",
 funds that respond quickly to changes in expected returns or to

changes in risk. Presumably these are also the funds that potentially
will be the quickest to return to the country when conditions change.
There are a couple of problems with measuring capital flight in this

way, however. First, as Cuddington (1986) notes, the errors and
omissions do not consist only of unreported short—term capital.

Second, the case for considering only short—term funds is less than
compelling. An investor, reacting to unfavorable conditions at home
(such as an anticipated devaluation), may acquire stocks, long—term

bonds, or deposits with more than a year to maturity or "real" assets
as well as a short—term financial assets. The motivation for all such

acquisitions will be identical as will their effect on the investor's
home country. In addition, it is difficult to make the case that
short-term funds are more likely to react quickly either in leaving
the investor's home country or in returning. In today's international
financial markets there is very little loss of liquidity associated

with acquiring long-term bonds (especially U.S. government bonds,
corporate   bonds traded on U.S. markets, or Eurobonds) or equities../

                                12
Thus, whether one wishes to measure private—sector acquistion of
foreign assets or the component of these asset that can flow and
reflow quickly, is seems best to look beyond short—term capital flows.

    An alternative (not pursued in any previous attempts to measure
capital flight) is to combine private sector external borrowing with
government and government—guaranteed external borrowing and measure
the acquisition of gross rather than net private sector external
assets. The reason for doing so is that should a balance—of—payments
crisis arise, the government may, as has happened in a number of
cases, take on the obligation of servicing this private debt. If so
the private external borrowing may be considered a contingent
liability of the government./ One might also include foreign

exchange value guaranties provided to holders of foreign currency
denominated accounts and any forward market intervention that the
authorities have undertaken.

    Dooley (1986) and Khan and Ui Haque (1986) define capital flight
as those external assets held by the private sector that do not
generate income recorded in the balance of payments accounts of the

country.
    Dooley (1986) measures the stock of external claims by summing
identified capital flows in the balance of payments accounts and

making two adjustments to capture unreported capital flows. The first
of these is to add the errors and omissions. The second adjustment
Dooley carries out is based on a comparison of the World Bank data on

the stock of external debt and external borrowing reported in the
balance—of—payments accounts. If both sources report borrowing
accurately, one ought to be able to match closely the change in the


                               13
 stock of debt reported by the World Bank with the net flows of new
 borrowing reported in the balance of payments accounts. This is

 frequently not the case, however. In several countries the annual
 change in the stock of external debt as reported by the World Bank is

 considerably larger than flows reported in the balance of payments
 accounts, suggesting that part of the increase in external debt goes
 unrecorded in the balance of payments accounts. In the cases where a

 discrepency arises, the unrecorded increase in external liabilities
 must correspond to an underestimate of balancing transactions. Dooley
 (1986) assumes that all of the underestimated balancing transactions

 consist of private sector acquisition of foreign assets. He therefore
 adds the difference between each year's change in external debt as

 reported by the World Bank and the increase as recorded by the balance
of payments accounts to his estimate of the increase in private sector

foreign assets. He then computes a market interest rate for each
country's assets and calculates the stock of external assets that
would give rise to the level of investment income recorded in the

balance of payments accounts at this market interest rate. The
difference between the two measures of external assets is his measure
of capital flight.
    Unlike any of the studies discussed above, Dooley (1986) and Khan

and Ul Haque (1986) attempt to distinguish capital flight from
"normal" capital flows that correspond to ordinary portfolio
diversification and business activities of domestic residents. Both

point out that looking only at the gross increase in external assets
as a measure of capital flight may give misleading results since in

many countries that are generally recognized not to be experiencing
capita]. flight, domestic residents acquire both foreign assets and


                              14
foreign liabilities. That is, there are generally two-way capital
flows between countries and to identify one side of these flows as

capital flight would be seriously misleading. Their solution is to
identify foreign assets that do not generate reported income as
capital flight because the presumption is that if the income is
unrecorded, the motive of the investor is to place funds beyond the
control of the authorities. Both claim that such capital is "lost to
the country" and is identified as flight capital.
    The problem of distinguishing "normal capital flows" from "capital
flight" was discussed earlier. Does the solution adopted by Dooley
(1986) and Khan and Ul Haque (1986) succeed in making this
distinction? If this capital is "lost to the country" while owned by
residents of the country, it must be that these foreign assets
represent a welfare loss and should be distinguished from those that
do not. If the problem associated with capital flight involves an
externality of the sort described above (in which the social rate of
return on capital invested domestically exceeds the private rate
of return on such investments or in which there is a shadow value of
foreign exchange that exceeds the market price), it seems that any
movement of funds abroad that otherwise would have been invested at
home should be considered in a measure of capital flight. The same
would be true if the nature of the distortion is the absense of
credibility on the part of the policy maker. In each of these cases,
whether or not the income from foreign investments is reported or not
seems irrelevant. One may wish to distinguish repatriated investment
income from reinvested income on these grounds, as noted earlier,
however. If on the other hand, the problem that is addressed is the


                              15
 erosion of the domestic tax base and the need to levy taxes
                                                             on other
 reported income that have less desirable allocatjve or distributional
effects, their definition seems to be the natural one.
    An alternative means of
                             distinguishing capita], flight from
"normal" capital flows might be to examine the extent to which
                                                                 private
sector capital flows are two—way flows
                                           or one—way flows. In a
situation  in which private sector capital account credits
                                                           greatly
exceed private sector capital account debits, one might judge that
capita], is fleeing and that the "nomal" two-way flow of funds is not
occuri.ng. While this means of distinguishing flight
                                                     capital from
"normal"   capital flows might be conceptually useful in devising a
measure    at capital flight corresponding to Walter's (1987)
                                                              definition,
given the obvious data    problems, it S   difficult to see how it could
be implemented.




                                16
III. Empirical Results
    In this section we present estimates of capital flight based on a
common database and a standard time period and obtained using the
definitions and methods above. We do this with several goals in mind.
First, we will be able to show in a concise way the range of estimates

of capital flight implied by the alternate definitions discussed
above. Second, by comparing our estimates with those reported in
previous work we will be able to determine the extent to which the
estimates of capital flight are sensitive to differences in data
sources. Finally, we will be able to determine if the different

defintions adopted by the World Bank (1985), Erbe (1985), Morgan
Guaranty (1986), and dine (1986) give rise to significantly different
estimates of capital flight.
   Our results show that in some cases important differences arise
when we compare our estimates of capital flight to those obtained by
others when using the same definitions but somewhat different data
sources. On the other hand, the differences in definitions adopted by
previous authors make only marginal differences in most cases. We also
consider adjustments to the capital flight estimates to reflect
capital flight in the form of mis-invoicing of trade flows and
valuation changes on external debt due to exchange rate changes.
   Tables 1 — 6 present summary measures of changes in external debt
and some balance of payments aggregates for six countries from 1976 to

1984. The six countries considered are Argentina, Brazil, Korea,
Mexico, the Philippines, and Venezuela. In addition, these tables

present several estimates of capital flight obtained using a single,
consistent data set and several definitions of capital flight

described previously.2!   We have adopted the sign convention used in

                               17
 the balance—of—payments accounts. In order to facilitate comparisons

 across the various estimates we present totals for 1976 to 1982 as
 well as for 1976 to 1984.!-!

     Several conclusions emerge immediately from these tables.     First,
the extent of capital flight according to all measures is greater for
Argentina, Mexico, and Venezuela than for the other three countries,
with Mexico leading the list. In these three countries, the estimates

of capial flight are large not only in absolute terms but also in
relation to the increase in external debt accumulated over the period

considered. The estimated degree of capital flight from Korea and the
Philippines is very small. Regardless of the definition employed,
countries estimated to have experienced considerable capital flight
are those in which the increase in external debt greatly exceeds the

cumulative current account deficits. Second, the smallest estimate of

capital flight is generally obtained using Cuddington's definition.
This is not surprising since he considers only short—term capital
flows. Third, there is generally very little difference between the

estimates obtained using the Morgan definition and those obtained
using that of the World Bank and Erbe./ Fourth, the estimates of

capital flight provided by Dooley and by Khan and Ui Hague show that
in most cases not only has the private sector acquired a substantial

volume of foreign assets, but also a substantial fraction of these
assets does not generate income that is reported in the balance of

payments accounts. Finally, in many cases the estimates presented
here are very close to the estimates presented by other authors.

    The most striking exception to this last point is found when
Erbe's reported capital flight estimates are compared to our estimates


                                18
based on her definition. The bulk of the difference can be traced to
dif fences in estiniates of the increase in external debt.i/ A fairly
sizable difference can also be found between the Morgan estimates of
capital flight from Brazil and our estimate based on the Morgan
definition. The source of this difference seems to be in different
estimates of the change in reserves and foreign assets of the banking
system. These differences suggest that the estimates of capital flight
are sensitive to the data sources employed, and are especially
sensitive to differences in estimates of external debt.
   A few remarks about individual countries are in order. Argentina
experienced substantial capital flight between 1976 and 1982 according
to all measures. However, the data also show that no additional
capital flight occured in 1983 and 1984. The estimates of capital
flight from Brazil, while considerably smaller than for the other
Latin American countries, show substantial variation across

definitions. All estimates except those based on Cuddington's
definition point to a much smaller volume of capital flight between
1976 and 1982 than between 1976 and 1984, and indicate that capital
flight of approximately $6 billion occured in 1983 and 1984.

Venezuela, like Mexico, is estimated to have experienced sizable
capital flight both between 1976 and 1982 and during 1983 and 1984.

Interestingly, the estimates of capital flight during 1983 and 1984
based on all definitions except dine's and Cuddington's indicate that
capital flight during those two years exceeds the increase in external

debt by a factor of approximately four.
    The most interesting case presented here is that of Mexico. In

addition to the large volume of capital flight experienced by Mexico,
the estimated increase in 1983 and 1984 is also striking. The

                               19
 adjustments to the Morgan definition of capital flight proposed by
 Cline lead to a substantial downward revision of the degree of capital

 flight both over the entire period and over the 1976—1982 period.
 However, since the idea behind these adjustments is to determine the

 extent to which exchange controls have been effective, it would be
 useful to concentrate on the estimated capital flight during 1983 and

 1984. While these adjustments reduce the degree of capital flight by
 approximately $6 billion for 1983 and 1984, capital flight of

approximately $12 billion is estimated to have occured during this
period even if the Cline adjustments are used.

    One possible reason that the capital flight estimates may be

somewhat misleading is that changes in the dollar value of external
debt are employed. If a significant fraction of external debt is
denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, then the dollar
value of that debt will change as exchange rates change. For example,

if part of a country's external debt is denominated in DM and the U.S.
dollar appreciates relative to the DM, the dollar value of the debt
will fall. As a result, the capital flight extimates derived from

changes in the dollar value debt will be understated when the dollar
appreciates as it did from 1980 through 1984.   Similarly, these
valuation changes will overstate the extent of capital flight when the
dollar depreciates. How quantitatively important are these valuation
changes? It is difficult to determine the precise magnitude of these
valuation changes since time series on the currency composition of
external debt are not readily available. In order to shed some light

on the potential magnitude of these valuation changes, we have
calculated some hypothetical valuation changes assuming that 10% of



                              20
debt is denominated in DM and then assuming that 10% of debt is
denominated in yen.
    The hypothetical valuation changes on external debt are presented
in Table 7. As can be seen in Table 7A, if 10% of external debt is DM
denominated, the increase in the dollar value of the debt understates
slightly the level of new borrowing undertaken by the country. The
capital flight estimates based on these figures will then also be
slightly underestimated. The calculations reported in Table 7B
indicate that the size of valuation changes that result if 10% of
external debt is yen denominated are even smaller than is the case in
Table 7A. In neither case is the size of valuation changes sufficient
to result in substantial underestimates or serious overestimates of

capital flight, except in the unlikely case that a very large fraction
of external debt is denominated in currencies other than U.s. dollars.
    A comparison of partner country data on trade flows can be used to
consider two additional potential sources of mismeasurement of capital

flight. The first of these possibilities is that balance of payments
data are of such dubious quality so as to warrant a broad degree of
skepticism about any particular number that is derived from them. The
second of the possibilities is that additional capital flight occurs

through systematic mis-invoicing of imports and exports. Gulati (1987)
presents estimates of the degree to which capital flight estimates
could be adjusted to reflect mis-invoicing of trade flows)I
    There are several reasons for differences to arise in partner

country data on trade flows, quite apart from any systematic
falsification of invoices. One of these, problems arising from timing
lags due to transit, can produce differences for two reasons. First,

goods shipped and recorded by the exporting country in one year may

                               21
 not arrive and get recorded by the importing country until the

 following year. Second, when a country records these trade data in
 local currency, timing lags may result in their conversion into
 dollars at different exchange rates in the importing and exporting
 countries. A second major source of differences    partner country
 reports of trade flows arises from mistaken allocation of the

 destination of exports or the origin of imports. Such mistakes can
 arise quite easily due to transit trading, re—export, or the

 participation of third-country merchants.
     In order to attempt to sort out the extent to which the

discrepancies in partner country trade data are due to systematic
 faisfication of invoices and to poor quality data, we have carried out

a number of calculations that can be compared to those reported in
Gulatj (1987). In Table 8 we examine trade between the U.S. and four

industrial countries, Canada, France, Germany, and the U.K./ As
Table 8A indicates, reported exports of these countries to the U.S.
correspond very closely to reported U.S. imports from these countries.
The ratios of these reported magnitudes are generally much closer to

one than is the found in Gulati (1987). on the other hand, sizable
differences are found in Table 8B between reported French and German
imports from the U.S. and reported u.s. exports to these countries.

These differences suggest either systematic overinvoicing of imports

by these countries or, perhaps, may simply indicate that the
destination of shipments from the U.S. to the EEC countries may not be
accurately ascribed to the proper country. In any event, the size of
these differences is striking and raises questions about the general
quality of the data.



                               22
   A second set of comparisons is found in Table 9, where trade data

for five European countries with Germany are examined. Intra—European
trade data provide an interesting benchmark comparion since the data
problems described earlier should be minimized due to short transport

time, relatively stable intra—European exchange rates, and the absence
of intra—EEC trade restrictions. A fairly close correspondence between
partner country reports is found in Table 9, with the exception of
French—German trade since approximately 1980. There is evidence of

underinvoicing of exports, perhaps indicating capital flight from
France. On the other hand, this apparent underinvoicing of exports

corresponds to apparent underinvoicing of imports during the same
period. Since the ratios in both 9A and 9B are nearly always less than
one, it seems that either a systematic bias may be present in the
German partner country trade data or the CIF/FOB adjustment which uses
average ratios for each country overstate the corrections that needs to

be made to intra—European trade.
    The final set of comparisons is found in Table 10, where we
examine partner country trade flows between some Latin American
countries. The first of these comparisons is between Mexico and

Brazil. No striking differences are found between the partner country
reports in this case, especially when compared to the size of the
differences found in the Mexico—U.S. and Mexico—industrial countries

comparisons reported by Gulati. This would suggest that systematic
falsification of invoices rather than other data problems accounts for

the differences found by Gulati for Mexico. Next, consider the

Venezuela—Brazil comparison and the Argentina—Brazil comparison. In
the first of these we find that there is a relatively close

correspondence between the partner country reports, except in 1980 and

                              23
 1981, when reported Brazilian exports fall considerably short of

 reported Venezuelan imports, and in 1978, when reported Venezuelan

 exports fall short of reported Brazilian imports. On the other hand,
 large differences are found between the partner country reports for
Argentina and Brazil. Here we find that, in several years, reported

Argentine exports to Brazil fall considerably short of reported

Brazilian imports from Argentina, while in others the correspondence
is relatively close. We also find that reported Argentine imports from
Brazil fall short of reported Brazilian exports to Argentina, although
the difference is smaller.

    It seems then that both data problems and systematic falsification
of invoices account for the differences in partner country reports of

trade flows. The differences reflect, at least in part, capital
flight that may not be detected in the estimates discussed above. To
the extent that the differences point to underreported trade flows,
they must also reflect underrecorded balancing items.   If we assume
that the underrecorded balancing items are increases in private sector

foreign assets, then the capital flight estimates discussed above will
be underestimates. If we add import overinvoicing and export
underinvoicing, and assume that the difference reflect capital flight
rather than other data problems, as Gulati (1987) shows, the estimates

of capital flight are generally reduced since import underinvoicing
generally dominates export underinvoicing.




                              24
IV. Policy Implications and Concluding Remarks
   Our objective in this paper has been to survey the alternative
definitions of capital flight that have been offered in the recent
literature. At the conceptual level, we have noted that the definition

of capital flight requires a somewhat arbitrary distinction between
normal capital outflows and those that are labeled as capital flight.
Any specification of capital flight ought to be consistent with the
economic or policy question under consideration. Most current policy
issues presume a nationalistic point of view in which capital flight
reduces national welfare. Policy decisions will be aided to the extent
that a definition of capital flight represents a good proxy for the
measure of national welfare loss.
   At the empirical level, we have attempted to replicate several of
the leading definitions of capital flight using a common database.
Doing so illustrates the range of estimates of capital flight that are
possible, and how alternative definitions and databases contribute to
the dispersion of estimates. Our results show that for some countries,

differences in definitions or databases may be substantial, causing
some estimates of capital flight to be positive and others negative.
The change in a country's external debt position plays a major role in
several definitions of capital flight. Our results suggest that
revisions to external debt figures and differences across data sources

may account for up to $5 -$10 billion of the difference in capital

flight estimates.
    The evidence suggests that capital flight is often a large
absolute number. It is sometimes large relative to the stock of

external debt. Capital flight is probably always small relative to the
stock of domestic assets or other measures of net national wealth.

                               25
 What, then, is the relevance of these capital flight estimates for
policy makers?

     In balance of payments analysis, it is well-known that the set of
 international transactions are interdependent. Consequently, to take

the current U.S. case as an example, it is unreasonable to hope that

if the United States imposed a tariff and reduced its imports from
Japan by $10 billion that the U.S. current account balance would
improve by $10 billion. Because the U.S. current account surplus

equals the sum of net private U.S. savings plus the U.S. fiscal
surplus, we need to know the impact of the tariff on these variables
to determine its net effect on the current account. To make this

calculation requires a general equilibrium model of the economy.
    Policy making vis-a-vis capital flight is much the same. It is
unreasonable to claim that if $10 billion in capital flight could be

reversed, then the country's external debt needs would be reduced by
$10 bi11ion./ At a minimum, this conclusion would assume that the
alternative use of the $10 billion was toward domestic investment. But
if underlying forces in the economy were unchanged, domestic residents

might be inclined to spend their $10 billion on foreign imports, or to
convert these funds into gold or other commodities to preserve

purchasing power.

    From these examples it seems clear that capital flight is best
thought of as a !y!ptom of underlying economic forces rather than a
cause of national welfare losses. To understand the role of capital

flight, its impact on the national economy and the welfare gains from
reversing it, an appropriate definition of capital flight must be
imbedded in a complete model of the economy.



                              26
    A current issue of concern is the impact that capital flight might
have on the willingness of commercial banks to increase their lending
to LDCs. Surely if domestic residents are unwilling to invest in their
own countries, the argument goes, then commercial banks should be
unwilling also. And the argument can be bolstered by the statistical
relationship between new borrowings over the last several years and

increases in capital flight.
    But this current argument can be easily refuted.I First, we
would expect domestic residents to hold a diversified portfolio of
international investments, even during normal times. As transaction
costs decline, we would expect domestic residents to reduce their
exposure to country specific disturbances. Extreme risk aversion or
market uncertainty would enhance the attractiveness of offshore
investments. During a crisis period, an expected discontinuity in
financial policy could lead to a run on international reserves to

engage in capital flight.
    Second, commercial banks might be modeled as well-diversified
professional lenders. In a corporate reorganization, banks have the
power to force a change in management policies, to set covenants to
protect their self-interests, to take an equity participation for
enhancing returns, and to base their decisions on information that may
not be available to the general public.
   Thus commercial banks might be in a more desirable situation than

individual investors --   there   is a possibility that the interest rate

needed to draw in additional bank lending is insufficient to retain
the marginal domestic investor. We could easily envisage a model in

which additional bank lending, perhaps accompanied by an IMF program,
was taken as a signal that banks had re—appraised economic conditions

                                  27
and had extracted certain pledges regarding the conduct of monetary
and fiscal policy. In such a case, fresh bank lending might be
accompanied by a reversal of capital flight.

    The estimates of capital flight presented in this paper confirm
that world capital markets are becoming more highly integrated. In the

human capital literature, it was argued that given the mobility of
factors, human capital would migrate if it did not receive a
competitive market wage. Now the analogy is that financial

transactions and financial capital will migrate also if domestic
depositors and investors are not offered financial services with
competitive risks and returns. In this environment, capital flight
ought to be viewed as a symptom of underlying economic problems,
rather than as the source of the problem.




                              28
                                   FOOTNOTES
1.   Cuddington (1986) reminds us that human capital could be included
     in a measure of capital flight. Indeed, in the l960s, the "brain
     drain" was viewed by some as a serious factor detrimental to the
     economic development of some countries. During that debate,
     nationalists (e.g. Patinkin (1968]) stressed the distributional
     effects of capital movements thereby rejecting "the world" as the
     appropriate unit for welfare maximization. Internationalists (e.g.
     Johnson [1968]) argued that the brain drain was largely a symptom
     of other source country policies, exacerbated by the increasing
     integration of labor markets and the mobility of well—educated
     people. The current debate on capital flight echoes many of the
     arguments used regarding the brain drain.

2. In a slightly different situation, the theoretical construct may
     be well-defined (e.g. the money supply, the labor supply, the
     price level), but there is no easy way to operationalize the
     concept. Here the solution may be to pick a proxy variable (e.g.
     M2, or men and women above the age of 16 who are actively seeking
     employment, or a sample of prices of consumer goods and services)
     which the policy maker can influence or about which he collects

     data.

3. United States policies to stem capital outflows in the 1960s such
     as the Interest Rate Equalization Tax (1963) and the Voluntary
     Foreign Credit Restraint program (1968) were not viewed as highly
     successful. The Eurocurrency and Eurobonds markets quickly
     developed over this period to expedite capital outflows and the
     of fshore demand for funds.



                                   29
 4. Indeed, it is in the context of discussing the degree of capital
     flight in Mexico after the imposition of exchange controls that
     Cline suggests these adjustments.
 5. Some "real" assets, like real estate are considerably less liquid,
     however, and funds invested in these are less likely to respond

     quickly to changes in Conditions in the investor's home country.
 6. We are indebted to Alain Ize and Don Lessard for suggesting this
    point.

 7. A description of the data sources and tables containing detailed
    data used to generate these tables is found in the appendix. The

    adjustments to the Morgan-world Bank-Erbe estimates
                                                          suggest by
    Cline are not relevant for all countries and are presented here

    only for the purpose of comparison. We will discuss the
    importance of his adjustments when we turn to a discussion of
    Mexico.

8. There are three exception, as is noted in the footnotes to the

    tables. The World Bank numbers are for 1979-1982 rather than for

    1976—1982. Dooley does not provide sufficient data for us to
    recreate his market interest rate so that the estimates presented
    are his. In addition, he considers only 1978 to 1984. Finally,

    Khan and Ul Hague use Dooley's estimates.
                                                As Cuddington (1987)
    points out, when calculating these totals we ignore the effect of

   possible interest compounding and hence the total probably
   understates the increase in the value of assets held abroad.
9. The only exception to this is found in the case of Korea, where
   the estimates of capital flight are reduced from $6.1 billion to

   $2.8 billion and $7.6 billion to $3.5 billion when the banking

   system's acquisition of foreign assets is excluded. A slight but

                              30
   noticable reduction is also found in the case of the Philippines.

10. Erbe (1985) uses OECD estimates of external debt, while World Bank
   estimates are used here.
11. Partner country trade data have been used to examine the accuracy
   of balance of payments data by Morgensterh (1974) and to infer the

   extent of capital flight effected through mis-invoicing by
   Bhagwati (1964), Naya and Morgan (1969), and Bhagwati, Krueger,
   and Wibulswasdi (1974). Gulati (1987) provides updated estimates.
12. The trade data are taken from the IMF's Direction of Trade

   Yearbook. Since exports are reported fob while imports are

   reported cif, the import data are adjusted using each country's
   cif/fob ratio reported in International Financial Statistics so
   that both imports and exports are fob for the purpose of the
   analysis undertaken here.
13. Perhaps this claim is reasonable in the case of official
   misconduct, when public funds are moved offshore rather than
   recycled into the domestic economy. See Erbe (1985, p.268) for an

   example.
14. An analytical model by Diwan (1986) leads to a similar argument.

   Diwan posits that a country may be engaged in very high risk
   projects, and so domestic residents will acquire foreign assets to
   spread their risk. If external funding is less than adequate, a
   demand for insurance services is still present which domestic
   residents attempt to satisfy by placing funds offshore. The model
   predicts that increased commercial bank lending to LDCs should
   lead to a reduction in capital flight.




                               31
     Tab)e 1 Etprn?] Deht. Falance at Payments and Captal Flight
                                            Mrgentina
                                    (Billions at U.S. Dollars)

                                                                 76 — 82    76 — 84

   A.   Current Account Surplus                                    -8.6      —13.6
            Excluded Items                                          6.1       7.7

   B.   Net Foreiqn Direct Investment                               2.7         3.1

   C.   Private Short—Term Capital                                —14.9      —14.7

   D.   Portfoiic     Invetrnpnt:          bond5      Equities      0.0         0.0

   E. Fan(inc Eytcrn Foreign Assets                                 03        —0.3

        Chanqe in Rscrve                                           -2.6       —0.5

   6,   Errors and 0miscn                                          -0.8       -1.2

   H.   thange in Debt                                             34.1       36. 3



                                    Cpitl Flight Estinites
                                                                    Conci sterit        Previ cu
                                                                     Date Set           Estimates

                                                                 76 — 82    76 — 84      76 - 82

        World Birik    (H   4   B    +   i + F) (a)                22.4            NA      1 9.


        Erhe     (H + B + A + F)                                  25. 3         25. 3     23.2

        Morg.n    (H + B + A + E + F)                             25.           25. 0     2/. V

        Cline (Morgan, less excluded items in A)                   19,4         17.3         NA

        Cuddirtgton (—8 — C)                                       15.6         16.0      15.2

        Dooley   and Khan and Ui Haque (b)                        21.7         21 • 4     21.7


Sources: See Data Appendix.

(a) Estmates $or 1979—1982 are oiven rather than 1976—1982.

(b) Estimates 4cr 1978—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982. All number.
are tram Doaly (J986) arid are not replicated using consistent data ba.
    Table 2:     Extcrrd Deht                 Balance of Payrnent-, and Capital Flight
                                                   Brazil
                                        (Billions of U.S. Dollars)
                                                                       76 —          82 76 - 84
   A.   Current Account Surplus                                            -70.0         —76.8
            Excluded Items                                                   3.6            4.8
   B.   Net Foreign Direct Investment                                       13.6          16.5

   C. Private Short—Term Capital                                                 NA          NA

   D.   Portfolio Investmrnt: Bonds & Equities                                   NA          NA

   E.   14.nkinr    £ystem For,nn                Assets                      1.2            1.3

   F. Chanq in eervrc                                                        3.2

   6. rror and Jm2siuns                                                      0.3             • I



   H.   Chanae     in   Debt                                                65.9          79,3


                                         Capita' Flight Estimates
                                                                             Cons t prit                Prvi out;
                                                                                 Dit at                 Estimat
                                                                       76 —          82 7    -     f4    7      142


        World Bank (H +                 B + A + F>    (a)                    5.8            18.7             3.5

        Erb (H +         14    +    A    4   H                              12.             114.7

        Morgan (H +           S +       A + E + F>                          11.5            173               3.0

        Cline (orgn, tess excludfrd                       itenis   in A)                    12.5

        Cuddington (—GI                                                     -0.3            —0.1             —0.3

        Dooley and Khan and Ill Haque (b)                                   —I   •   7       6.0             -1.7

Sources: See Data Appendix.

(a) Estimates for 1979—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982.

(b) Estimates for 1978—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982. ALl numbers
are frc'm [cwUy (19Ei6) and are not replicated using cnsistnt data bst.




                                                     JJ
     Tmbl 3 Extrnal Ubt3 balance of Payments, and Capital Flight
                                                 Korea
                                  Billio 0+ U.S.         Dollar;)

                                                              76 - 82       76 - 84

    A.    Current Account Surplus                              —18.2        -21.1
              Excluded Items                                                  6.2
                                                                    4., 1


    B.   Net Foreign Direct Investment                              0.2       0.2

    C.   Privatp Short—Term Captal                                  1.8       1.9

    D. Port4olo Investment: Bonds & Equities                        0.0       0.0
   E. Barikino     System Foreign Assets                        —3.4         —4.1

   F.    Chanqe in Reservns                                     —4.3         —4.7

   (.    Errors nci lissions                                    —2.9         —4.8

   H. Change in Debt                                           28.4          33. 2

                                  Capital Flight Estimates
                                                                    Consi stent         Prev c'u
                                                                     Data Set           Est mates
                                                             76 — 82        76 - 84      76   - 82
         World Bank (H +      B   +   A +   F)    (a)           3.3               7.6         0.9
         Erbe (H +      + A + F)                                6.1               7.6

         Morgan (H +      +       +E    +   F)                  2.8            3.5            6.0
         Clinc   U'orgari, less       excluded items in A) —1.4              —2.1              g',   A

         Cuddington (—3 — C)                                    1.1            2.8            1.1
         Dooley and Khan and UI Haque (bI                       2.8           3.6             2.7

         Change In Debt                                        28.4          33.   2


Sources: See Data Appendix.

(a) Estimates for 1979—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982.

 (b) Estimates for 1978—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982. All numbers
are from Docley (1986) and are not replicated using consistent data base.




                                                 J4'
       TabJe 4 External Debt Balance of Paymentc., and Capital Flight
                                                  Hex i Co
                              (Billions           of   U.S.   Dol'ars)
                                                                   76—82 76—84
      A. Current Account Surplus                                    —42.1        —32.9
               EcIuded Iten                                          2Z.0         27.8

      8. Net Foreign Direct Investment                                   9.7      10.6

      Cl. Pr3vate Short-lerm Capital; Other Assets —9,8                          -15.8

      D. Portfolio Investment; Bonds & Equities                          0.1         0.2

      E Bir1ting Sy!tn Foreiqn Assets                                    0.5         0.2

      F. Chanoe in Rp'eves                                               0.6      —3.5

      6.   Errors and C!niion                                       —19.6        —2. 8

      H.   Change in Debt                                            67.9         79.4



                               Capital flight Estimates
                                                                         Corisi ;tent       revi ous
                                                                          Data Set          Est 1 mates


                                                                   76 - 82       76 — 84     76 — 82

           world ban(.   (H 4 B + A +            F)    (a)           25.3            53.6      26.5

                               +    F)                               36.1

           Morgan (H +   b+A       + E   +   F                       35.7            53.4      36.0

           Cline (Morgi less excluded items in A) 13.7                               25.b         NA

           Cuddington (—6 —    Cl)                                   29.3            36.2      30.1

           Dooley and Khan and Ui Haqu. (b)                          17.3            30.4      17.3


Sourcesi See Data Appendix.

(a)    Estimates   for 1979-1982 are given rather than 1976—1982.

(b) Estimates for 1978—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982. All numbers
are from Dooloy (19EI) and are not replicated using consistent data hase
    Table 5: Eterr,al Debt, Balance of Payments, and Capital Flight
                              Philippines
                       (Rillion; of U.S. Dollars)

                                                                     76—82 76—84
   A. Current Account Surplus                                         —11.7       —15.7
           Excluded Items                                               2.3         3.7

   B.   Net Foreign Direct Investment                                      0.5      0.6

   Cl. Private Short-Term Capitali Other As;ets —3.3                               —3.1

   D.   Portfolio Investment: Bond; & Equities                              NA          NA

   E. BiriHng System Foreign                         Assetc.              -1.3     —1.4

   F.   Chanoc in     Rprrves                                             —1.1      0,7

   G. Errors etid Omi ssi cn                                              —0.3     —0.6

   H. Chanqe in Debt                                                      19.2     19.4


                                           Capital Flight Est3mates
                                                                          Consi ctent         Previ eitt
                                                                           Data Set           timates
                                                                     76      82   76 — 84      76 — 82

        World Bank        (H + B + A + F)                  (a)            4.5           5.0         NA

        Erbe   (H +   }       +       A *       F)                        7.0           5.0      -3.0

        Morgan (H +       8       +    A    +    E + F)                   5.6           3.7        7.0

        Cuine (Morgan3 less excluded items in A.)                         3.3           0.0         NA

        Cuddington (—6 —                   Ci)                            3.7           3.7         NA

        Dooley and Khan and Ui Haqu.                           (b)        5,4           1.8       5.4


Sources: See Data Appendix.

(a) Estimates for 1979—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982.

(b) Estimates for 1978—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982. 411 number;
are from Dooley (1986) and are not replicated using consistent data base.
     Table 6: External Debt. Halance of Payments, and                    Capital     Flight
                                Venezuela
                        (Billions of U.S. Dollars)

                                                            76-82 76-84
   A. Current Account Surplus                                    —3,8          5.6
               Excluded Items                                     .4.4         6.8

   B.    Net Foreign Direct Investment                           —0.2         —0.1

   CI. Private Short—Term Capital: Other Assets —11.2                        —13.3

   D.    Portfolio Investment: Bonds & Equities                  —0.9          0.9

   F.    Pank:inq System Foreign A!SptS                          —0,3         —0.9

   F Chancie in            servee                                —I.e         —3,7

   ci,   Errors   ,rc1     0nisQns                                0.9          1.0

   H.    Change in Debt                                          26.3         28.7


                                  Capital    Flight Estimates
                                                                 Consistent                   Pre iou.
                                                                  bata Set                    E5tinI1
                                                           76 — 82          76 — 84            /6      E7

         World 8an (H +           B + A +    F) (a)             20.7          30.5                  22.0

         Erh      (H   +    + A   +    F)

         Moran (H +          +A       + E + F)                  20.2          29.6                  2.0
         Cline (Morgan, liss excluded itenis in           U l.7               22.8                    NA

         Cuddington (—B — Cl — D)                               11.2          13.1                  10.4

         Dooley and Khan and UI Haque (b}                       13.3          25.7                  13.3


Sources See Data Appendix.

(a) Estimates for 1979—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982,

(b) Estimates for 1978—1982 are given rather than 1976—1982. All numbers
are from Dco1oy (1986) and are not replicated using consistent date bsc,




                                             '37
                  Tablt 7 frotential VaIuat3ca Chariqe on External Debt
                                (B]Ilion; of U.S. Dol1ars

.       1O. of Debt Denorninted in DM

     Country                            1976—1982        1976—1985

Argentina                                —0.3

Brazil                                   —0.4             —2.8

korea                                    -0.3             —1.3

Mex co                                   —0.5             —2.8

Phil ippi iie                                             -0.8

              a                          -0. 5            —1.3

E,      10Z of Debt Denominated in Yen

     Co u n try                         1976—192              1985

Argsnt i na                               0.2             -0. 1


                                          0,9              0.2

Korea                                     0.3              0.0
       co                                 (I,   5         -0.1

Phz I ippn                                0.1             —0. 3

Venezuela                                 0. 1            —0. 2




                                            .3,
                  Tab1 8: Partner Country Trade Data Comparisons

A. Ratios of Reported Exports to Reported U.S. Imparts

                   1976   1977   1978     1979    1980      1981       1982       1983   1984

CANADA             1.01   1.00   1.00     1.02    1.02      1.04       1.04       1.07   1.04
FRANCE             1.00   1.07   1.04     0.99    0.93      Q.95       0.94       0.95   0.93
GERMANY            1.02   0.99   1.01     1.03    1.01      1.01       1.01       1.01   0.97
U.K.               1.03   1.04   0.87     1.06    1.08      0.98       1.01       1.03   0.95


8. Ratios o Reported Imports to Reported U.S. Exports

                   197    1977   1978     1979    1980      1981       1982       1983   1984

CANADA             1.05   1.05   1.06     1. 13   1. 13     1 •   11   1 •   11     12
                                                                                  1 •    1 •   11
FkANCE             1.30   1.34   1.38     1.40    1.39      1.29       1.23       1.31   1.28
GFRMANV            I.1:   1.10   1.21     1.26    1.25      1.19       1.22       1.21   1.17
U.I.               1.?    1,04   1.02     0.2     1.02      0.92       1.03       1.01   (.c7




Source: IM1,        r'cticno__Trade Yearbook,     and     Inter tio 1Fnarcia1
Stati sti   Cs.




                                        .29
               Table 9: Partner Country Trade Data Companions

A. Ratios of Reported Exports to Reported German
                                                 Imports
                 1976   1977       1978         1979     1980     1981       1982    1983    1984

DENMARK         1.03    I •   03   1 04         1 • 05   1.05           05   1 .02   1.05
                                                                  1 •                        1.08
FRANCE          0.97    0.95       0.97         0.96     0.91     0,. 87     0.80    0.84    0.87
NET4ERLANDS     1.06    1.05       1 • 04       I . 02   I • 06   I . 07     1 .06   1.08    1.08
U.K.            1.00    0.89       0.86         0.98     0.97     0.94       0.87    0. B9   0.87
SWITZERLAND     0.89    0.89       0. 93        0.93     0.90     0.91       0.92    0.96    0.95



b. Ratios of Reported Imports to Reported German Exports

                1976    1977       19?8         1979     1980     1981       1982    1983    1984

DENt1RK         0.93    0.9        t).92    0.9          0.92     0.92       0.94    0.9     0.91
FRANCE
NETHERL(ND8
                0.BP
                0.9
                        0,8
                        0.90
                                   0.86
                                   0.90
                                            0.85
                                            0.90
                                                         0.82     0.80       0.75    0.78    07
                                                         0.88     0.88       0.88    0.86
U.K.            0.95    0.82       0.91     1.00         0.96     0.95       0.94    0.99    0.98
SWITZERLAND     0.90    0.91       0.93




Source: JMF, PjL!I9!L2Li!iearbook, and International Finarzai
Stat: sticm.




                                          4'O
               Table 10; Partner Country Trade Data Comparisons

A. Ratios o4 Repnrted F:irst Country Exports to
           Reported Second Country Imports

                  1976     1977    1978     1979   1980   1981      1982   1983   1964

MEX — BRAZIL      0.?9     1.02    1.07     0.98   0.99   4.11      1.13   1.13   1.05
VEN — BRAZIL*     1.04     0.95    0.82     1.03   1.23   1.05
ARG — BRAZIL      0.94     0.73    0.57     0.60   0.94   1.06      1.00   0.99   0.97
PHIL — H.K.       1.05     1.16    1.20     1.20   1.14   1.21      1.40   1.07   1.07
KOREA — H.K.      1.06     1.04    1.11     1.16   1.17   1.30      1.33   1.30   1.51



B. Ratac o F Fortci First Country Imports to
          Reportd Second Country Exports

                  19Th     11"77   1978     1979   1980   1981      1982   1983   1964

MEX — BRAZIL      1    1   0.91    0.89     0.83   0,87   0.91      0.96   0.92 0.8
VEN — BRAZIL*         0'   1.14    0.97     0.95   0.73   0.56
ARO — BRAZIL      0. 80    0.96    0.68     0.87   0.85   0.82      0.93   0.67   0.64
KOFE   H.K.           :.   0. 29   0. Zn    040    0.40   V. 0..'   0.71   0.54   0. 136
PHL — H,K.        0.52     0.51    0.57     0.55   0.58   0.56      0.54   0.66   0.68



Source: IMF, Dlrectorl      o'f Trade   Yearbook, and International_Financial
Stat_it Cs,

* Veneue1a     uset partner country data a4ter 1981.
                                   REFERENCES

 Bhagwati, Jagdish   N., Anne 0.
                             Kruger and Chaiyawat Wibulswasdj.
     "Capital Flight from LDCs: A Statistical Analysis," in J.N.
     Bhagwati  (ed.) Illegal Transactions in International Trade,
     Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing, 1974.
 Bhagwati, Jagdish N. "On the Underinvoicing of Imports," in in J.N.
     Bhagwati (ed.) Illegal Transactions in Interhationa]. Trade,
     Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing, 1974.
 dine, William. Unpublished estimates, 1986.
 Cuddington, John T. "Capital Flight: Estimates, Issues, and
     Explanations," Princeton Studies in International Finance, 1986.
     (forthcoming)
 Cuddington, John P. "Macroeconomic Determinants
     Chapter X in this volume.                   of Capital Flight,"

 Diwan, Ishac. "LDC's Debt, Potential
                                      Repudiation and Capital Flight,"
     New York University Graduate School of Business Administration,
     Unpublished manuscript, September 1986.
Dooley, Michael P. "Capital Flight: A Response to Differences in
    Financial Risks," Staff Papers, 1986. (forthcoming)
Dooley, Michael P., William Helkie, Ralph Tryon, and John Underwood,
    "An Analysis of External Debt Positions of Eight Developing
    Countries Through 1990," Journal of Development Economics, May
    1986.

Erbe, Susanne. "The Flight of Capital from
                                           Developing Countries,"
    Intereconomics, November/Deceer 1985, pp. 268—75.
Gulatj, Sunil K. "Adjusting Capital Flight Measurement for Over and
    Under—invoicing: Some Surprises," Chapter X in this volume.
Johnson, Harry G. "An 'Internationalist'
                                         Model," Chapter 5, pp. 69-91,
    in Walter Adams (ed.), The Brain Drain, New York: Macmillan, 1968.
Khan, Mohsjn S. and Nadeem Ui Hague.
                                     "Capital Flight from Developing
    Countries," The World Bank, Finance and Development, 1986.
    (forthcoming)

Morgan Guaranty Trust Company. "LDC Capital Flight," World Financial
    Markets, March 1986.
Norgenstern, Oskar. "On the Accuracy of Economic
                                                 Observations: Foreign
    Trade Statistics," in J.N. Bhagwati (ed.) Illegal Transactions in
    International Trade, Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing, 1974.
Naya, Seiji and Theodore Morgan. "The Accuracy of International Trade
    Data: The Case of Southeast Asian Countries," in J.N. Bhagwati
    (ed.) Illegal Transactions in International Trade, Amsterdam:
    North-Holland Publishing, 1974.

Patinkin, Don. "A 'Nationalist' Model," Chapter 5, pp. 92—108, in
    Walter Adams (ed.), The Brain Drain, New York: Macmillan, 1968.

Walter, Ingo. "The Mechanisms of Capital Flight," Chapter X in this
    volume.

World Development Report. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1985.
</ref_section>
                     APPEND I CES




A: Data Sources


B: Yearly Estintates of Capital Flight for Argentina, Brazil,
    Korea, Mexico, Philippines, Venezuela (1976—1984).




                    14'
                                 Data Appendix

   The sources and methods used for the calculation of the capital
flight and balance of payments figures found in Tables 1 through 6 in
the detailed tables included in this appendix are as follows.

A. Current Account Surplus: IMF, Balance of Payments Yearbook, 1985.

B. Net Foreign Direct Investment: IMF, Balance of Payments Yearbook, 1985.

C. Non—bank Private Short—Term Capital: IMF, Balance of Payments Yearbook,
   1985.  Items identified as 'Other short—term capital of other sectors."

D. Portfolio Investment: Bonds and Corporate Equities: IMF, Balance of
   Payments Yearbook, 1985. Items identified as "Other bonds, assets"
   and "Corporate Equaties."

E. Banking System Foreign Assets: IMF, International Financial
   Statistics. Calculated as the change in line 7ad (multiplied by —1
   for consi stency with the balance of payments sign convention).

F.   Change in Reserves: IMF, Balance of Payments Yearbook, 1985.
6. Net Errors   and Omissions: IMF, Balance of Payments Yearbook, 1985.
H.   Change in Debt: Data from   1978   to 19B4 are World Bank data, obtained
     from Dooley (1986). Data from      1976 and 1977 are from Doaley et. al.
     (198) .                                             -




   Items A, B, C, 8, F, and 6 are reported in millions of SDRs. Conver-
sion into U.S. dollars is made using the period average SDR/dollar
exchange rate (IFS line sb).
   Capital flight estimates, except for those labeled Dooley, are ob-
tained from these items using the forumlas in the following tables. The
estimates using Dooleys definition are taken directly from Dooley
(1986).                                                       -
                                                                                                                                   AR(3ENTINA
                                                                                                                          Millions       o4      US
                                                                              19/6                JQ/7         19/&     1979           198')           1981     1982     1983      1984
 (.    Current Account Surplus                                                    653             1131
         1. Tra'.ej (credit)                                                                                   1870      500         —4783            —4635    •2379
                                                                                  180               212         280      267                                            —2439     —2542
        2. Reinve.ted FDI Income                                                                                                        344             413      611      452
                                                                                      U               0          0                                                                  440
        3. Other investment Income                                (credit)            50
                                                                                                                              C)            C)            0                 ci
                                                                                                    127        316       68')          1227
                                                                                                                                                                                      C)
                                                                                                                                                        882      523      441
i.     Net Forein D]rect Investment                                                   0             145        273       262
                                                                                                                                                                                    264
                                                                                                                                       791              930      254      182      269
C. Nonbank Private                      Short—Term Capital                        --45              482      —1510      1450
         I.      Other Asets                                                        0                    0
                                                                                                                                     —1991             846.S    4808    —1513     1687
         2. LodnS E>:tended                                                                                      0            0           0               0        0                  0
                                                                                  662                —1         29      846
                                                                                                                                                                            i)
         3. Loans Received                                                   -7v8
                                                                                                                                       —36            —1487     —511      291      706
                                                                                                 -290
         4. Other           Lidbjtjtj5                                                2             773
                                                                                                              —755
                                                                                                               734
                                                                                                                        1965
                                                                                                                       1360
                                                                                                                                      2927
                                                                                                                                     —4881
                                                                                                                                                      —2211
                                                                                                                                                      —4767
                                                                                                                                                               —2675
                                                                                                                                                                1622
                                                                                                                                                                        —1242       13
                                                                                                                                                                          561      968
D. Fortfoljo lnestment:
              Bonds and Corporate                              ties
                                                     Eqi..ii                          0              0                    0              0                0        Ci
E. Banking            Sst.i Foreign Assets                                        NA                NA          NA       NA             NA               N       254     466       _79
F. 1;hanq jr               cserves                                           Y..l                   37       —2191    —4234           2628
                                                                                             --it
                                                                                                                                                      305       680     2473      --144
G.    Nt      Errors anc            Onijonc.                                                                    13      243           —310            —i
H. Chi.nqe        i   r.            )                                                                         1900     7600
                                                                                                                                                               —4':2               —52
                                                                                                                                                      6'I00    9900     2400      -200
      c:api   ti] F i iht.          Esti nat.e;           in Mill ,oni of    U.   .
                                                                                  —
                                                                                          Doll   .s ::r.; ::=_=___.,___                                      =r:=__r:__._
     Horid Ba,.. ,          WDR;        Erbe         H   +   Es   + A + F     132                4u
     t'lorg.ri             +        +       +       + F                                                      1852      3128          5036             5751     8455
                       H       Li       A       E                             132                940                                                                    2615     —2617
     Ci inc           (Morqan ec1udirig                           in                                         1852      3128          5036             5751     8709     2149
     Ct'ddinqtc.n              G + C
                                                          1—3          A.)    --98               00          1256      2181          3465             4457     7575
                                                                                                                                                                                 —2696
                                                                              266                -618        1497                                                       1255     —3400
     Dool ey                                                                                                          —1693          2301             8680     5210     1955
                                                                               NA                   NA       2000     4700           —900                                        —1635
                                                                                                                                                      6200     970CI     200     —5o
                                                                                                      8RAZIL
                                                                                                         lii
                                                                                                   Iii one of US 1:
       ==                ==
A. Current Account Surplus
                                   ==            = ===       ==
                                                                   1976        1977
                                                                    == = == == ==
                                                                  —6551     —5106
                                                                                          =
                                                                                       1978
                                                                                       == =
                                                                                      —71:31

                                                                                                 1979
                                                                                               —10468

                                                                                                          1980
                                                                                                             :, n
                                                                                                        —12793

                                                                                                                    1981      1982     1983     1984
                                                                                                                     == ======ar=a===n=====aat======
                                                                                                                  —11763    —16332    —6810       53
        Travel (credit)
        1.                                                           57         55       68        75           126      236        66     38     66
        2. Reinvested FDI Income                                      0          0        0         C)            0         0        o      o        o
        3. Other Investment Income (credit)                         282        358      640       245           314      :355     696     492     660
8. Net Foreign                Direct Investment                    1372       1684     1874      2220          1544     2317     2551    1374    1555
C. Nonbank Private Short—Term Capital                              1091        298     —126        26          1994      111     —287    —359   —3883
        1. Other Assets                                             —21        187       46        32            47       58        75     15   —3514
        2. Loans E<tended                                             0          0        0        —3             0        0        0                0
        3. Loans Received                                           880        -42       50        —8          1939       48     —363    —373    —357
        4. Other LiabIlities                                        2.31       154     —224         3             8         4        1      1     —12
D.    Portfolio Investment:
         8onds and Coporate Equities                                 NA         NA       NA        NA            NA       NA       NA      NA      NA
E.    8nking System Foreign Assets                                 —244        —9      --829     226            :328    —599      —11     173    -:350
F.    Chiinqe   in 1servs                                         -2602      —495     —4559     2907           3462     —674     5255    1873    541C)
(3.   Net Errors -rd Oinigions                                      494                 299      1227          —351     —39i)    -379    —617     406
H.    Change    i   ri   Debt       (5)                                      82"'     12300     6700           9900     9900    11100    4500   8900
                         ==                                           =
      Capital       Flight Estimates            in   Millions of U.S. Dollars
      Wnrld }3ank, WDR; Erbe H + 8 + A + F                         --62      42133     2594      1359          2113      221     2575    937    5098
      Morqani H + 8 + A + E + F                                   —3(8        444      1753     151)5          2441    --820     2564    1112   4748
      Cline    (Morgan excluding 1—3 in A.)                       —647       3931      10'iB     1264          2001    —1410     1802    582    4023
      Cuddington   (3                                              —494       418      —299    —1227            351      39(1     379     617   —406
      WL)R, Erbe          H    f   II + A + F                     —554       4.205      926     181 1          2769    —1419     2553    1287   4398
      Dooley                                                         NA         NA     490()    4900            400     150C)   —350C)   1700   6(100
                                                                                                              KOREA
                                                    1976         1977       1978
                                                                                                     Millions       of US    $
                                                                                       1979        1980           1981        1982      1983       1984
        1. Travel (credit)
                                                     275         370         408        327
        2. Reinvested FDI Income                                                                    370           448            02      595
        3. Other Investment Income (credit)               C)       0           0          0                                                         675
                                                      25           46
                                                                                                         i)            0           0       0
                                                                                        137         303           443            374
                                                                                                                                                          I)
                                                                                                                                         347        457
8. Net Foreign Direct Investment
                                                      75          72          61         17          _5            59            —78     _57
C.    Nonbat Private Short—Term Capital                                                                                                              75
        1.                                           354          23       —1198        844        1938
             Other
                Assets                                                                                           —136              3     895
        2.   Loans                                   —83        —306       —255        —371         —90                                            —774
                     E>tended                          0                                                           12             50     102        117
        3.   Loans   Received
                                                                      C)          0          0        0             0
                                                      97         —15       —289          26
                                                                                                                                   0          0       0
        4.   Other   Liabilities                                                                    -47           —14             12
                                                     3.39        .346      —652        1187        2Q76                                   16         —2
                                                                                                                 —132            —59     777      —59i)
D. Portfolio Investment:
       Bonds arid Coporate Equities
                                                                               0             0       0             77
E. 8anking System Foreign Assets                                                                                                          0          52
.  Change in eserves
                                                    -222
                                                   —1314

                                                                —347
                                                               —1371

                                                                           --81')
                                                                           —70
                                                                                       575
                                                                                       073
                                                                                                 —897.2
                                                                                                  —297

                                                                                                               —Zóo.4
                                                                                                                  304
                                                                                                                                 29
                                                                                                                                 44
                                                                                                                                       —384
                                                                                                                                        202
                                                                                                                                                  —334
0. Net Errors and Qmjs•jn                                                                                                                         —589
                                                   —242                    —326       -328        —331           —360       —1288      —951
H. Change     in   Debt   (fl                      2000        240(i       3000       5500
                                                                                                                                                  —919
                                                                                                  6500          4900         4100      2100       270')
=
     Capital Flight Estimates    in Millions   o   U.S. Dollars
              =
     World Bank, WOR; Erbe H +     + A + F
                                   13
                                                    454        1111                    487
     Morgan    H + U + A + E + F
                                                    232
                                                                           1291                    875           622        1298        668        842
     Cline                                                      764         401        —88
              (Morgan e>cluding 1—3 in A.)          —68
                                                                                                   —22            62        1327        294        508
     Cudding€on 0 + C                                           348        —26        —552        —695          —830
                                                   —112                                                                      450       —659
     Dool cy                                                     12        I52'       —516       —1607           495        1285         57
                                                                                                                                                  —625
                                                     NA          NA                   1700        —IQQ                                            1692
                                                                                                                —5QQ        1200       3QQ         5Qi)
                                                                                          MEXICO
            =============__=
A. Current Account Surplus
                                                      1976
                                                    —3410

                                                               1977
                                                              —1849

                                                                          1978
                                                                         —3163


                                                                                  Millions of US
                                                                                  1979
                                                                                 —5452

                                                                                           1980
                                                                                                =
                                                                                            —8162


                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                           —14020
                                                                                                                  ==_==
                                                                                                                          —6051        5323     3905
     1. Border rravel (credit)                        1398     1255       2085    2742        3573           4593          1236W       1103     1331
     2. Reinvested FDI Income                            ()          0      C)        0          I)               0           0           0        0
        3. Other   Investment Income (credit)          124       168      403      694        1023           1389          1320        1282     2054
B. Net Foreign Direct         Investment              628       556       829     1335       2184            2541          1644         454      392
C. Nonbank     Private Short—Term Capital            —405     —1657      —530    —1115       2800           3978          —2222    —6231       —4506
        1. Other Assets                              —708      —863      —441    —1755       -892          —2592          —2458    —3368       —2346
        2. Loans Received                             302      —794       —98      640       3691           6570           235     —2062       —2159
          a. Government—Owned Enterprises              38      —198      —187       97        267           4784          -639        12         —23
          b. Private Enterprises                      264      —595        89      736       3424           1786           873     —2875       —2136
I).   Portfolio Investment:
             Bonds and Corporate Equities             —53       —32          1     —52       —131             —12          300         -106     —192
E. Banking     System Foreign Assets                     0           0   —115     —296       —610             336          204           50      259
F.    Change   in Rtierves                            172      --321     —388     —317       —959          —1C)97         3546     —202')      —2134
G.    Nit Errors   and Otni ssi ons                 -2623            6   —130      647      —3776          "8318       —5399           —946
H.    Change in Debt    ($)                                    66')')    4600     71 00     1 43C'':       200c:)l:)      79u          791)0    3600
      Capita) Flight Estimates        in Millions of U.S. i)oliars
      World Bank, WDR; Erbe H + B + A + F            399C)     '1985     1878     2666       7363           8224          7039     11656       5763
      Morgan    H + B + A + E + F                    3990      4985      1763    2370        6753           8560          7243     11706       6022
      Curie    (Morgan e>cluding 1—3 in A.)          2468      3562      —725    —1066       2157           2578          4686      9322       2636
      Cuddington 6 + Cl                              :3331      857       571     1107       4667          10910          7856         4314    2584
      J)ool ey                                         NA         NA      100     1500       6900           6900          2100     1   1200     1900
 A. Current
 13.




             1.
             2. Reinvested

                            Account Surplus
                           FDI
                                (credit)
             3. Other Investment 'nco,n
        Net Foreign Direct Investment
                                        (cr,?dit)


                                                                        —1101
                                                                                 92
                                                                                  0
                                                                                 15
                                                                               12o



                                                                                         —754
                                                                                           145
                                                                                            30
                                                                                           209


                                                                                               0



                                                                                                           1978
                                                                                                       —1093
                                                                                                            210
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                             29
                                                                                                           101




                                                                                                                          1979
                                                                                                                          1496
                                                                                                                           238
                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                              37
                                                                                                                              8




                                                                                                                                      PHIL..JppINES
                                                                                                                                   Millions of US t
                                                                                                                                       1980
                                                                                                                                     —1913
                                                                                                                                        320
                                                                                                                                          I)
                                                                                                                                         86



                                                                                                                                                1981
                                                                                                                                                    —2125
                                                                                                                                                      343
                                                                                                                                                         I)
                                                                                                                                                      184)



                                                                                                                                                              =::
                                                                                                                                                               1982
                                                                                                                                                              —3210
                                                                                                                                                                   449
                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                   159




                                                                                                                                                                           1983
                                                                                                                                                                          —2753
                                                                                                                                                                            465
                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                               211




                                                                                                                                                                                          1984
                                                                                                                                                                                       —1241
                                                                                                                                                                                           367
                                                                                                                                                                                          286
                                                                                                                                                                                                I—)
                                                                                                                                      —107            172          15          loS         —6
 C. Nonbarik Private Short—Term
          1•      Other
          2. L.oans Ex tended
                              Ast                     Capital                 —98
                                                                            —312
                                                                                         —167
                                                                                          337
                                                                                                           —79         --596
                                                                                                                      —889
                                                                                                                                        319
                                                                                                                                      —389
                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                    —702      -361
                                                                                                                                                                   95      —646           545
          3. Loans RCCEIVCd                                                                 0                 0                             0                                  99          99
                                                                        •
                                                                              214         1s9
                                                                                                                                                        I—)      0              0           0
          4.      Other Ljbj1itjes                                                                         263            293          708           712       456        —744
                                                                                  4.)
                                                                                               o                              4)            0                                             446
                                                                                                                                                                 0              0
       Fortfoi,o                                                                                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                                        I—,
D.                           Investment:
              13orid and Coporate EqLI3               ties                     N           NA               NA             NA           NA            NA           NA          NA
E.                                                                                                                                                                                         NA
       L(nkiiiq        ys€en Foreign                                          405          77          --394          —   40.3        --816           29
F.     Lhnge        jr F'eri                                                    'I         29
                                                                                                                                                                               71      --122
                                                                                                       —878                           --961          348       703
Ii.    Net    Error           and Omi ssj tins
                                                                            —148
                                                                                                                                                                                       —262
                                                                                                           1.15           245          122          —504
H. Change          i   ri   Debt   ($)                                      I ,()()     1 l:)()        274:)
                                                                                                                                                              —373        —34              96
        ;_
                                                                                                                      251:H:,        41 o:          3404)     340C,                       500
 —                = == =            ;    =r:—— = ::
                                                                        :;:z:: ;:;
                              —=                      r: :z       =                                =   =          =       :                     =              =           =         =n         =
       World      FianJ-, WDR;      Erbe H +          B       A   + F       581
       Morgan         H + 13 ÷      A + E + F                                           1084           831             6:36
                                                                            986                                                      1119           1795      908         —904        —1010
       Cl inc    (Morgan excluding               1—3          A. )
                                                                                        1161           437            2:              303           1824      701         —833
                                                                            879         986            198            —4                                                              —1132
       Ci•iddinqton 6 + Cl                                                  459                                                      —103           1301                 —1509        —1785
       Drio1y                                                                            127           227            643             267
                                                                                                 VENEUEL.A
                                                                                           Millions of   US
              = ==   ==
A. Current Account Surplus
                                =      1r             fl=====
                                                          1976
                                                           254
                                                                  1977
                                                                 —3179
                                                                         =
                                                                              1978
                                                                               =
                                                                             —5735

                                                                                          1979
                                                                                           350
                                                                                                     1980
                                                                                                     4728
                                                                                                          =    1981
                                                                                                                 sr
                                                                                                               4000
                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                           1982
                                                                                                                       —4246
                                                                                                                                     afl2rfl
                                                                                                                               atn 1983
                                                                                                                                  4427

                                                                                                                                         1984
                                                                                                                                            4972
        1. Travel (credit)                                 109     168         205         178        243       187        309     .31')     358
        2. Reinvested FDI Income                             0       0           0           0           0        0          0        0        0
        3. Other Investment Income            (credit)     163     128        260          322        521      1009        631     629      1078
B. Net    Foreign Direct Investment                       —889      —4         68           88         55       184        253      86        50
C. Nonbank Private Short—Term               Capital      —1449    —453        —316        1876      —1971     —2760    —5773     —3493     —3017
     1. Other Assets                                      —859    —221        -417        —640      —1446     —2609    —4951      —723     —1313
        2. Loans Extended                                    0       0           0           0           0        0       0          0         0
        3. Loans Received                                '—686    —216         29         2568      —570       —262    —838      —2798     —1666
           a. Private Enterprises                           40      72         66          413        85        —38      168     —1835      —132
           b. Public Enterprises                          —726    —288        —38         2155      —655       —224    —1006      —962     —1533
        4. Other Liabilities                                96     —16          73         —53         46       111         17      27       —38
D.    Portfolio Investment:
          E'onds and Corporate Equities                   —192    —107       —i39            6      —263       —118        —10      —7        —1
E. Banking       System Foreign Assets                       4    -113        -199        —156           8       59         99    —686       102
F.    Chinge    in Resurves                              —2343    —801        1"64       —4098      —3764        21    8165       —336     —1568
(3.   N't Errors and Omissions                            2024    2270        1489         497     '-1128     --2139   —2161          7      104
                in Debt                                  —1200               6100                   5500       2300    —100       500       1900
                                                                                                   —_—_fl
H.    Change                  ($>                                 6400                    7300
        ==== =       =t        ======                      = ===             ————  ==                                   flflfl
      Capital Flight Estimates in Millions of U.S. Dollars
       == === ==—=====—================================= ======================= ====_= =========_==========fl============C=====
      World Bank, WDR; Erbe H + B + A + F        4178      2416     1496    3640      6519     6505     4072      4677    5362
      Morgan     H + B + A + E + F              —4174      2303     1297    3484      6527     6564     4171     3991     5464
      Cline     (Morgan excluding 1—3 in A.)    —4445      2007      832    2994      5763     5367                    3230
                                                                                                                          4028   3052
      Cuddinyton      6   +   Cl + B                      —973   —1950       —933
                                                                                     '
                                                                                           136      2837       4866    7122       723       1211
      Dool ey                                               NA     NA         400        8200       5500       —200    —600       9700     2700
