NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INATTENTION AND SWITCHING COSTS AS SOURCES OF INERTIA IN MEDICARE
PART D
Florian Heiss
Daniel McFadden
Joachim Winter
Amelie Wuppermann
Bo Zhou
Working Paper 22765
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22765

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2016

An earlier version of this paper was circulated under the title, “Plan switching and inertia in
Medicare Part D: Evidence from administrative data.” This research was funded by the
Behavioral and Social Research program of the National Institute on Aging (grants
P01AG05842-18, P01AG033559, R56AG026622-01A1, and RC4AG039036), with additional
support from the E. Morris Cox Fund at the University of California, Berkeley. We gratefully
acknowledge comments by, and discussions with, Eric French, Ben Handel, Maria Polyakova,
and Justin Sydnor, participants at the 2014 AEA meetings in Philadelphia, the 2014 ASHEcon
conference in Los Angeles, the 2014 CESifo Conference on Behavioral Economics in Munich,
the 2014 CEAR/MRIC Behavioral Insurance Workshop in Munich, the 2014 German Health
Econometrics Workshop in Wuppertal, the 2015 NBER Summer Institute, the 2015 Workshop on
Policyholder Behavior at ETH Zurich, the 2016 EuHEA meetings in Hamburg, as well as seminar
audiences at cemmap/UCL, DIW Berlin, Helmut Schmidt University Hamburg, and the
universities of Copenhagen, Essex, Leuven, Lugano, Lund, Regensburg, St. Gallen, Wuppertal,
Wurzburg, and Zurich. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Florian Heiss, Daniel McFadden, Joachim Winter, Amelie Wuppermann, and Bo
Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Inattention and Switching Costs as Sources of Inertia in Medicare Part D
Florian Heiss, Daniel McFadden, Joachim Winter, Amelie Wuppermann, and Bo Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 22765
October 2016
JEL No. C25,D12,G22,I13
ABSTRACT
The trend towards giving consumers choice about their health plans has invited research on how
good they actually are at making these decisions. The introduction of Medicare Part D is an
important example. Initial plan choices in this market were generally far from optimal. In this
paper, we focus on plan choice in the years after initial enrollment. Due to changes in plan
supply, consumer health status, and prescription drug needs, consumers' optimal plans change
over time. However, in Medicare Part D only about 10% of consumers switch plans every year,
and on average, plan choices worsen for those who do not switch. We develop a two-stage panel
data model of plan choice whose stages correspond to two separate reasons for inertia: inattention
and switching costs. The model allows for unobserved heterogeneity that is correlated across the
two decision stages. We estimate the model using administrative data on Medicare Part D claims
from 2007 to 2010. We find that consumers are more likely to pay attention to plan choice if
overspending in the last year is more salient and if their old plan gets worse, for instance due to
premium increases. Moreover, conditional on attention there are significant switching costs.
Separating the two stages of the switching decision is thus important when designing
interventions that improve consumers' plan choice.
Florian Heiss
University of Duesseldorf
LS Statistics and Econometrics
Universitaetsstrasse 1, Geb. 24.31
40225 Düsseldorf
Germany
florian.heiss@hhu.de

Amelie Wuppermann
Department of Economics
LMU Munich
Ludwigstr. 33
D-80539 Munich
Germany
amelie.wuppermann@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

Daniel McFadden
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu

Bo Zhou
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089-3331
zhoub@usc.edu

Joachim Winter
Department of Economics
LMU Munich
Ludwigstr. 33
D-80539 Munich
Germany
joachim.winter@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

1

Introduction

The recent trend towards giving consumers more choice about their health plans has
invited research on how good they are at making these decisions. Data come from private
markets (such as employer-sponsored health coverage) as well as from health insurance
programs that are offered or subsidized by governments. The introduction of Medicare
Part D is an important example. A rapidly expanding literature analyzes enrollment and
plan choices, using both survey and administrative data. Generally, initial plan choices
in Medicare Part D have been found to reconcile with standard normative models of
decision-making; see for example Abaluck and Gruber (2011) and Heiss et al. (2013).1
Initial plan choice is only one aspect of consumer choice in Medicare Part D. Once enrolled,
consumers stay in Medicare Part D for many years. Over time, they experience changes
in their health and prescriptions drug needs. On the supply side, the menu of plans
offered also changes from year to year. Moreover, recent reforms implement changes in
the copayment and coverage structure of Medicare Part D plans such as the gradual
abolishment of the infamous coverage gap. In the open enrollment period at the end of
each year, enrollees therefore face a switching decision for the next year that is as complex
as the initial plan choice.2 If consumers fail to make optimal switching choices, the welfare
cost to them can be large. Inertia among health insurance enrollees also has implications
for firm behavior, with potentially large effects on market outcomes and overall welfare;
see Handel (2013), Ericson (2014), Handel and Kolstad (2015), Ho et al. (2015), Decarolis
et al. (2015), and Polyakova (2016). There is, however, also the possibility that plan
choices improve over time since enrollees learn, as stressed by Ketcham et al. (2012).
In this paper, our objectives are to characterize the sources of inertia, to study the events
that trigger switching in the presence of inertia, and to simulate and compare the effects
of interventions aimed at reducing inertia. We specify a structural consumer choice model
with two crucial features. First, the model comprises separate attention and plan selection
stages, to separate inattention and switching costs as reasons for inertia. As Abaluck and
Gruber (2016a) note this is an important distinction. Second, it allows for unobserved
heterogeneity that enters both stages. Our empirical results confirm that these features
1

We review the literature on plan choices in Medicare Part D in Section 2.2.

2

Each year during the Medicare Part D annual enrollment period that runs between October 15 and
December 7, individuals on Medicare have the opportunity to enroll in Part D, or if they are enrolled,
to switch plans. Switching plans does not involve any fees, and as at initial enrollment, plans have to
accept all individuals. Important institutional features of the Medicare Part D market are described in
Bach and McClellan (2005), Duggan et al. (2008) and Heiss et al. (2010), among others. We provide
an overview in Section 2.1.

1

together provide a more realistic picture of plan switching and inertia in Medicare Part
D than simpler models. Our simulations illustrate that these features also alter the evaluation of inertia-reducing interventions. Furthermore, our findings add to the mounting
evidence on the interaction between inattention and the salience of product characteristics
in complex environments such as health insurance markets.
Estimation and simulation of our two-stage model of plan switching are based on administrative data on Medicare Part D plan choice and prescription drug use for 2007 through
2010.3 A preliminary, descriptive analysis confirms that annual plan switching rates in
the Medicare Part D market are low, a finding that is in line with earlier studies of plan
switching in this and many other markets, reviewed in Section 2.2 below. We characterize
switching behavior descriptively in terms of overspending, defined as the difference between the consumer’s total costs4 induced by the plan the consumer has chosen and that
of the least-cost alternative (for given prescription drug use).5 We find that overspending
is much lower among individuals who switch plans than for stayers. Overspending is furthermore lower for those who actively decide to switch than for those who are forced to
make a plan choice (because they enter the Part D market for the first time or because
their old plan is not available any more). This finding suggests that those individuals
who make an active switching decision are selected, which is reflected in our structural
model. Our descriptive analysis further suggests that overspending cannot be fully explained by unobserved plan characteristics that might lead consumers to optimally choose
plans associated with higher overspending.6
The structural model of plan choice we present in this paper allows for different sources
of persistence. Specifically, an individual may end up staying in the same plan as in the
previous year for two reasons. First, last year’s plan might be the optimal choice. The
fact that plan features change relatively little over time together with preference heterogeneity will result in persistence of plan choices over time. Second, an individual might
3

We restrict our analysis to individuals enrolled in a stand-alone prescription drug plan (i. e., not in
managed care) and who are not eligible for a Low-Income Subsidy (LIS). Further details are given in
Section 3.

4

The total costs that the consumer has to bear include premiums, deductibles, and copayments that
she has to pay for prescription drugs.

5

Overspending has been defined and studied in several earlier studies of Medicare Part D plan choice,
including Abaluck and Gruber (2011), Heiss et al. (2013), and Abaluck and Gruber (2016a). We
discuss how the overspending measure we use here is constructed in Section 3 below.

6

This observation is related to a more general discussion about the use of parameterized models of choice
behavior to study the rationality of consumers in Medicare Part D and other markets, see Ketcham
et al. (2016) and Abaluck and Gruber (2016b). We return to this issue in the concluding Section 7.

2

stay with the old plan even though it is not optimal any more – this is the definition
of inertia. Much of the prior literature has used the concept of switching costs to rationalize this second cause of persistence. In discrete choice models, such switching costs
are typically captured by including a dummy variable for the old plan among the plan
characteristics. Its coefficient has been interpreted as a monetary estimate of utility loss
arising from switching costs. See Farrell and Klemperer (2007) for a review of the literature on switching costs in industrial organization. Recent studies of switching behavior
in Medicare Part D and other health care markets that use such models include Miller
and Yeo (2012), Nosal (2012), Handel (2013), Ericson (2014), Handel and Kolstad (2015),
Ho et al. (2015), Abaluck and Gruber (2016a), and Polyakova (2016). These studies also
provide discussions of the sources of switching costs in health insurance markets, the most
important one being transaction or “hassle” costs. We review theses studies in more detail
in Section 2.2.
The approach of including a dummy variable for the old plan in a discrete choice model
implies that each individual compares the available plans in each year and deliberately
makes a choice – which seems unrealistic. Moreover, our simulations show that in such
a model, switching costs would have to be unreasonably large to produce the typically
low switching rates, a result several earlier studies found as well. Polyakova (2016) points
out that including heterogeneity in these one-stage models tends to bring down estimated
switching costs. The two-stage model we propose achieves this as well, but we add a
behavioral dimension by including inattention as a second source of inertia. We argue that
this set-up is more realistic as not all consumers are assumed to evaluate all alternatives
in every year. Rather, they differ in their propensity of making a deliberate choice, which
may be increased by attention triggers such as salient changes of plan features. Our
empirical results show that the model with a separate attention stage fits the data better
and provides more realistic estimates of switching costs than the standard model that
ascribes inertia to switching costs alone.
The second innovative feature of our model is heterogeneity in consumers’ ability and
willingness to make diligent decisions. We model this heterogeneity as a latent variable,
which we call acuity, consisting of both observed and unobserved components. Importantly, acuity enters both the attention and the plan-choice stage. Moreover, the model
allows for heterogeneity in the implied switching costs. Taken together, these features provide a rich structural framework that can reproduce the descriptive evidence, including
selectivity of switchers.

3

A few recent models of switching behavior in Medicare Part D and other markets allow
for both inattention and switching costs. While they share certain features of our model,
none comprises all of them.7 Kiss (2014) studies liability insurance switching in Hungary.
His specification of the attention stage is simpler than ours as he can rely on a natural
experiment that creates variation in the attention probability. Further, his model does
not allow for unobserved heterogeneity while the fact that such heterogeneity enters both
stages is a crucial feature of ours. Hortaçsu et al. (2015) develop another model that
comprises both attention and switching stages; they use it to analyze inertia in the Texas
residential electricity market. Their model also does not allow for unobserved heterogeneity that enters both stages. Ho et al. (2015) is substantively related to the present paper as
they analyze inattention in Medicare Part D and discuss attention triggers. Their model
neither allows for switching costs in the second stage nor for unobserved heterogeneity
that enters both stages. They focus on the implications of inertia for firm behavior while
our objective is to study interventions that reduce it.
In order to characterize the individual and joint contributions of inattention, switching
costs, and acuity to the observed persistence of plan choices, we estimate four versions of
the model that sequentially add features. The fourth version is the full model, as outlined
above. It provides the best fit of the data, and the nested simpler versions are statistically
rejected.
The estimation results for the full model provide interesting insights into the nature of
inattention in this market. Consumers are more likely to pay attention to plan choice if
overspending in the last year is more salient and if their old plan gets worse, for instance
due to premium increases. However, consumers are not more likely to pay attention when
they experience the onset of a chronic health condition that involves costly prescription
drugs, although such an onset could make it worthwhile to search for a plan with a more
suitable formulary. These findings are in line with the recent literature on inattention and
salience, an issue to which we return in the conclusions (Section 7).
Our model allows us to simulate interventions aimed at reducing inertia. Hoadley et al.
(2013) discuss a variety of such interventions from a policy perspective. In our framework, some of them would affect attention while others would reduce switching costs, a
distinction that seems to be made neither in the policy discussion nor in earlier structural
7

Our study and the papers cited in this paragraph introduce inattention in two-stage models of consumer
choice. Alternative but related motivations for introducing a first stage focus on decision costs. In a
study of retirement investment, Luco (2014) distinguishes between decision costs and enrollment costs.
The first-stage decision in Honka (2014) determines how many markets a consumers searches and thus
endogenizes the size of her consideration set.

4

models of plan choice in this and other markets.8 In the one-stage standard model, inertia is induced only by switching costs which suggests interventions that reduce the hassle
costs of switching, for instance by facilitating paperwork. Removing switching costs in
the simplest one-stage version of our model unsurprisingly yields a dramatic increase in
switching rates and reduced overspending. However, just as switching costs are likely
overestimated in this simple model, the effect of removing them is unrealistically large.
When we simulate versions of our model that include an attention stage, removing switching costs has a much smaller effect. As we discuss in detail below, our simulations suggest
that forcing people to actively consider switching plans has a much larger effect than
reducing switching costs. This and additional simulation results highlight that compared
to our full two-stage model with observed and unobserved heterogeneity, simpler models
of plan switching may yield misleading findings.
Importantly, our results imply that simpler models that do not include a separate attention stage overestimate switching costs and underestimate inertia. Further, ignoring
(in)attention leads to a selection problem as making an active decision is the outcome
of the attention stage which involves unobservables – in our model, acuity. As active
plan choices are observed only for a selected group of high-acuity deciders, simpler models would overestimate the gain from reductions in inattention and switching costs: they
predict the behavior of the full population using the estimates of a selected population
without adjusting for the acuity differences.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We begin by describing the institutional arrangements of the Medicare Part D that are relevant for our analysis and the
related literature on plan choice and plan switching in this and other markets in Section
2. Section 3 describes the data sources, the construction of our analytic dataset, and the
definitions of the model variables. It also reports some descriptive empirical facts about
plan switching in Medicare Part D which motivate the set-up of our two-stage discrete
choice model. This model is then introduced in Section 4. The estimation results are
presented and discussed in Section 5. In Section 6, we report the results of simulations of
policy interventions aimed at reducing inertia in the Medicare Part D market. In Section
7, we summarize our findings and draw policy conclusions.
8

We discuss this issue further in Section 6.

5

2

Background

2.1

Institutional framework of Medicare Part D

Medicare Part D, introduced in 2006, provides the Medicare-eligible population with
universal access to standardized, heavily subsidized prescription drug coverage through
government-approved plans sponsored by private insurance companies and health maintenance organizations (HMOs). In addition to providing access to affordable drug coverage
to all Medicare beneficiaries (in particular to the chronically ill), a second policy goal was
to create a “competitive, transparent marketplace offering a wide array of benefits” (Bach
and McClellan (2005), p. 2733). The institutional design of Medicare Part D exemplifies
the current trend toward “consumer-directed health care” (Goodman (2006)) as it relies
on consumer behavior and competition among insurers to attain satisfactory market outcomes with limited government regulation. In the case of Medicare Part D, and arguably
also in other similar programs, giving consumers more choice also means confronting them
with difficult decisions. In the following, we describe the features of the program that are
relevant for our present analysis.
Medicare beneficiaries can enroll in Part D when they become eligible for Medicare. If they
enroll, they can choose between about 50 plans (the exact number varies across regions).
Once enrolled, they can switch to a new plan annually during the open enrollment period
at the end of each year. If individuals do not actively decide to switch to a different
plan they are automatically re-enrolled in their old plan for the new year. The menu of
available plans is the same for first-time enrollees and switchers.
Each firm that wants to enter this market has to offer at least a plan that is actuarially equivalent to a standard plan whose features are tightly specified. Features of the
standard plan include formulary, the beneficiary’s annual pharmacy bill for drugs in the
plan formulary, the beneficiary’s total out-of-pocket (OOP) payments for these covered
drugs, the threshold for catastrophic coverage, and the monthly premium,. The standard
Medicare Part D plan had the following benefit schedule in 2006:9
• The beneficiary has an annual deductible of $250.
• The beneficiary pays 25 percent of drug costs above $250 and up to $2,250 (the
“initial coverage limit” or ICL). The expense born by the beneficiary is then $750
for a beneficiary whose pharmacy bill has reached $2,250.
9

In subsequent years, these numbers were adjusted, see for example Heiss et al. (2013).

6

• The beneficiary pays 100 percent of drug costs between total OOP of $2,250 and
$3,600; this is referred to as the coverage gap or doughnut hole. The threshold of
$3,600 is attained at a drug bill of $5,100.
• The beneficiary pays 5 percent of drug costs above the drug cost threshold of $5,100,
at which the total OOP threshold level is achieved; this is referred to as catastrophic
coverage.
The Medicare Part D plans sponsored by private insurance firms may differ from the standard plan in their premiums and other plan features, provided that their benefits for any
drug costs are, on average, at least as high as those of the standard plan. Enhancements
may in particular include coverage for the $250 deductible and for the gap in the standard
plan.
This design implies that Medicare Part D stand-alone plans are characterized by the following variables: premium, deductible (if any), ICL for those plans that are not classified
as “standard benefit”, and the formulary benefit design which specifies drug tiers and copayments. Together with the specific prescription drugs an enrollee uses over the course
of the year, these characteristics determine her OOP cost. The sum of these OOP cost
and the premiums paid is the total cost to the consumer which for simplicity we refer to
as “total costs” in the following.
Despite this complexity, there are two institutional features that provide beneficiaries
with easy access to information on the plans that are available to them and their cost
implications.
First, it is rather straightforward for an individual to figure out the total costs implied by
her prescription drug use (or, if the calculation is made for the future, by her expected
prescription drug use), for her current plan and any other plans that are available for the
next year. The Medicare Plan Finder, provided by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS) is an online decision tool supporting Part D plan choices.10 Plan Finder
allows consumers to determine the premiums and expected annual OOP costs of any given
set of prescription drugs for the plans available at their location, and invites consumers
to do this for their existing prescriptions. Plan Finder thus allows consumers to evaluate
and compare total costs of all plans at low costs.11
10

The CMS Plan Finder can be accessed at http://www.medicare.gov/find-a-plan/ (last visited: September 9, 2016).

11

A further complication arises as the drug within a therapeutic class that implies the lowest copayment
depends on the chosen plan. This introduces another dimension, drug substitution, into the choice

7

Second, before the beginning of the open enrollment period, each plan has to send a
standardized “Plan Annual Notice of Change” (ANOC) to its enrollees, based on a template provided by CMS. This notice contains a table with cost-relevant plan features for
the current and the following year (premium, deductible, copayments) as well as detailed
information on all changes that will become effective in January of the following year.12
2.2

Existing literature on plan choice and switching in Medicare Part D

Since its introduction in 2006, a large number of studies pose the question of how good
individuals are at making decisions in the Medicare Part D market. How consumers
respond to prices and costs in this market is crucial for assessing the welfare effects of its
introduction and subsequent reforms, in particular given that plan sponsors will adjust
their pricing strategies accordingly.
Early studies of enrollment decisions and initial plan choices, such as Heiss et al. (2010)
and Kling et al. (2012), analyzed survey data and documented choices that seemed unlikely to be optimal. At the same time, initial enrollment rates were high and overall
the introduction of Medicare Part D was deemed to be successful, see Heiss et al. (2006),
Goldman and Joyce (2008), and Duggan et al. (2008).
More recent research uses much more detailed administrative data on plan choices and
prescription drug claims provided by CMS. A finding of several early studies in this
literature is that for substantial fractions of those enrolled in Part D, initial plan choices
imply overspending: For a given use of prescription drugs, plans with lower total costs than
that of the chosen plan exist, see Abaluck and Gruber (2011), Zhou and Zhang (2012),
and Heiss et al. (2013). For example, Heiss et al. document that in 2006–2009, less than a
quarter of individuals were enrolled in plans that were, from an ex ante viewpoint, as good
as the least-cost plan covering the same drugs. Their estimates indicate that consumers
overspent about $300 per year, on average. Unobserved plan and taste heterogeneity may
explain some of the overspending documented in this and other studies but most likely
not all of it.
problem. Plan Finder suggests generic substitutes for branded drugs, but does not conveniently provide
information that allows consumers to price out drug substitutes, or calculate risks associated with new
conditions or complications. Relative to the first-order effect of choosing the least-cost plan for a given
set of prescription drugs, drug substitution is, however, a second-order concern. See Heiss et al. (2013)
for a detailed discussion.
12

A recent example of an ANOC can be found at https://www.yourmedicaresolutions.com/sites/
default/files/2015%20%20Standard%20ANOC.pdf (last visited: September 9, 2016).

8

There is less consensus about whether plan choices have improved over time. Given that
beneficiaries’ drug needs evolve over time and plan sponsors adjust key features such as
premiums and the formulary benefit design every year, and as changing plans during the
annual open enrollment period involves no monetary cost, one would expect that switching
is frequent. However, switching rates are rather low – estimates of about 10 percent had
already been found in 2006 and 2007 survey data by Heiss et al. (2010). Low switching
rates have also been documented by Hoadley et al. (2013) in a descriptive analysis of plan
switching using Medicare Part D claims data for 2006 through 2010. They document
that switching rates are generally low; only 13 percent voluntarily switch plans during
the annual enrollment period. Even though large premium increases were associated with
higher switching rates, most enrollees with relatively large premium increases did not
switch plans. Seven out of ten Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in stand-alone Part D
prescription-drug plans during all four annual open enrollment periods from 2006 to 2010
did not voluntarily switch plans in any of these periods. These descriptive results are in
line with those we report in Section 3 below and with those of several other studies that
employ explicit choice models.
A natural approach to assess the effect of inertia at the individual level is to check how
overspending evolves over time. Ketcham et al. (2012) find that enrollees were more
likely to switch plans if their potential gain from doing so was larger and that overall,
large reductions in overspending were realized from 2006 to 2007. In contrast, using
the full universe of claims data that became available subsequently, Abaluck and Gruber
(2016a) find that forgone savings from choosing suboptimal plans have increased during
the first four years of Medicare Part D. They argue that there has been little consumer
learning over time in the Part D market, and that increasing choice inconsistencies are
driven by changes on the supply side that are not offset by consumers because of inertia.
As mentioned in the introduction, studies of plan inertia in this and other markets typically involve a discrete choice model that includes a dummy variable as a characteristic
of the old plan. Miller and Yeo (2012) develop an algorithm that allows them to estimate
switching costs using aggregate data on market shares. Applying this approach to data
from Medicare Part D for 2006–2010, they find very high switching costs of around $1,700,
which seems unrealistic. Estimates of switching costs based on individual level data tend
to be smaller as they allow for some heterogeneity, see Polyakova (2016). Nevertheless,
papers that use individual-level data find evidence of substantial switching costs and also
of inattention (Ho et al. (2015)), and this is also the case for the present study. However,
there is no consensus about how serious the problem of inertia is. Ketcham et al. (2015)
9

argue that while annual switching rates are low, over time a relevant fraction of those
enrolled in Part D do switch: Of those enrolled in 2006, only about half remained in the
same plan in 2010.
Another dimension of consumer behavior in health insurance markets that has been studied using administrative data from Medicare Part D concerns their reaction to nonlinear
price schedules. Einav et al. (2015) show that beneficiaries react to the complex intertemporal incentives induced by non-linearities in Part D’s copayment structure by substituting
drugs within and across years. Their model assumes that all beneficiaries respond to these
incentives similarly, but they differ with respect to their price elasticities.

3

Data construction and descriptive evidence on plan switching

In our analysis of plan switching and inertia in Medicare Part D, we use the claims records
of a 20% representative sample of Medicare enrollees in the years 2007–2010. These claims
data have also been used by other researchers working on Medicare Part D plan choice
and switching, including Abaluck and Gruber (2011), Abaluck and Gruber (2016a), Heiss
et al. (2013), Ho et al. (2015), Hoadley et al. (2013), and Polyakova (2016). As most
of these earlier studies, we restrict our analysis to the claims for beneficiaries aged at
least 65, in stand-alone prescription drug plans (PDPs) who do not receive low-income
subsidies and are not dual-eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.
The claims data consist of several databases. Conceptually, the data can be thought of
as being organized by beneficiary. The plan in which the beneficiary is enrolled in a given
year is identified by an encrypted plan ID that allows plan characteristics (premium, deductibles, gap coverage) to be linked. The plan formularies which specify the copayments
and are thus essential for determining the beneficiary’s total costs associated with alternative plans were not available when the dataset we use was constructed. Information on
plan formularies is thus inferred from copayment costs.13
Throughout the paper, we use the following convention for dating variables: Decisions
with respect to plans covering prescription drug use in year t are taken during the open
enrollment period at the end of year t−1. The plan in which a consumer is enrolled in
year t−1 is referred to as the “old plan” or the “year t−1 plan”, and the “new plan” is
the one covering year t.
13

The algorithm is described in Heiss et al. (2013); a similar approach has been used by other researchers
including Abaluck and Gruber (2016a).

10

3.1

Sample

To study switching between Part D plans among seniors, we form working samples of Part
D enrollees who have unrestricted choice among all the plans available in their Medicare
region, and have sufficient data on their health, drug use, OOP costs, and premiums to
estimate our plan-choice models.
The full 20% samples comprise between 9.3 and 10 million individuals per year, for the
four years 2007–2010. We restrict our analytic sample to those individuals who are U.S.
residents, aged 65 years or older, enrolled in stand-alone, non-employer (non-EGWP) Part
D prescription drug plans; are neither entitled to the Low-Income Subsidy (LIS) nor dual
eligible for Medicaid; are continuously enrolled in Part D in two adjacent years; and do
not switch plans during the year (outside of the open enrollment period).14
Applying these criteria results in sample sizes of around 1.2 million individuals for the
years 2008–2010 (Table 1). As we analyze plan choice for year t as made at the end of
year t−1, conditional on year t−1 information, we estimate our choice models for these
three years. The criteria for selecting individuals for our analytic sample are essentially
the same as those used by Heiss et al. (2013) and other studies of plan choice in Medicare
Part D. In the final step, we randomly select 100,000 individuals since the estimation of
our model is computationally intensive. The number of observations available for each
year is smaller (Table 1) as the resulting panel is unbalanced. The total number of choices
across all individuals and years is 238,280. All descriptive statistics and model estimates
reported in the remainder of the paper refer to this estimation sample, or to sub-samples
thereof.
3.2

Plan choice, prescription drug use, and individual characteristics

For our subsequent analysis, we construct various variables that measure individual characteristics, health status, prescription drug use, and plan choice. These data are augmented with data on the features of the available plans (which may vary every year) such
as premium and whether they provide gap coverage.
In addition, we construct cost variables based on the individual’s prescription drug use
during year t−1, i. e., the year at the end of which decisions for year t are made. The
14

For those who are not in a stand-alone plan, we do not have data on individual prescription drug
claims. Eligibility for the LIS, in turn, changes the nature of the choice problem an individual faces
considerably, as discussed for instance by Decarolis (2015). These groups are commonly excluded in
recent studies of plan choice and switching behavior using claims data, as for instance in Ho et al.
(2015), Abaluck and Gruber (2016a), and Polyakova (2016).

11

list of all prescription drugs used combined with the formulary and benefit design of a
Part D plan and the plan’s premium gives the total costs of that plan, i. e., the sum of all
copayments, the premiums, and any deductibles. We construct total costs for year t for
the plan chosen in year t−1 and for any plan available in the next year.
We also construct variables that indicate whether according to her OOP costs, an individual (in her current year plan) ended up in the Part D catastrophic region, in the coverage
gap, or below the coverage gap.
Finally, we construct indicators for the incidence of new health conditions, classified by
whether they are costly in terms of prescription drugs or not. We classify conditions as
costly if having the specific condition predicts high prescription drug costs in supplementary regressions.15
As the claims data contain very little demographic information on the individual (age,
sex, and race), we further augment our data with regional information from the American
Community Survey (ACS). We include the ZIP-code share of individuals aged 65 and
above without a high school degree (“low education”) as well the share of the population
aged 65 or above with income below the federal poverty level (“low income”) and above
5× the federal poverty level (“high income”).
Descriptive statistics for these variables are reported below in Section 5. In the remainder
of the present section, we discuss the choice and cost variables descriptively.
3.3

Optional vs. forced choosers

In our subsequent analysis, we distinguish optional and forced choosers: Forced choosers
are individuals who do not have a default plan and thus are forced to pay attention to
plan choice. For optional choosers, on the contrary, the plan that they were enrolled in
t−1 is part of their choice set in t. If they do not take action, they will by default stay
in their old plan.
Optional choosers either switch to a new plan or stay in the old one. Thus, every year,
each individual falls into one of three groups: Forced choosers, optinoal switchers, and
15

Costly conditions include acute myocardial infarction, ischemic heart disease, stroke, breast and lung
cancer, Alzheimer’s disease and dementia, diabetes, depression and asthma. In comparison to these
conditions, hip fracture, prostate cancer, endometrial cancer, colorectal cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic kidney disease, osteoporosis, heart failure, rheumatoid arthritis/osteoarthritis,
glaucoma, anemia, benign prostatic hyperplasia, hyperlipidemia, acquired hypothyroidism, hypertension, atrial fibrillation are relatively cheap and thus included as “cheap” conditions.

12

optional stayers. Table 2 displays the shares of these groups. The majority of individuals
ends up staying in their old plan. On average across all three years, only a little more
than 10% of the optional choosers leave their old plan. On average, and across all years,
about 3.4% of individuals are forced to make a plan choice. The majority of them do not
have a default plan because they are new to Medicare Part D (97%). Only 3% of forced
choosers have been enrolled in a t−1 plan that is no longer available in year t. Despite
some differences in sample definitions, these numbers are in line with those reported in an
extensive descriptive analysis of administrative data on Medicare Part D plan switching
between 2006 and 2010 by Hoadley et al. (2013).
3.4

Total costs and overspending

To motivate our analysis of inertia in Medicare Part D plan choices and the effect of
policy interventions designed to reduce it, we now present descriptive evidence on the
quality of plan choices of forced choosers, optional switchers and optional stayers. In
the literature on plan-choice quality in Medicare Part D, and in health insurance more
generally, a measure of overspending is frequently used for this purpose, see Abaluck and
Gruber (2011), Heiss et al. (2013), and Abaluck and Gruber (2016a), among others. As
stated above, conceptually, overspending is defined as the difference between the total
costs (to the consumer) of the plan a consumer has chosen and the total costs of the
least-cost alternative. This definition reflects the fact that relevant features of the plans
such as premiums, deductibles, the plan formulary and copayments are summarized in
the total costs.
In practice, measures of overspending can be constructed in different ways. A key distinction is that between an ex ante and an ex post perspective. Tables 3 and 4 display
ex post and ex ante overspending for forced and optional choosers, separately for stayers
and switchers.
Ex post overspending for year t is calculated based on the prescription drugs that an
individual has taken in that year. It thus reflects the costs that beneficiaries actually
realized during year t. As Table 3 shows, individuals who stay in their old plan have
the highest overspending, on average, compared to both optional switchers and forced
choosers. These numbers might be taken to imply that actively making decisions results
in better outcomes. This is not what one would expect if individuals stayed in their old
plans because of a preference for unobserved plan characteristics.

13

Individuals who are forced to do not choose quite as well as those who actively decide
to switch to a different plan, which indicates substantial heterogeneity in the ability to
choose plans. This implies that optional switchers are a selected group of individuals
who appear to make better choices than forced choosers who, in turn, are mostly newly
enrolled and therefore not selected at all. Our structural model of plan choice allows for
heterogeneity of individuals’ choice quality and can explain these features of observed
overspending.
In Table 4, we turn to ex ante overspending for stayers and switchers, which is based on
prescription drugs taken in year t − 1 (this measure cannot be computed for the newly
enrolled individuals who make up 97% of the forced choosers as their prescriptions for
t − 1 are not observed). This measure is meant to capture beneficiaries’ information on
their prescription drug needs at the time when they make their plan choice. This is also
the information beneficiaries are asked to provide to the Medicare Plan Finder discussed
above. The table shows ex ante overspending in year t for the plan that individuals chose
for year t as well as for the plan that they chose in t−1. For the group of stayers, the two
plans are obviously the same. For the switchers, overspending based on the t−1 plan is
the amount they would have overspent had they stayed in their old plan. The difference
in overspending between the old and new plans thus captures how much switchers have
saved by switching plans – $180 per year, on average. Compared to stayers, switchers’
overspending in the t−1 plan is slightly higher in all years except for 2010. This suggests
that high ex ante overspending in the old plan may encourage individuals to switch to a
different plan.
A particularly interesting group of individuals are those who have chosen the ex ante
cost-minimizing plan. As discussed in Heiss et al. (2013), this is the choice implied by
static optimization. It can easily be implemented, for instance by using a decision aid
such as the Medicare Plan Finder discussed above. The lower panel of Table 4 displays
the share of individuals with zero ex ante overspending, separately for the two groups
of optional choosers. A much larger share of switchers than of stayers have zero ex ante
overspending. These numbers also support the notion that switchers make better choices
than stayers.
In the structural model of plan choice presented in the remainder of this paper, we take an
ex post perspective. We cannot use the ex ante measures because they are not available for
the group of forced choosers. Ex post measures of overspending might seem problematic
as they condition on information on outcomes, realized during year t, that are not known
to the individual at the end of year t−1. Ex ante measures, in contrast, do not condition
14

on year t outcomes but require assumption on how individuals form expectations at the
end of year t−1 with respect to these variables. These assumption can also be problematic.
We discussed the trade-off between using ex ante and ex post measures in detail in earlier
work, see Heiss et al. (2013). In our analysis of static Medicare Part D choices, we found
that the key substantive findings do not depend on whether ex ante or ex post measures
are used.

4

A two-stage model of plan switching decisions

In this section, we introduce a comprehensive model of plan selection that is behaviorally
more plausible and can explain more of the empirical findings presented in Section 3
than typical models used in the literature. It includes two features that have not been
combined in previous papers. First, it comprises separate inattention and plan selection
stages including switching costs. Without some sort of trigger, consumers might not
pay attention to the plan-choice opportunity and fail to compare plans during the open
enrollment period. If they compare plans and find a more attractive one, switching might
still be hampered by hassle and other switching costs. Second, our model allows for both
observed and unobserved heterogeneity in the ability and willingness to make diligent
decisions. This “acuity” affects both stages, allowing for the effect that individuals who
consider switching make more careful choices than the average. Leaving the attention
stage aside, the choice model uses a mixed (i. e., random parameters) multinomial logit
specification with heteroskedasticity, building on McFadden (1974) and McFadden and
Train (2000).
We first present the structure of the choice problem in Section 4.1. The concept of acuity is
introduced in Section 4.2. Then we discuss the two stages of the choice model in Sections
4.3 and 4.4. Identification of the two-stage model is discussed in Section 4.5. Since
inattention is unobserved and acuity enters both stages simultaneously as a latent variable,
all model parameters have to be estimated jointly. We use a maximum likelihood estimator
with a numerical approximation of the analytically unavailable likelihood function; details
are discussed in Section 4.6.

15

4.1

Structure of the choice problem

We model the plan choice for a set of consumers i = 1, . . . , N for years t = 1, . . . , T .16
Since the individuals start enrolling in Part D in different years, can die during the time
our panel data covers, or can change the low-income subsidy status or other criteria
for inclusion in our estimation sample discussed in Section 3.1, our panel data set is
unbalanced and T differs by individual. For notational convenience, we do not explicitly
index T by i in the remainder of this section. Individual i chooses among the available
plans in year t. This choice set Yit contains around 50 plans on average, but the number
of plans and their features differ by t and Medicare region.
4.2

Acuity

Individuals differ in both their ability to, and their willingness to put effort into, making
good plan-choice decisions. We introduce a latent variable, acuity, that captures these
aspects. Acuity may comprise such diverse factors as intelligence, financial literacy, mental
health, opportunity costs of time, or the availability of support from children, doctors,
or other sources. It can affect choices in both stages: Individuals with high levels of
acuity might be more likely to pay attention in the first stage of the model, i. e., they
collect and compare information on the available plans. If they do pay attention, acuity
might also affect the weight they put on the objective consequences of the plans such as
their premiums and implied OOP costs and the error variance in the second stage (the
multinomial choice model).
Acuity qit of individual i at time t is a latent variable that depends on observed individual characteristics wit . We include variables such as age, gender, depression, and ZIP
code level socio-economic characteristics. qit also includes a time-constant unobserved
heterogeneity term λi which we assume to be normally distributed:
qit = wit α + λi

(1)

Since qit is unobserved, it is only identified up to location and scale. For normalization, we
do not include a constant in the model and define λi to have a zero mean and a variance
of one.
16

The time index t refers to the year for which the plan is chosen. The actual choice is made in the open
enrollment period at the end of the previous year.

16

4.3

Attention stage

Let ait denote an unobserved indicator for whether individual i pays attention at time
t (ait = 1) or not (ait = 0). Some individuals are forced to pay attention and choose
a plan, for example in the first year of enrollment or if a plan is discontinued. Let
a dummy variable, fit , be equal to one if individual i is forced at time t. For optional
choosers (fit = 0), we model the attention probability as a function of observable attention
triggers, collected in the vector xit , and unobserved individual acuity qit , which in turn is
modeled as a function of observed individual characteristics in equation (1).
Whether individual i pays attention in choice situation t is determined by a latent variable,
a∗it . We use a linear specification
a∗it = xit ζ + δa qit + eit .

(2)

Optional choosers pay attention if a∗it is positive while forced choosers always pay attention. Assuming i.i.d. logistic errors eit , this implies a conditional attention probability of

pait (λi ) ≡ Pr(ait = 1|fit , xit , wit ; λi ) =

4.4





1
1+exp(−xit ζ−δa qit )


1

if fit = 0

(3)

if fit = 1

Plan-choice stage

Given an individual pays attention, she compares plans according to the perceived utilities
uitj = zitj β + γi ditj + vitj ,

(4)

where zitj is a vector of plan characteristics, including premium and implied OOP costs
given prescription drug use. The dummy variable ditj indicates the plan she is enrolled
in year t − 1 so that dijt = 0 is associated with a switch. As in prior literature, the
coefficient γi of this lagged choice dummy is interpreted as a switching cost. We allow
for the possibility that these switching costs vary across individuals by using a random
coefficient specification and assuming a normal distribution,




γi ∼ N µγ , σγ2 .

(5)

We allow individual acuity, qit , to affect choices in the sense that individuals with higher
values of qit give relatively more weight to utility contributions of observed plan characteristics and the switching cost. Those with lower values of qit are relatively more affected

17

by the noise involved in the error terms vitj . We thus specify that the standard deviation
of vitj is related to acuity via
q

var(vitj |qit ) ∝ exp(δv qit ).

(6)

With a plan-choice parameterization resembling a heteroscedastic mixed multinomial logit
model, the conditional probability that individual i chooses plan j from choice set Yit at
time t given she pays attention is
pyitj (λi , γi ) ≡ Pr(yit = j|ait = 1, zitj , wit , dijt ; γi , λi ) = P

k∈Yit





zitj β−γi ditj
exp(δv qit )

,
β−γi ditk
exp zitk
exp(δv qit )

exp

(7)

where as defined above acuity is qit = wit α + λi .
Our model nests several special cases that have been studied in prior literature. Given our
parametric structure, we can test the assumptions that produce special cases as follows.
As in other models of plan switching, γi = 0 implies that there are no switching costs.
As we allow for heterogeneity of these costs, we test whether its population mean and
variance are zero (µγ = 0 and σγ = 0). Importantly, however, if decisions follow the full
two-stage model, a restricted one-stage model that ignores attention would overestimate
switching costs as all observed inertia would be attributed to this source of heterogeneity.
If δa = 0 and δv = 0, then acuity does not matter, i. e., there is not heterogeneity with
respect to decision quality. If only one of these parameters is different from zero, then
acuity only affects choices via the corresponding stage. Further, if at least one of these
parameters is zero, then decision quality at the second stage is conditionally independent
of attention. We expect that individuals with higher levels of acuity tend to have a higher
attention probability (δa > 0) and make better plan-choice decisions (δv < 0). This is one
of the novel testable behavioral implications of our model.
If this mechanism holds, optional choosers who end up paying attention have a relatively
high acuity and therefore tend to pick “good” plans with low total costs. We have seen
a first indication of this effect in Section 3.4 where we reported that optional switchers
have a lower realized overspending than forced choosers. Ignoring this effect would lead
to biases in the policy conclusions. Specifically, as optional choices are observed only
for a selected group of high-acuity choosers, simpler models would overestimate the gain
from reductions in inattention and switching costs as they cannot predict the behavior of
the full population using the estimates of a selected population without adjusting for the
acuity differences.

18

4.5

Identification

Data on repeated plan choices reveal whether a beneficiary switches plans for the next
period. The identification problem arises because if she does not switch, we do not observe
the reason why.
The simplest explanation for why a beneficiary decides to stay in the same plan in two
consecutive years is that she carefully compared plans and came to the conclusion that
her current t − 1 plan is the most attractive one available for the next year, t. Given
that on average around 50 plans are available and that both the list of available plans
and their features (like the premium, deductible, list of covered drugs, copayments and
others) change on a yearly basis, this alone is unlikely to explain the low switching rates
observed in the data. We are able to account for a large part of the plan characteristics
that should be relevant to an individual who chooses an insurance plan to minimize
total costs. We observe exactly which drugs an individual takes and can reconstruct the
financial consequences of buying these drugs under each available plan, as reflected in
our total cost measure. We also account for specific plan features such as the premium
and deductible as well as the risk associated with each plan. On top of that, we include
alternative-specific constants for the largest plans. Allowing for preference heterogeneity
provides a comprehensive model of deliberate plan choices. The remaining persistence
that cannot be explained by plan features and preference heterogeneity is what we call
inertia and attribute to inattention and switching costs.
For identification, we can exploit the fact that some individuals are forced to make an
active choice because they enter the market for the first time or their t − 1 plan is discontinued. For similar arguments, see Handel (2013), Handel and Kolstad (2015) and
others. These forced choosers by definition do not have the opportunity to be inattentive.
If they are otherwise comparable to the other consumers, their behavior alone identifies
the plan choice parameters and the difference to the optional choosers is attributed to
inertia. As forced and optional choosers have similar means of the observed variables (in
particular age, education, and poverty rate; see Table 5 below), the assumption of similar
preferences across the two groups seems reasonable. Also, they are very similar in terms
of the choice sets they face; see Table 6 below.
The explanatory variables that drive the attention probability and the plan choices are
different in a quite natural fashion, creating exclusion restrictions that add to the identification of the model. Take the premium as an example. If the premium of the t−1 plan
increases in t – a change that is made salient in the ANOC letter – our model implies that

19

attention is triggered and the individual starts to compare alternatives. If on the other
hand the level of the premium of the t−1 plan is high for year t relative to the alternatives
– a fact that is only apparent after comparing plans – this might contribute to overcoming
switching costs and changing the plan. The same holds for the other predictors. Attention is triggered by different shocks or changes in the past, whereas for the plan choice,
comparison to the other plans provide the relevant predictors. Importantly, in this market
attention triggers such as changes in the old (t−1) plan’s premium and other features are
highly salient as the ANOC letters prominently contain pairwise comparisons of the old
and new values of plan features, see also Ho et al. (2015). The assumption that changes
in state variable trigger attention is also in line with theoretical models of inattention
such as Bordalo et al. (2013).
A final identification issue arises in dynamic panel data models with lagged dependent
variables if unobserved initial conditions and unobserved heterogeneity are correlated,
see Heckman (1981). In the present analysis, we focus on heterogeneity in acuity, λi , and
switching costs, γi , neither of which are likely related to the specific plan chosen in the first
year. Moreover, in Medicare Part D, we come close to observing the initial conditions;
see also Polyakova (2016). As the first choices in our panel refer to 2008, the lagged
dependent variable is the plan choice made for 2007 which was the first complete year of
Medicare Part D. Also, the vast majority of the forced choosers in our sample are newly
enrolled in Part D, so that their initial choices are observed and explicitly modeled.17
4.6

Maximum likelihood estimation

Given our parametric specification, we can estimate all model parameters simultaneously
using maximum likelihood. Since we assume independence across individuals, the likelihood function is the product of the individual likelihood contributions Li (ζ, β, δa , δv , µγ , σγ2 ).
The observed outcome for individual i is the sequence of plan choices made in years
t = 1, . . . , T (while attention is unobserved). Let jit denote the observed plan choice in
year t. Thus, the likelihood contribution is given by
Li (ζ, α, β, δa , δv , µγ , σγ2 ) = Pr(yi1 = ji1 , . . . , yiT = jiT | · ) ,

(8)

where for notational convenience we suppress the observed covariates (the histories of the
wit ’s, xit ’s, and zit ’s). Further, conditional on these covariates as well as individual i’s
17

In principle, we could use data from 2006 as well so that we would observe initial conditions for all
individuals. However, as discussed in Heiss et al. (2010) and Heiss et al. (2013), the choice situation
faced by consumers in the first year of Medicare Part D was special due to the extended enrollment
period which ended in May, so we opted against using those data.

20

unobserved acuity part λi and her switching cost γi , her choices are independent over
time. Put differently, any observed dependence is due to these two latent characteristics,
conditional on observables. We can therefore write
Pr(yi1 = ji1 , . . . , yiT = jiT | · , λi , γi ) =

T
Y

Pr(yit = jit | · , λi , γi ) .

(9)

t=1

These probabilities are readily available given our assumptions on the attention and planchoice stages. We first obtain the choice probabilities for period t:
Pr(yit = jit | · , λi , γi ) = pait (λi ) · Pr(yit = j|ait = 1, wit , zitj , dijt , λi , γi )
+ (1 − pait (λi )) · Pr(yit = j|ait = 0, wit zitj , dijt , λi , γi ) . (10)
This expression involves probabilities that condition on attention, which is not observable. By plugging in the quantities derived in (3) and (7) above, we see that the choice
probabilities have different forms depending on whether the individual is a forced chooser
or not and whether she stays in the same plan or switches to a different plan between
years t − 1 and t, which are both observable events. For forced choosers (fit = 1), the
attention probability is pait (λi ) = 1. If optional choosers (fit = 0) do not pay attention, the
probability to choose a different than the old plan (i. e., ditjit = 0), is zero, the probability
to choose the old plan is one.
Putting everything together, we get

Pr(yit = jit | · , λi , γi ) =









pyitjit (λi , γi )
a

y

pit (λi ) · pitjit (λi , γi )




 a
y


if fit = 1
if fit = 0 ∧ ditjit = 0 (11)

pit (λi ) · pitjit (λi , γi ) + (1 − pait (λi )) if fit = 0 ∧ ditjit = 1

To obtain the probability of individual i’s entire choice sequence, we plug this expression
into equation (9). To calculate the likelihood contribution, the final step is to integrate
out the remaining two latent quantities, qi and γi :
Pr(yi1 = ji1 , . . . , yiT = jiT | · ) =

ZZ Y
T

Pr(yit = jit | · , λ, γ) g(λ)h(γ) dλ dγ ,

(12)

t=1

where g(·) and h(·) are the densities of λ and γ, respectively. Both latent variables are
assumed to follow a normal distribution. Recall that we impose the normalization that
λ is standard normally distributed, whereas mean and variance of the normal variate γ
are left unrestricted. The double integral does not have an analytic solution. We use a
Gaussian quadrature product rule to accurately approximate it.18
18

With an even more flexible model including several random parameters, the dimension of this integral
would increase and product rule Gaussian quadrature would become infeasible. However, in that case it

21

5

Results

In this section, we present the main empirical results. We begin by providing descriptive
statistics of the observed covariates and choice outcomes. We then present the parameter estimates of our choice model, focusing on the most comprehensive specification,
and interpret these results in terms of the implied marginal effects. We end the section
by comparing these results with those obtained from estimating simpler, nested choice
models.
5.1

Descriptive statistics

Table 5 contains descriptive statistics of the covariates that enter the acuity equation and
the attention stage, separately for optional and forced choosers and stratified by switching
status. The top panel shows variables that are potential triggers of attention. As most
of the forced choosers newly enter Medicare Part D, the attention trigger variables that
exclusively refer to information in t−1 are not available for the majority of forced choosers.
The attention trigger variables are thus not shown for the forced choosers.The bottom
panel of this table shows demographic controls that may affect individuals’ acuity when
making Part D choices.
There are three different sets of attention triggers: (1) experience in Part D in year t−1,
(2) changes in features of the year t−1 plan, and (3) health shocks and prescription drug
use in year t−1. The descriptive statistics suggest that Part D experience and changes
in the old plan may be particularly relevant triggers: while among those who decide to
switch plans 22% were in the coverage gap in year t−1, only 18% among stayers hit the
gap. Similarly, switchers face an average premium increase of $130 per year while stayers
only face an average increase of $70. 14% of switchers see changes in cost sharing, either
from coinsurance to copayment or vice versa, compared to only 8% among stayers.
With respect to the variables that enter the acuity equation, switchers and stayers appear
to be rather similar. The only marked difference is observed in the fraction of non-whites,
which is 4% among switchers and 7% among stayers. As most forced choosers are newly
enrolled in Medicare Part D, it is not surprising that forced choosers are younger, more
likely to be male (which is correlated with age), and have fewer years of experience with
Part D than optional choosers. With respect to all other demographic variables, optional
and forced choosers are very similar.
could be approximated using either Monte-Carlo simulation or powerful multidimensional integration
rules such as sparse grids, see Heiss and Winschel (2008).

22

Table 6 compares plan characteristics in the choice sets faced by the individuals in the
estimation sample, again separately by switching status. Overall, the choice sets seem
to be very similar across the three groups of individuals. On average, they can choose
among roughly 52 plans, with very similar average premiums, deductibles, ICLs, and gap
coverage. The last plan characteristic is the variance of the OOP costs on the plan level.
This measure is meant to capture the variability of costs that consumers can expect with
each plan. Including the plan-level variance of OOP as a regressor allows risk preferences
to play a role.
Coming back to our discussion of identification in Section 4.5 above, these descriptive
findings are reassuring for two reasons. First, if forced choosers were very different from
optional choosers, it would be questionable whether the forced choosers can help to identify preferences for plan characteristics for the optional choosers. Second, the choice sets
that optional and forced choosers face are similar on average, i. e., conditional on attention the two groups face similar choices, except that the choice sets of optional choosers
include their old plans.
5.2

Specifications of the choice model

We specify and estimate four increasingly complex versions of the choice model introduced
in Section 4. The features of these models are described in Table 7. All models allow for
heterogeneity of switching costs by including a random coefficient on the dummy variable
for the old plan (if it is still in individuals’ choice sets). Model I is a standard mixed
(random parameters) multinomial logit model with heterogeneous switching costs. As
discussed in Section 2, the coefficient of a dummy variable for the old plan has been
interpreted as a measure of switching costs in earlier literature. Importantly, this simple
model attributes all inertia to switching costs. In Model II, we add an attention stage
and thus allow for two different sources of inertia, inattention as well as switching costs.
Model III adds the latent acuity variable in the attention stage, allowing for heterogeneity
in how sensitive individuals are to attention triggers. Model IV further allows for an
effect of acuity on plan choice, conditional on attention, which introduces heterogeneity
of individuals with respect to acuity and heteroskedasticity at the plan-choice stage.
Model IV corresponds to the full two-stage model described in Section 4 while the other
three models are nested sequentially. As all models are estimated by Maximum Likelihood,
their predictive power can be readily assessed and compared. Table 7 reports the values
of the Akaïke and Bayesian information criteria (AIC and BIC) as well as the likelihoodratio test statistics for pairwise comparisons to Model IV. According to both the AIC
23

and the BIC, Model IV fits the data best, and the LR tests clearly reject the simpler
models as well. Thus, the most comprehensive Model IV is our preferred model, and we
focus the discussion of the estimation results and their substantive interpretation on this
model. The discussion of the estimation results of the other three models concentrates
on the question of whether using these simpler models would lead to different substantive
conclusions with respect to Part D plan-choice behavior and the effects of interventions.
5.3

Estimated coefficients, marginal effects, and switching costs

Table 8 displays the estimates and their standard errors for the parameters of the attention stage and the acuity equation, and Table 9 those for the plan-choice stage, obtained
from the preferred and most comprehensive Model IV. These tables also show the implied marginal effects of the covariates. For the attention stage and the acuity equation,
we calculate the marginal effect on the probability to pay attention as well as on the
probability to switch plans. For the plan-choice stage, we calculate the marginal effect
on the probability to choose a plan conditional on attention as well as overall (i. e., not
conditioning on attention).19
To facilitate the interpretation of the marginal effects reported below, it is useful to
consider how the implied attention probabilities vary in the sample. Recall that attention
is a latent binary outcome, and the probability of attention is heterogeneous, conditional
on covariates. The attention probabilities implied by Model IV vary between 0.2% and
95.4%, with a median of 20.9%, and first and third quartiles of 17.1% and 25.3%, so there
is considerable variation.20
Attention stage
The attention trigger variables fall into three groups: experience in Part D in t−1, changes
in the features of the t−1 plan announced for year t, and health shocks as well as healthcare use in t−1. All coefficients in the first two groups are statistically significant at the
0.001 level. Despite the large sample size, some of the health variables are not significant;
they do not seem to raise enrollees’ awareness of the opportunity to switch plans. In the
following, we discuss the effect sizes of these covariates in terms of their marginal effects
on the probability of attention. As switching requires attention, the marginal effects of
the covariates on switching are always smaller than those on attention.
19

Similar results for the other three models can be found in Tables A1 to A5 in the Appendix.

20

We report and compare the attention probabilities implied by Models II–IV in Table 10 below.

24

Perhaps the most salient aspect of an individual’s Part D experience is whether she hit
the coverage gap and if so, whether she was enrolled in a plan that provides gap coverage.
We thus include two dummy variables and their interaction. The marginal effect of having
gap coverage in year t−1 for individuals who did not hit the gap in t−1 is −7.4 percentage
points. For those who did hit the gap in t−1, it is 2.9 percentage smaller, for a total effect
of −10.3 percentage points. Given a median attention probability of about 21%, this is
a large effect: Individuals who hit the gap and do have gap coverage are much less likely
to even consider switching for year t. Having hit the gap without gap coverage in year
t−1 increases the attention probability by 5.8 percentage points, which also is a sizeable
effect. Similarly, individuals who have hit the catastrophic coverage region in t−1, i. e.,
those with the largest drug bills, are more likely to be attentive as well (by 4 percentage
points).
Recall that plans are required to send their enrollees ANOC letters before the open enrollment period each year. All changes of the features of the year t−1 plan should thus
be salient. We find that individuals indeed are more likely to pay attention if the premium of their old plan increases, the deductible increases, the ICL increases, their old
plan introduces changes to the formulary that would lead to an increase in OOP cost, or
their old plan switches from copayments to coinsurance or vice versa. For instance, an
increase of the year t−1 premium by 100 dollars results in a 6.1 percentage point increase
of the attention probability. Interestingly, we find that premium changes are particularly
salient, as the effect of a premium increase is much higher than the effects of an increase in
the deductible or the annual OOP spending implied by a formulary change. The finding
that individuals put more weight on premiums than on the cost implications of other plan
features is in line with earlier research, including Abaluck and Gruber (2011) and Heiss
et al. (2013). Furthermore, we find that the effect of the implied change in OOP cost due
to formulary changes is much smaller (0.005 percentage point increase with a 100 dollar
increase in OOP), than the effect of a change in the premium or the dedutible. This likely
reflects that formulary changes are less salient than changes in premium and deductible.21
Attention probabilities are lower if a t − 1 plan is consolidated and higher if there is a
change in cost-sharing (from copay to coinsurance and vice versa). Such changes might
make a plan more or less attractive, so we do not have a strong prior on the sign of
these effects. Further, it might seem counter-intuitive that the probability of attention
21

While the ANOC letters contain summary tables on changes in premiums, deductibles and copayments,
the exact formulary changes, i. e., changes in the list of drugs and their tiers, are only provided in an
Appendix to the letter.

25

increases with an increase of the ICL (as a higher limit indicates that the plan gets better)
and with a lower share of tiers with increases in cost-sharing. However, as the regression
already controls for change in total OOP spending, the sign of these effects are difficult
to interpret as well.
One would expect that having been diagnosed with a new health condition or having
had emergency room visits or hospital stays in the year t − 1 raises attention to the
Medicare Part D decision. However, this is not borne out by the data. The variables
that measure health shocks and health-care use are mostly statistically insignificant. The
only statistically significant but small effect we find is that of a dummy variable for
whether an individual had five doctor visits or more in the previous year. As the model
controls for the other health variables, this finding suggests that repeated interaction with
a health professional raises attention. The data do not allow us to pursue such potential
information channels further.
Acuity equation
The final covariate that enters the attention equation is acuity – a latent variable that
captures how careful individuals are in making their choices. It is modeled as a function of
observable individual characteristics and an unobserved heterogeneity term; in Model IV,
it enters the plan-choice stage as well. It is statistically significant in both equations, and
as the information criteria in Table 7 show, it also improves the overall predictive power.
The variables that determine acuity also affect attention and plan choice indirectly. This
indirect channel is accounted for in the marginal effects we report for the covariates in
the acuity equation. As the effects of these covariates are modeled using a linear index in
the attention equation, the indirect effect a predictor of acuity has on attention is 2.568
times its coefficient in the acuity equation.
Turning to the acuity equation itself, the coefficient estimates imply higher levels of acuity
for males, whites, younger individuals, individuals who have less experience with Part D,
individuals who live in ZIP code areas with higher average education among seniors, those
living in middle-income ZIP codes, and those who have no depression diagnosis in their
claims history.
The difference in acuity between males and females is small, and statistical significance
is marginal given our sample size. The effect of being non-white, compared to all other
groups, is large as this group’s attention probability is lower by 8.4 percentage points,
on average. Compared to individuals younger than 70, the attention probabilities of

26

individuals aged between 70 and 80, and of those older than 80, are 1.1 and 4.8 percentage
points lower, respectively.
An important issue in the literature on Medicare Part D is whether choices improve over
time as consumers learn to navigate this rather complicated market. The prior literature
on this question delivered mixed results, see Ketcham et al. (2012) and Abaluck and
Gruber (2016a). We find that for each additional year an individual has been enrolled
in Part D, the attention probability is reduced by 1.6 percentage points, ceteris paribus.
The fact that individuals become less attentive to plan switching over time, conditional on
all other variables including attention triggers, suggests that individuals’ decision-making
does not improve over time. Rather, acuity declines, ceteris paribus.
It would be interesting to test whether acuity is predicted by measures of cognitive ability, decision making competence, or financial literacy, see Barcellos et al. (2014), among
others. Measures of these constructs are not available in the Medicare claims data. However, the attention probability of individuals who have been diagnosed with depression is
lower by 2.9 percentage points. This partial measure of mental health, which might also
be related to decision making competence, predicts at least part of the heterogeneity in
Medicare Part D decision-making.
Our proxies for socio-economic status, constructed at the ZIP code level, also predict
acuity and therefore attention. An increase of the share of seniors without a high-school
degree by 1 percentage point is associated with a decrease in the attention probability of
0.116 percentage points. As ZIP code level income measures, we include the shares of poor
(income below the FPL) and rich (income above 500% of the FPL) seniors. Attention
probabilities are largest for the reference group of individuals with incomes between 100%
and 500% of the FPL, as the poor and rich shares increase by one percentage point,
attention probabilities decline by 0.05 and 0.132 percentage points. As these ZIP-code
level measures are noisy, the relatively small magnitudes of the marginal effects are not
surprising. Nevertheless, they suggest that socio-economic status might play a role in
determining the quality of Medicare Part D plan choices. We speculate that the relatively
poor show lower levels of acuity because of lower decision-making competence. Among
the relatively rich, acuity might be lower because they feel less inclined to worry about
plan choice in Part D, which in turn might reflect their opportunity cost of time. This
interpretation is consistent with the finding that richer individuals tend to select highpremium plans in Medicare Part D, independent of their risk; see Heiss et al. (2013).

27

Plan-choice stage
Turning to the results for the plan-choice stage, shown in Table 9, note first that in our
two-stage model, plan choices are made only conditional on attention. Our model estimates imply an average attention probability of 23% while there is a 77% probability of
being inattentive. Those individuals who are inattentive stay in their old plan and do
not enter the choice stage. For the others, plan choices are modelled by a mixed (random parameters) multinomial logit specification with heteroskedasticity. In our preferred
Model IV, the variance of the errors is a function of acuity. The results for the plan-choice
stage show sensible signs for all coefficients, and to the extent that they are comparable,
they are also in line with earlier results from static plan-choice models such as Heiss
et al. (2013) and Abaluck and Gruber (2011). In particular, individuals are more likely
to choose a plan if it has lower OOP, lower premium, lower deductible, higher ICL, and
offers gap coverage. Also, the effect of a plan’s premium is three times as large as that of
its implied OOP cost, which confirms earlier findings that individuals are too sensitive to
the premium as the most salient feature, see e.g. Abaluck and Gruber (2011) and Abaluck
and Gruber (2016a).
In addition to these plan features, the plan-choice model also contains a dummy variable
for the previous year’s plan. It has a statistically significant and qualitatively important
effect. We derive an estimate of switching costs from this coefficient below. Finally, we
find that individuals are more likely to choose a plan whose implied OOP cost variance
is lower, suggesting that individuals are risk averse and value the insurance component of
Medicare Part D. To illustrate the size of the effect, our estimates imply that individuals
have a willingness to pay of $163 for a ceteris paribus reduction of the OOP cost variance
from the 75th to the 25th percentile.
As before, the further quantitative interpretation of the results focuses on marginal effects,
which we compute both unconditional and conditional on attention.
Not conditioning on attention, the probability that a plan is chosen decreases by 3.3
percentage points when the annual premium increases by $1000, or by 0.33 percentage
points with a more realistic increase in the annual premium by $100. Given that individuals choose, on average, between roughly 50 plans and thus a priori the probability of
choosing a plan is roughly 2 percent, this corresponds to a sizable 16.5% increase.
When conditioning on attention, marginal effects get larger in absolute value, except for
the marginal effect of the old plan dummy, which captures switching costs. This increase
reflects the fact that the effects of the plan characteristics are watered down by inattention
when not conditioning on attention. That is, when we consider all individuals, a plan’s
28

annual premium has a lower impact on the probability that the plan is chosen than if
we consider only individuals who pay attention. Those who are inattentive do not even
consider the plan’s premium when making their choice.
At this point, it is useful to recall the interpretation of the coefficient of the old plan
dummy variable as a measure of switching costs. The raw model parameters are measured
in ‘utility units’. We can translate them into dollar units because a price variable (plan
premium) is included among the regressors. The ratio of the coefficient of the old plan
dummy variable and that of the premium is the implied compensation for staying in the
old plan conditional on all other covariates. This yields our estimate of switching costs
3.238
as − −9.565
× $1000 = $338.53.

These switching costs imply an increase of the probability to choose the t−1 plan by 11.5
percentage points conditional on attention. Not conditioning on attention, the overall
probability of choosing the t−1 plan is 79.9 percentage points higher than the probability
of choosing an otherwise identical plan. This large unconditional effect arises because all
inattentive individuals stay in the t−1 plan by definition.
Finally, the estimate of δv is statistically significant. As the sign is negative, individuals
with higher levels of acuity have a lower variance of the error term at the plan-choice
stage, see the specification of plan utility in equation (4). Loosely speaking, they make
better plan choices in the sense that the observed plan characteristics such as premium
and OOP cost have a stronger impact on choice probabilities. Conversely, individuals
with lower acuity have a larger variance of the error term and thus in the limit choose
randomly among available plans.
5.4

Comparison of Models I–IV

In this section, we compare the four models in terms of their behavioral implications. In
particular, it turns out that relative to our preferred Model IV, the simpler Models I–III
lead to very different estimates of switching costs, inattention, and inertia. Thus, the
four models would also have different implications for policy interventions, discussed in
Section 6 below, aimed at reducing inertia.
We begin by comparing the attention probabilities implied by Models II–IV in Table 10.
As we make the choice model more complex, the attention probabilities become smaller,
at the mean and also across the entire distribution. In particular, allowing for unobserved
heterogeneity in acuity in Model III and Model IV reduces the mean attention probability

29

by more than half, compared with Model II: Going from Model II to IV a larger share of
inertia is attributed to inattention rather than switching costs.
Tables 11 and 12 show the marginal effects of the covariates on the probability to pay
attention and the probability to switch plans, respectively, for all models that contain
an attention stage, i. e., Models II–IV. Table 13 reports marginal effects on plan-choice
probabilities for all four models.
In Table 11, most marginal effects get smaller when going from the simpler to the more
complex models. Ignoring the role of unobserved heterogeneity in acuity and not taking
the effect of acuity on plan choice into account tends to lead to an overestimation of the
effects of attention triggers and demographics on attention. A particularly interesting
difference arises for the marginal effect of experience with Part D: While in Model II, the
probality to pay attention is not related to the number of years of experience with part
D, there is a small but significantly positive relationship in Model III, and – as discussed
above – a negative relationship in Model IV. Whether and how heterogeneity is allowed
for in the model may thus be important for conclusions concerning the development of
choice quality over time. The marginal effects reported in Table 12 are rather similar
across models. If we are only interested in the effect of observed covariates on overall
switching rates and do not intend to study policy interventions aimed at different aspects
of inertia, the simpler models appear to be sufficient.
The four models lead to quite different estimates of switching costs, see Figure 1. As
illustrated above for Model IV, the implied switching costs are calculated based on the
estimation results for the plan-choice stage as the ratio of the coefficients of the t−1 plan
dummy and the annual premium. They express how much individuals are, on average,
willing to pay in order to stay in their old plan. Model I attributes all inertia to switching
costs. It yields large average switching costs of more than $1000. When we allow for
inattention as a source of inertia, estimated switching costs are reduced substantially to
roughly $690. Given that average premiums are only roughly $550 per year this is still a
rather high number. Further reductions in estimated switching costs arise when we allow
for unobserved heterogeneity in the attention stage (Model III) and in the plan-choice
stage (Model IV). In the full model, average switching costs amount to roughly $340 per
year (the number reported above).
Table 13 displays the average marginal effects of the different plan characteristics on the
probability that a plan is chosen, unconditional and conditional on attention (see the

30

top and bottom panels, respectively).22 As Model I has no attention stage, the marginal
effects of the regressors on the conditional and unconditional probability of choosing a
plan are necessarily the same.
The average marginal effects of the covariates on the probability to choose a plan conditional on attention tend to increase in absolute value as we move from Model I to Model
IV. This reflects that in the simpler models, the effects of plan characteristics on choice
are watered down by inattention or neglected heterogeneity. The effects on the unconditional probabilities (which in Models II–IV integrate out the probability that individuals
pay attention to plan choice) are very similar across models. The only exception to these
patterns is the marginal effect of the year t−1 plan dummy (to be precise, the marginal
effect of the mean of the random coefficient) whose patterns are more complex. Specifically, we quantify inertia as the additional probability of choosing the t−1 plan over an
otherwise identical plan with the same features. Conditional on attention, this marginal
effect reflects inertia due to switching costs alone. The unconditional marginal effect comprises both sources of inertia, switching costs in the second stage and inattention in the
first stage. Figure 2 visualizes what the conditional and unconditional marginal effects
imply for inertia, i. e., the additional probability of staying in the t−1 plan compared to
another plan with identical plan features.
The height of the columns of Figure 2 corresponds to the unconditional marginal effects
reported in the bottom panel of Table 13. They thus reflect the overall level of inertia estimated by each model. These are broken down by source, inattention and switching costs,
as reflected in the conditional marginal effects. Model I does not include a separate attention stage, which results in a low estimate of inertia that is entirely attributed to switching
costs. The other models produces larger estimates of inertia, about 80 percentage points
in Models III and IV. These models differ in how much of this considerable inertia effect is attributed to inattention and switching costs, respectively. In the full model, the
contribution of switching costs is relatively small while inattention is the major source of
inertia.
These results correspond to the observation made above that the simpler models – most
dramatically, Model I which does not allow for inattention – overestimate switching costs
and underestimate total inertia.
22

The underlying coefficients and standard errors for Model IV were discussed above (Tables 8 and 9);
those for Models I–III are displayed in Tables A1 to A5 in the Appendix.

31

6

Simulations: Forcing attention and removing switching costs

Several policy interventions aimed at increasing switching rates have been suggested in
the literature, both in Medicare Part D and in other markets where consumer inertia is
an issue. Such proposals typically aim to reduce the transaction costs associated with
switching plans (e. g., Hoadley et al. (2013)); increase attention using reminders, nudges,
and other information shocks (e. g., Sinaiko et al. (2013)); or reduce the complexity of the
choice environment, for instance by reducing the number of available options (e. g., Frank
and Lamiraud (2009), Besedeš et al. (2015)).
We use the estimates of our four models to simulate the effects of two different policy
interventions on the probability that individuals switch plans and on ex post overspending.
In the first policy intervention, we force all individuals to pay attention. In the second
policy intervention, we set switching costs to zero. These two scenarios are extreme
and therefore allow us to bound the effects of more realistic interventions that increase
attention or reduce switching costs. Our policy conclusions will be based on the most
comprehensive and statistically superior Model IV. As discussed in section 5, Models I–III
which are nested in Model IV are rejected both by likelihood ratio tests and perform much
worse in explaining observed choices according to the AIC and BIC information criteria.
However, it is not clear a priori whether this translates into strongly biased conclusions
when they are used for policy simulations. It is therefore instructive to simulate the effects
of the policy interventions for these three models as well.
Figures 3 and 4 display the simulation results. For Models I–IV, we report the average
probability to switch and average overspending for three scenarios: the baseline case
(i. e., using the estimates based on the observed choice data as reported in Section 5) and
the two policy interventions. In our preferred Model IV, forcing all individuals to pay
attention results in a dramatic increase in the switching probability, from 11.0% to 69.1%.
An intervention that reduces switching costs to zero but lets attention unchanged has a
smaller but still relevant effect on the average switching probability, which increases from
11.0% to 19.5%. These simulation results reflect the fact that persistence in observed
plan choices is largely driven by inattention and not switching costs, as discussed above.
The relative importance of attention and switching costs is also reflected in the simulated
effects of the interventions on average ex post overspending, which results directly from
the increased switching rates. From a baseline estimate of $357, forcing attention reduces
overspending by about 20% to $284 while setting switching costs to zero results in a small
reduction in average overspending to $347.

32

As Model I does not include an attention stage, forcing individuals to pay attention affects
neither the probability to switch nor average overspending. Setting switching costs to
zero has much larger effects on the switching probability and on average overspending
in Model I than in Model IV. This is not surprising as in Model I, switching costs are
the only mechanism that could generate inertia. The simulated effects are very large:
The switching probability increases from the baseline estimate of 10.7% to 80.4% while
overspending is reduced from $354 to $262. Going from Model I to Model IV, the impact
of forcing attention becomes gradually larger while the impact of reducing switching costs
to zero is reduced. This is in line with the results in Figure 1 that switching costs decrease
when introducing an attention stage and unobserved heterogeneity into the model.
Forcing everybody to pay attention results in different switching rates and average overspending when comparing Models III and IV as in the latter, individuals with low acuity
both have a lower attention probability and put less weight on OOP costs in the choice
stage. This induces selection; in particular, an intervention that forces everybody to pay
attention results in lower average acuity in the plan-choice stage and therefore poorer
choices, on average. Our simulations show that this effect is quantitatively important.
While 46% are induced to switch by forced attention in Model III, 69.1% are in Model IV.
Nevertheless, average overspending is lower in Model III ($273) than in Model IV ($284).
The simulation results obtained from Model IV provide additional insights on the heterogeneity of the effects of policy interventions. Figure 5 shows the empirical cumulative
distribution functions (CDFs) of overspending in the baseline scenario and in the two
intervention scenarios. Forcing attention results in a much more compressed distribution
of overspending. This illustrates the fact that attention is the most important source of
heterogeneity as it prevents a large share of individuals from making any change.
Figure 6 displays the empirical CDFs of the reduction in overspending that is induced
by the two policy interventions relative to the baseline case. Not surprisingly given the
relatively minor impact of switching costs in Model IV, the change in overspending is
close to zero for most individuals when switching costs are removed. When individuals
are forced to pay attention overspending decreases on average, but it increases for about
a third of the individuals in the sample.
An important implication of our simulation results is that while some individuals profit
when they are forced to pay attention, others are harmed – at least with respect to ex post
overspending. For policymakers, the balance between winners and losers of such reforms
as the ones we simulate in this section is of particular interest. The magnitudes of these

33

effects depend on whether heterogeneity in acuity is allowed for, as we do in our preferred
Model IV.23

7

Summary and conclusions

In Medicare Part D and other health insurance markets, only few consumers switch plans
across years and thereby forego significant savings. In this paper, we separated channels
that contribute to this high level of inertia: inattention to plan choice and perceived costs
of switching plans. To characterize these two sources of inertia, we developed a two-stage
panel data model of plan choices. The first stage models whether individuals pay attention
to their plan choice or not. Given that individuals pay attention, the second stage models
the plan choice in a discrete choice framework. The model includes switching costs and
allows for unobserved individual-specific heterogeneity that leads to correlation of the two
stages.
Our results suggest that in Medicare Part D, attention to the possibility of switching plans
is triggered by events and experiences that are salient during the open-enrollment period.
In particular, for those individuals who do not have gap coverage in their current plan,
having reached the gap is associated with a higher propensity to switch. Premium and
formulary changes also trigger attention, but the effect of premium changes is much larger
than that of changes in OOP costs induced by changes to the formulary. This finding is
interesting since formulary changes are clearly relevant for switching decisions but not as
salient as premium changes. An implication for firm behavior is that consumers’ reactions
to increases in their plan’s costs will be larger when they are implemented via the premium
rather than other characteristics such as copayments and obscure details of the formulary
benefit design, as for instance the tier assignment of specific drugs. Furthermore, new
plans in the market may not be considered to the extent that their market entry is not
salient to consumers.
Another interesting finding is that acuity declines over time, which seems inconsistent with
the notion that people learn. This result corroborates recent findings Abaluck and Gruber
(2016a) who also argue that choice inconsistencies in Medicare Part D increased over
time. Also, individuals who pay attention in the baseline scenario have higher acuity and
therefore make better decisions, at least in terms of total costs associated with their plan
23

In further simulations, we computed the effects of the two interventions using Models I–III. These
simulations illustrate how modeling assumptions – in particular, the way how heterogeneity enters a
structural choice model – affect the policy conclusions. Detailed results can be found in the Appendix.

34

choice and current prescription drug use, than those who do not pay attention. Finally, our
estimates indicate that even conditional on attention, there are still considerable implicit
switching costs. Understanding the sources of these switching costs is an important topic
for future research. These open issues not withstanding, our two-stage model opens up
the possibility to simulate the effects of policies that aim at increasing plan switching by
making the economic determinants of optimal health insurance plan choices more salient.
The simulations we performed using the estimates of our full two-stage choice model
provide several interesting insights that differ from those one would obtain from simpler
ones. We found that removing inattention, in our case by forcing every beneficiary to make
an active choice, has much larger effects on switching rates than removing switching costs.
This important finding echoes Kiss (2014) who found that in the Hungarian car insurance
market, a public campaign aimed at increasing switching rates mainly acted through
manipulating attention, rather than switching costs. Recent literature has stressed that
reducing the number of available plans is another intervention that would conceivably
improve plan choices and increase switching rates. We leave to future research the issue
of whether a structural choice model like ours could reliably capture the effects of changing
the number of available options.24
Our simulations underscore the importance of heterogeneity in individual responses to
policy interventions. Specifically, when we force everybody to pay attention in our simulations, average acuity in the choice stage decreases, resulting in higher switching rates
but, on average, also in worse choices in terms of total costs: At least some individuals
end up in a worse plan when forced to make a choice. Such effects make the evaluation
of the welfare effects of interventions much harder. We also found that most of those
beneficiaries who switch do not choose the least-cost plan, a result that is in line with
descriptive evidence by Hoadley et al. (2013).
The welfare consequences of consumer inertia in health insurance markets are complex
and depend on the specific setting. Our findings add to the existing evidence on the excess
costs associated with suboptimal plan choices and on the importance of inertia observed
in health insurance markets. It seems obvious that consumers should be encouraged to
review their health plans more frequently. However, Handel (2013) argues that policies
that nudge consumers to better decisions by reducing inertia also exacerbate adverse
selection, which potentially leads to a reduction in overall welfare. A further issue is
24

The key issue here is that in data on Medicare Part D, the number of available plans has varied rather
little over time. In experimental studies such as Besedeš et al. (2015), the number of options can be
manipulated over a much larger range.

35

that removing frictions might lead to market unravelling, but as Handel and Kolstad
(2015) argue, risk-adjustment could mitigate the negative effects of reducing information
frictions. Handel et al. (2015) explore this issue further. We leave an extension of our
present analysis that would allow for the computation of welfare effects to future research.
We note, however, that in addition to these issues, such an extension would necessarily
involve additional functional from assumptions, as pointed out in a related context by
Ketcham et al. (2015) and Abaluck and Gruber (2016b).
Another area of research where our two-stage model might be fruitfully employed is the
industrial organization of health insurance markets. Polyakova (2016) develops a model
of plan choice that allows both for private information about health risk (giving rise
to adverse selection) and switching costs. She argues that in a setting such as Medicare
Part D, switching costs help sustain an equilibrium with adverse selection characterized by
large differences in risk between more and less generous plans. Our two-stage model could
be used to study how different interventions that reduce inertia affect market equilibria
and prices over time. However, as Abaluck and Gruber (2016a), Decarolis (2015), and
Decarolis et al. (2015) argue, analyzing the choice set evolution is especially complicated
due to the rules governing assignment of low-income subsidy enrollees to plans.
We close by pointing out the relevance of our empirical findings for the emerging literature on the effects of inattention on consumer choices, and their implications for firm
behavior, see Grubb (2012) for an overview. A prominent example is the theory of
context-dependent choice developed by Bordalo et al. (2013). In that model, “a consumer’s attention is drawn to salient attributes of goods, such as quality or price. An
attribute is salient for a good when it stands out among the good’s attributes, relative
to that attribute’s average level in the choice set (or more broadly, the choice context).
Consumers attach disproportionately high weight to salient attributes and their choices
are tilted toward goods with higher quality/price ratios.” Our empirical findings are very
much in line with these predictions, and they add to the still relatively scarce evidence
on the relevance of inattention and attention shocks for high-stakes financial decisions.25

25

This evidence includes Stango and Zinman (2014) on bank overdraft fees, Crossley et al. (2016) on
retirement savings, and Helmers et al. (2016) on online shopping.

36

References
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2011): Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: Evidence
from plan choice in the Medicare Part D program. American Economic Review, 101, 1180–
1210.
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2016a): Evolving choice inconsistencies in choice of prescription
drug insurance. American Economic Review, 106(8), 2145–2184.
Abaluck, J. and J. Gruber (2016b): The robustness of tests for consumer choice inconsistencies: Reply to Ketcham, Kuminoff and Powers. American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Bach, P. B. and M. B. McClellan (2005): A prescription of a modern Medicare program.
New England Journal of Medicine, 353, 2733–2735.
Barcellos, S. H., A. Wuppermann, K. G. Carman, S. Bauhoff, D. McFadden, A.
Kapteyn, J. Winter, and D. Goldman (2014): Preparedness of Americans for the
Affordable Care Act. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 111(15), 5497–5502.
Besedeš, T., C. Deck, S. Sarangi, and M. Shor (2015): Reducing choice overload without
reducing choices. Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(4), 793–802.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2013): Salience and consumer choice. Journal
of Political Economy, 121(5), 803–843.
Crossley, T. F., J. de Bresser, L. Delaney, and J. Winter (2016): Can survey participation alter household saving behavior? Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Decarolis, F. (2015): Medicare Part D: Are insurers gaming the low income subsidy design?
American Economic Review, 105(4), 1547–1580.
Decarolis, F., M. Polyakova, and S. P. Ryan (2015): The welfare effects of supply-side
regulations in Medicare Part D. NBER Working Paper No. 21298.
Duggan, M., P. Healy, and F. Scott Morton (2008): Providing prescription drug coverage to the elderly: America’s experiment with Medicare Part D. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 22(4), 69–92.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf (2015): The response of drug expenditure to
nonlinear contract design: Evidence from Medicare Part D. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
130(2), 841–899.
Ericson, K. M. M. (2014): Consumer inertia and firm pricing in the Medicare Part D
prescription drug insurance exchange. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(1),
38–64.
Farrell, J. and P. Klemperer (2007): Coordination and lock-in: Competition with switching
costs and network effects. In M. Armstrong and R. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial
Organization, Volume 3, chapter 31, 1967–2002. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Frank, R. and K. Lamiraud (2009): Choice, price competition and complexity in markets
for health insurance. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 71(2), 550–562.

37

Goldman, D. P. and G. F. Joyce (2008): Medicare Part D: A successful start with room
for improvement. Journal of the American Medical Association, 299(16), 1954–1955.
Goodman, J. (2006): Consumer directed health care. Policy Brief 2006-PB-20, Networks
Financial Institute, Indiana State University.
Grubb, M. D. (2012): Dynamic nonlinear pricing: Biased expectations, inattention, and bill
shock. International Journal of Industrial Economics, 30, 287–290.
Handel, B. (2013): Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When nudging
hurts. American Economic Review, 103(7), 2643–2682.
Handel, B. and J. T. Kolstad (2015): Health insurance for “humans”: Information frictions,
plan choice, and consumer welfare. American Economic Review, 105(8), 2449–2500.
Handel, B. R., J. T. Kolstad, and J. Spinnewijn (2015): Information frictions and
adverse selection: Policy interventions in health insurance markets. NBER Working Paper
No. 21759.
Heckman, J. J. (1981): Heterogeneity and state dependence. In C. F. Manski and D. McFadden (Eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete Data and Econometric Applications, 91–139.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Heiss, F., A. Leive, D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2013): Plan selection in Medicare
Part D: Evidence from administrative data. Journal of Health Economics, 32, 1325–1344.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2006): Who failed to enroll in Medicare Part D,
and why? Early results. Health Affairs, 25, w344–w354.
Heiss, F., D. McFadden, and J. Winter (2010): Mind the gap! Consumer perceptions and
choices of Medicare Part D prescription drug plans. In D. A. Wise (Ed.), Research Findings
in the Economics of Aging, 413–481. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Heiss, F. and V. Winschel (2008): Likelihood approximation by numerical integration on
sparse grids. Journal of Econometrics, 144, 62–80.
Helmers, C., P. Krishnan, and M. Patnam (2016): Attention and saliency on the internet:
Evidence from an online recommendation system. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 10939.
Ho, K., J. Hogan, and F. Scott Morton (2015): The impact of consumer inattention on
insurer pricing in the Medicare Part D program. NBER Working Paper No. 21028.
Hoadley, J., E. Hargrave, L. Summer, J. Cubanski, and T. Neuman (2013): To switch
or not to switch: Are Medicare beneficiaries switching drug plans to save money. Issue Brief,
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, CA.
Honka, E. (2014): Quantifying search and switching costs in the US auto insurance industry.
RAND Journal of Economics, 45(4), 847–884.
Hortaçsu, A., S. A. Madanizadeh, and S. L. Puller (2015): Power to choose? An analysis
of consumer inertia in the residential electricity market. NBER Working Paper No. 20988.
Ketcham, J. D., N. V. Kuminoff, and C. A. Powers (2016): Choice inconsistencies
among the elderly: Evidence from plan choice in the Medicare Part D program: Comment.
American Economic Review, forthcoming.

38

Ketcham, J. D., C. Lucarelli, E. J. Miravete, and M. C. Roebuck (2012): Sinking,
swimming, or learning to swim in Medicare Part D. American Economic Review, 102, 2639–
2673.
Ketcham, J. D., C. Lucarelli, and C. A. Powers (2015): Paying attention or paying too
much in Medicare Part D. American Economic Review, 105, 204–233.
Kiss, A. (2014): Salience and switching. Unpublished manuscript.
Kling, J. R., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. Vermeulen, and M. V. Wrobel (2012):
Comparison friction: Experimental evidence from Medicare drug plans. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 127(1), 199–235.
Luco, F. (2014): Switching costs and competition in retirement investment. Unpublished
manuscript, Northwestern University.
McFadden, D. (1974): Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. In P. Zarembka (Ed.), Frontiers in Econometrics, 105–142. New York: Academic Press.
McFadden, D. and K. Train (2000): Mixed MNL models for discrete response. Journal of
Applied Econometrics, 15(5), 447–470.
Miller, D. P. and J. Yeo (2012): Estimating dynamic discrete choice models of product differentiation: An application to Medicare Part D with switching costs. Unpublished
manuscript.
Nosal, K. (2012): Estimating switching costs for Medicare Advantage plans. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Mannheim.
Polyakova, M. (2016): Regulation of insurance with adverse selection and switching costs:
Evidence from Medicare Part D. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(3), 165
–195.
Sinaiko, A. D., C. C. Afendulis, and R. G. Frank (2013): Enrollment in Medicare
Advantage plans in Miami-Dade County: Evidence of status quo bias? Inquiry, 50(3), 202–
215.
Stango, V. and J. Zinman (2014): Limited and varying consumer attention: Evidence from
shocks to the salience of bank overdraft fees. Review of Finance, 27(4), 990–1030.
Zhou, C. and Y. Zhang (2012): The vast majority of Medicare Part D beneficiaries still
don’t choose the cheapest plans that meet their medication needs. Health Affairs, 31(10),
2259–2265.

39

Tables and figures
Table 1: Sample selection
2007
2008
2009
2010

Entire 20%
9,299,848
9,530,609
9,781,213
10,016,372

Selection criteria

Estimation sample

1,176,895
1,215,532
1,136,255

76,352
80,546
81,382

Notes: Selection criteria: US residents, aged 65+, enrolled in stand-alone non-employer PDP plan, do not
receive low-income subsidies (non-LIS), not dual-eligible, enrolled in Part D continuously in 12 months
in the reference year (t) and prior year (t−1) unless forced chooser (i. e., individual has no default plan).
Estimation sample randomly selects 100,000 individuals who meet all selection criteria in at least one
year. Because of later enrollment, death, or not meeting all selection criteria for the whole time period,
the panel data set is unbalanced and the number of observations is smaller than 100,000 in each year.

40

Table 2: Optional and forced choosers
Forced choosers

2008
2009
2010
All years

(%)
3.65
3.65
2.78
3.35

Optional choosers
Stayers Switchers
(%)
(%)
86.09
10.27
86.29
10.06
87.79
9.44
86.73
9.91

N
76,352
80,546
81,382
238,280

Notes: Optional choosers are individuals who do have a default plan, forced choosers are those without
default (i. e., because they are new to Part D (roughly 97% of forced choosers) or because their old plan
terminates (roughly 3%)).

41

Table 3: Average ex post overspending
Forced choosers
Year
2008
2009
2010
All years

280.5
272.5
255.3
270.4

Optional choosers
Stayers Switchers
325.0
220.4
394.6
203.4
396.1
202.6
373.0
208.8

Total
312.6
370.9
374.0
353.3

Notes: Based on estimation sample. Ex post overspending = total costs in chosen plan – total costs of
cheapest available plan in year t, based on drugs used in year t.

42

Table 4: Ex ante overspending in old and new plan
Stayers
Old plan (t-1) = new plan (t)
Mean
2008
341.3
2009
405.6
2010
423.9
All years
391.5
Median
2008
256.4
2009
334.0
2010
342.4
All years
313.9
Share with zero ex ante overspending
2008
3.37
2009
1.84
2010
2.45
All years
2.54

Switchers
Old plan (t-1) New plan (t)
409.4
416.5
400.7
409.0

239.1
220.1
224.2
227.7

313.8
346.9
307.6
322.8

166.6
144.5
172.3
163.7

0.96
0.91
1.17
1.01

13.15
17.64
18.32
16.37

Notes: Based on estimation sample. Ex ante overspending = total costs in (old or new) plan − total
costs in cheapest plan, based on drugs used in t−1. As ex ante overspending is not available for most of
the forced choosers, they are not included.

43

Table 5: Descriptive statistics – estimation sample
Optional choosers
Switchers
Stayers
Attention Triggers:
Part D experience in t-1:
Gap coverage [D]
Hit the gap [D]
Gap coverage & hit the gap [D]
Hit catastrophic region [D]
Change in t-1 plan:
Plan consolidated [D]
Change of premium [$1000]
Change of deductible [$1000]
Change of ICL [$1000]
OOP effect of formulary change [$1000]
Tiers with increases in copayments [share]
Switch between copay and coinsurance [D]
Health shocks and health care use in t-1:
Onset of costly condition [D]
Onset of cheap condition [D]
Five or more doctor visits [D]
At least one ER visit [D]
At least one hospital stay [D]
Determinants of Acuity
Male [D]
Non-white [D]
Age 70–79 years [D]
Age 80 years or older [D]
PDP experience [years]
Low education [ZIP-code share]
Low income [ZIP-code share]
High income [ZIP-code share]
Ever had depression [D]
N

0.14 (0.35)
0.22 (0.41)
0.06 (0.23)
0.03 (0.17)

0.13 (0.34)
0.18 (0.38)
0.04 (0.21)
0.02 (0.15)

0.10
0.13
0.01
0.15
0.05
0.38
0.14

0.19
0.07
0.00
0.15
0.04
0.42
0.08

(0.31)
(0.11)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.17)
(0.35)
(0.35)

0.10 (0.30)
0.25 (0.43)
0.77 (0.42)
0.24 (0.43)
0.17 (0.37)
0.36
0.04
0.49
0.30
2.83
0.21
0.09
0.24
0.24
23,623

(0.48)
(0.20)
(0.50)
(0.46)
(0.85)
(0.11)
(0.07)
(0.16)
(0.43)

Forced choosers

(0.39)
(0.08)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.15)
(0.30)
(0.27)

0.10 (0.30)
0.25 (0.43)
0.76 (0.43)
0.25 (0.43)
0.17 (0.38)
0.37
0.07
0.48
0.32
2.87
0.21
0.09
0.25
0.24
206,672

(0.48)
(0.25)
(0.50)
(0.47)
(0.86)
(0.12)
(0.07)
(0.16)
(0.43)

0.45
0.08
0.44
0.27
0.36
0.21
0.08
0.26
0.23
7,985

(0.50)
(0.28)
(0.50)
(0.44)
(0.94)
(0.12)
(0.07)
(0.16)
(0.42)

Notes: Means with standard deviations in parentheses. Dummy variables are marked with [D]. Pooled
across years 2007/8-2009/10. Information on experience in old plan for forced choosers omitted as only
available for small fraction of forced choosers (those whose old plan was terminated). Change in cost
sharing is defined as the share of tiers on the formulary for which an increase in cost-sharing occurs.
Dollar amounts are measured in 2010 dollars using the CPI.

44

Table 6: Descriptive statistics – choice sets in estimation sample

# plans
OOP cost [$1000]
Plan characteristics
Annual premium [$1000]
Deductible amount [$1000]
ICL amount [$1000]
No gap coverage [D]
Old plan [D]
Variance of OOP cost [($1000)2 ]
N

Optional choosers
Switchers
Stayers
51.79 (4.38)
51.11 (3.72)
1.01 (1.19)
0.93 (1.08)
0.55
0.13
2.75
0.76
0.02
10.27
23,623

(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.10)
(0.04)
(0.00)
(5.88)

0.55
0.13
2.75
0.76
0.02
9.95
206,672

(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.10)
(0.04)
(0.00)
(5.67)

Forced choosers
51.65 (3.82)
0.90 (1.07)
0.54
0.12
2.74
0.75
0.00
9.55
7,985

(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.10)
(0.04)
(0.00)
(5.50)

Notes: Means across averages in individuals’ choice sets with standard deviations in parentheses. Dummy
variables are marked with [D]. Pooled across years 2007/8-2009/10. OOP cost= out of pocket cost,
ICL=initial coverage limit. Old plan is a dummy variable for the plan the individual was enrolled in in
t−1. Dollar amounts are measured in 2010 dollars using the CPI.

45

Table 7: Estimated models
Model
Model components:
Switching cost (random coefficient for old plan)
Attention stage
Unobserved heterogeneity in acuity
Acuity enters choice stage
Number of parameters
Log likelihood
LR test against model IV (df)∗
AIC
BIC

I

II

III

IV

X

X
X

X
X
X

13
-166,907.2
9806.4 (30)
333,840.4
334,026.5

41
-163,429.8
2851.6 (2)
326,941.6
327,528.6

42
-162,716.8
1425.6 (1)
325,517.6
326,118.9

X
X
X
X
43
-162,004.0
—
324,094.0
324,709.6

Notes: All models are estimated on the unbalanced estimation sample with 238, 280 observations on
100, 000 individuals. On average, they faced around 51.2 alternatives in each choice situation which
translates into 12,199,769 alternatives in total.
∗
: All LR tests clearly reject the respective simpler model against Model IV.

46

Table 8: Results Model IV – attention and acuity
Coefficient
Attention stage
Constant
Gap coverage [D]
Hit the gap [D]
Gap coverage & hit the gap [D]
Hit catastrophic region [D]
Plan consolidated [D]
Change of premium [$1000]
Change of deductible [$1000]
Change of ICL [$1000]
OOP effect of formulary change [$1000]
Tiers with increases in copayments [share]
Switch between copay and coinsurance [D]
Onset of costly condition [D]
Onset of cheap condition [D]
Five or more doctor visits [D]
At least one ER visit [D]
At least one hospital stay [D]
Acuity coefficient (δa )
Determinants of acuity
Male [D]
Non-white [D]
Age 70–79 years [D]
Age 80 years or older [D]
PDP experience [years]
Low education [ZIP-code share]
Low income [ZIP-code share]
High income [ZIP-code share]
Ever had depression [D]
Unobserved Heterogeneity
*** p < 0.001, ** p

-1.656
-0.965
0.681
-0.370
0.460
-0.153
7.453
1.517
1.641
0.558
-0.390
0.663
-0.014
0.008
0.086
-0.011
-0.033
2.568

Marginal effects on
attention switching

SE
(0.113)
(0.047)
(0.037)
(0.067)
(0.075)
(0.044)
(0.116)
(0.225)
(0.336)
(0.068)
(0.043)
(0.040)
(0.041)
(0.028)
(0.033)
(0.033)
(0.038)
(0.041)

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

-0.074
0.058
-0.029
0.040
-0.012
0.612
0.125
0.135
0.046
-0.032
0.058
-0.001
0.001
0.007
-0.001
-0.003

-0.042
0.036
-0.017
0.024
-0.007
0.366
0.074
0.081
0.027
-0.019
0.036
-0.001
0.000
0.004
-0.001
-0.002

-0.035 (0.015) *
-0.007
-0.438 (0.031) ***
-0.084
-0.050 (0.017) **
-0.011
-0.235 (0.021) ***
-0.048
-0.075 (0.008) ***
-0.016
-0.550 (0.076) ***
-0.116
-0.237 (0.109) *
-0.050
-0.628 (0.056) ***
-0.132
-0.140 (0.017) ***
-0.029
1
(by normalization)
< 0.01, * p < 0.05

-0.003
-0.037
-0.005
-0.021
-0.007
-0.051
-0.022
-0.058
-0.013

**

***

Notes: Average marginal effects on the probability to pay attention and the probability to switch plans.
Stars indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from zero. The attention stage model also
includes year dummies.

47

Table 9: Results Model IV – plan choice
Coefficient
Choice stage
OOP cost [$1000]
-3.130
Annual premium [$1000]
-9.565
Deductible amount [$1000]
-5.216
ICL amount [$1000]
0.622
No gap coverage [D]
-0.569
Old plan coefficient mean (µγ )
3.238
Old plan coefficient variance (σγ2 )
1.385
Variance of OOP cost [($1000)2 ]
-0.219
Acuity coefficient (δv ) in error var.
-0.497
*** p < 0.001, **

SE

Marginal effects on plan choice
unconditional
conditional

(0.066) ***
-0.011
(0.189) ***
-0.033
(0.111) ***
-0.018
(0.157) ***
0.002
(0.038) ***
-0.002
(0.078) ***
0.799
(0.046) ***
(0.012) ***
-0.001
(0.010) ***
p < 0.01, * p < 0.05

-0.036
-0.111
-0.061
0.007
-0.008
0.115
-0.003

Notes: Average marginal effects on the probability that plan is chosen, unconditional and conditional on
attention. Stars indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from zero. The plan choice model
also includes five dummy variables for the largest plans.

48

Table 10: Probability of attention among optional choosers
Model
II
III
IV

Min.
0.004
0.001
0.002

1st Qu.
0.374
0.176
0.171

Median
0.464
0.216
0.209

Mean
0.455
0.224
0.218

3rd Qu.
0.556
0.263
0.253

Max.
0.994
0.979
0.954

Notes: Models described in Table 7. Minimum, 1st Quartile, Median, Mean, 3rd Quartile and Maximum
of attention probability implied by the models with attention stage.

49

Table 11: Marginal effects on probability to pay attention
II

Model
III

Attention Triggers
Gap coverage [D]
-0.330 *** -0.120 ***
Hit the gap [D]
0.117 ***
0.048 ***
Gap coverage & hit the gap [D]
-0.041 **
-0.016 *
Hit catastrophic region [D]
0.037 *
0.018 *
Plan consolidated [D]
0.078 ***
0.014 **
Change of premium [$1000]
1.028 ***
0.685 ***
Change of deductible [$1000]
0.538 ***
0.212 ***
Change of ICL [$1000]
0.301 ***
0.095 **
OOP effect of formulary change [$1000]
0.110 ***
0.063 ***
Tiers with increases in copayments [share]
-0.012
-0.022 ***
Switch between copay and coinsurance [D]
0.171 ***
0.080 ***
Onset of costly condition [D]
-0.008
-0.005
Onset of cheap condition [D]
-0.001
-0.000
Five or more doctor visits [D]
0.018 **
0.005
At least one ER visit [D]
-0.014 *
-0.006
At least one hospital stay [D]
-0.010
-0.007
Determinants of Acuity
Male [D]
-0.021 *** -0.012 ***
Non-white [D]
-0.158 *** -0.085 ***
Age 70–79 years [D]
-0.040 *** -0.017 ***
Age 80 years or older [D]
-0.087 *** -0.045 ***
PDP experience [years]
0.003
0.006 *
Low education [ZIP-code share]
-0.137 *** -0.099 ***
Low income [ZIP-code share]
-0.171 *** -0.078 ***
High income [ZIP-code share]
-0.279 *** -0.141 ***
Ever had depression [D]
-0.017 **
-0.012 ***
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05

IV
-0.074 ***
0.058 ***
-0.029 ***
0.040 ***
-0.012 ***
0.612 ***
0.125 ***
0.135 ***
0.046 ***
-0.032 ***
0.058 ***
-0.001
0.001
0.007 **
-0.001
-0.003
-0.007 *
-0.084 ***
-0.011 **
-0.048 ***
-0.016 ***
-0.116 ***
-0.050 *
-0.132 ***
-0.029 ***

Notes: Average marginal effects. Stars indicate whether underlying coefficients are significantly different
from zero. No marginal effects for Model I shown as it has no attention stage or acuity.

50

Table 12: Marginal effects on probability to switch
II

Model
III

Attention Triggers
Gap coverage [D]
-0.082 *** -0.060 ***
Hit the gap [D]
0.026 ***
0.023 ***
Gap coverage & hit the gap [D]
-0.009 **
-0.008 *
Hit catastrophic region [D]
0.008 *
0.008 *
Plan consolidated [D]
0.018 ***
0.007 **
Change of premium [$1000]
0.233 ***
0.326 ***
Change of deductible [$1000]
0.122 ***
0.101 ***
Change of ICL [$1000]
0.068 ***
0.045 **
OOP effect of formulary change [$1000]
0.025 ***
0.030 ***
Tiers with increases in copayments [share]
-0.003
-0.011 ***
Switch between copay and coinsurance [D]
0.039 ***
0.038 ***
Onset of costly condition [D]
-0.002
-0.002
Onset of cheap condition [D]
-0.000
-0.000
Five or more doctor visits [D]
0.004 **
0.002
At least one ER visit [D]
-0.003 *
-0.003
At least one hospital stay [D]
-0.002
-0.003
Determinants of Acuity
Male [D]
-0.005 *** -0.006 ***
Non-white [D]
-0.036 *** -0.040 ***
Age 70–79 years [D]
-0.009 *** -0.008 ***
Age 80 years or older [D]
-0.020 *** -0.022 ***
PDP experience [years]
0.001
0.003 *
Low education [ZIP-code share]
-0.031 *** -0.047 ***
Low income [ZIP-code share]
-0.039 *** -0.037 ***
High income [ZIP-code share]
-0.063 *** -0.067 ***
Ever had depression [D]
-0.004 **
-0.006 ***
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05

IV
-0.042 ***
0.036 ***
-0.017 ***
0.024 ***
-0.007 ***
0.366 ***
0.074 ***
0.081 ***
0.027 ***
-0.019 ***
0.036 ***
-0.001
0.000
0.004 **
-0.001
-0.002
-0.003 *
-0.037 ***
-0.005 **
-0.021 ***
-0.007 ***
-0.051 ***
-0.022 *
-0.058 ***
-0.013 ***

Notes: Average marginal effects. Stars indicate whether underlying coefficients are significantly different
from zero. No marginal effects for Model I shown as it has no attention stage or acuity.

51

Table 13: Marginal effects on probability to choose plan
Model
I

II

III
Conditional on Attention
OOP cost [$1000]
-0.010 *** -0.020 *** -0.037 ***
Annual premium [$1000]
-0.029 *** -0.061 *** -0.115 ***
Deductible amount [$1000]
-0.018 *** -0.039 *** -0.069 ***
ICL amount [$1000]
0.003 ***
0.007 ***
0.011 ***
No gap coverage [D]
-0.004 *** -0.004 *** -0.010 ***
Old plan coefficient mean (µγ )
0.334 ***
0.282 ***
0.192 ***
Variance of OOP cost [($1000)2 ] -0.001 *** -0.002 *** -0.003 ***
Unconditional
OOP cost [$1000]
-0.010 *** -0.009 *** -0.010 ***
Annual premium [$1000]
-0.029 *** -0.029 *** -0.030 ***
Deductible amount [$1000]
-0.018 *** -0.019 *** -0.018 ***
ICL amount [$1000]
0.003 ***
0.003 ***
0.003 ***
No gap coverage [D]
-0.004 *** -0.002 *** -0.003 ***
Old plan coefficient mean (µγ )
0.334 ***
0.660 ***
0.801 ***
Variance of OOP cost [($1000)2 ] -0.001 *** -0.001 *** -0.001 ***
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05

IV
-0.036 ***
-0.111 ***
-0.061 ***
0.007 ***
-0.008 ***
0.115 ***
-0.003 ***
-0.011 ***
-0.033 ***
-0.018 ***
0.002 ***
-0.002 ***
0.799 ***
-0.001 ***

Notes: Average marginal effects. Stars indicate whether underlying coefficients are significantly different
from zero.

52

Figure 1: Estimates of switching costs
1200

Switching costs [$]

1073
900

690
600

409
338
300

0

I

II

III

IV

Model
Notes: Based on coefficient estimates after estimation of Models I–IV. Ratio of the mean of the random
coefficient for the old plan dummy and the coefficient of the premium. As premium measured in USD
1000, ratio multiplied by 1000.

53

Figure 2: Contribution of inattention and switching costs to inertia

80

Source

80.1

79.9

Inattention
Switching costs

Inertia [percentage points]

66.0
60

60.9

37.8

68.4

40

33.4

20

33.4

28.2
19.2
11.5

0

I

II

III

IV

Model
Notes: Overall inertia measured by the unconditional marginal effect of the mean old plan coefficient
(bottom panel of Table 13). The respective marginal effect conditional on attention (top panel of Table
13) indicates how much of overall inertia can be attributed to switching costs.

54

Figure 3: Comparison of simulation results: Switching probability

80.4

Switching probability [%]

80

69.1
60

46.0
38.0

40

23.6

20.5

19.5

20

10.7 10.7
0

I

11.0

10.4

10.0

II

III

IV

Model
Scenario:

Baseline

Forced attention

No switching costs

Notes: Policy simulation: Forced attention setting the probability of attention to 1 for everyone. No
switching costs reduces switching costs to zero.

55

Figure 4: Comparison of simulation results: Overspending
375

361

360

Average overspending [$]

354 354

352

357
347

350

329
325

318

300

284
273

275

262
250

I

II

III

IV

Model
Scenario:

Baseline

Forced attention

No switching costs

Notes: Policy simulation: Forced attention setting the probability of attention to 1 for everyone. No
switching costs reduces switching costs to zero.

56

Figure 5: Predicted overspending in baseline and after policy interventions

Notes: Empirical CDFs based on Model IV. Policy simulation: Forced attention setting the probability
of attention to 1 for everyone. No switching costs reduces switching costs to zero.

57

Figure 6: Predicted reduction in overspending induced by policy interventions

Notes: Empirical CDFs based on Model IV. Overspending at baseline – overspending after policy simulations. Policy simulation: Forced attention setting the probability of attention to 1 for everyone. No
switching costs reduces switching costs to zero.

58

Online Appendix
A.1 Estimation results for Models I–III
Tables A1–A5 report detailed estimation results for Models I–III. The results are presented
analogously to the results for the preferred Model IV in Tables 8 and 9. Tables A1, A3,
and A5 present coefficients, standard errors and marginal effects for the plan-choice stage
of Models I, II, and III, respectively. Tables A2 and A4 report coefficient estimates,
standard errors, and marginal effects for the attention stage, and the acuity equation of
Models II and III (Model I does not contain an attention stage nor an acuity equation).
In the following, we first describe the results for the plan-choice stage for the different
models and then focus on the results for the attention stage and acuity equation. We
mainly discuss the coefficient estimates. The marginal effects are discussed in Section 5.4
in the main text.
Plan-choice stage
As Table A1 shows, all coefficients in the plan-choice stage of Model I are highly statistically significant. They furthermore have the expected signs: Individuals are less likely
to choose plans with higher OOP, higher premium, higher deductible, and those plans
that do not offer gap coverage. An increase in a plan’s ICL increases the probability that
this plan is chosen. Similar to the results in the literature, the premium coefficient is
more than three times the OOP coefficient, suggesting that individuals largely overvalue
premiums in their decisions, see also Abaluck and Gruber (2016a). Furthermore, the estimates of the mean for the old plan dummy – or, to be precise, the mean of the random
coefficient – is positive and high, translating into an estimate of high switching costs – as
displayed in Figure 1. We further find even in our simplest model that an increase in the
plan-level variance of OOP significantly decreases the probability that the plan is chosen,
which indicates that risk aversion plays a role in Part D plan choice.
Adding an attention stage in Model II results in only relatively minor changes to the
coefficient estimates in the plan-choice stage, as the comparison of the values in Tables
A1 and A3 shows. The only relevant changes appear for the mean (and the variance) of
the old plan dummy. The mean is reduced from 9.2 in Model I to 6.5 in Model II (the
variance from 3.6 to 2.8). Taken together with a relatively stable coefficient for the plan
premium, the reduction in the mean implies a reduction in the estimated switching costs,
see also Figure 1. As part of inertia is explained by inattention in Model II, this change
is expected.

59

When going from Model II to Model III, the coefficients of all but the old plan dummy
hardly change as the comparison across Tables A3 to A5 shows. Only the mean (and the
variance) of the old plan dummy are reduced, from 6.5 to 3.9 (2.8 to 1.2 for the variance).
Allowing for heterogeneity thus further decreases the estimated switching costs.
Attention stage
Tables A2 and A4 report the coefficient estimates, standard errors and marginal effects
for Models II and III, respectively, for the three sets of attention triggers: experience with
Part D, changes in plan features across years, and health events/health care use in t−1.
In both models, hitting the gap increases attention for individuals who do not have gap
coverage; so does hitting the catastrophic coverage region. Furthermore, changes in plan
features trigger attention in both models. As in Model IV, changes in premiums are
particularly important for attention in both Models II and III. In addition, changes in
deductible, ICL, and the benefit design significantly trigger attention in both models.
Again, similar to the results presented in Table 8 for Model IV, health events and health
care use in t−1 seem to play a smaller role for attention. While in Model II, individuals
with five or more doctor visits have a higher probability of attention, individuals with
at least one visit to the Emergency Room pay attention with slightly lower probability.
In Model III none of the coefficients for health events or health care use are significantly
different from zero.
Acuity
Results for the determinants of acuity are presented in the bottom panels of Tables A2
and A4 for Models II and III, respectively. As in Model IV, all coefficient estimates except
for the years of experience with Part D are negative and highly statistically significant
in Models II and III. According to these models, men have lower acuity than women,
non-whites have lower acuity than whites, and older individuals have lower acuity than
younger ones. Individuals who reside in a ZIP code with a higher share of low educated
seniors have lower acuity, and so do individuals in low and very high income ZIP codes.
Furthermore, individuals who ever had depression have lower acuity.
Interestingly, the coefficient estimate for experience with Part D is positive in Models
II and III, but not significantly different from zero in Model II and only marginally
so in Model III. Whether heterogeneity is allowed for in the attention and the planchoice stage thus seems important for conclusions on how acuity evolves over time in
Part D. More specifically, neglecting that unobserved heterogeneity in the willingness and
ability to engage in Part D plan choice can play a role for consumers’ valuation of plan
60

characteristics would lead to the conclusion that consumers’ acuity, attention to plan
choice and probability to switch increase over time. In contrast, when heterogeneity is
accounted for, a longer experience with Part D is associated with a decrease in acuity.
A.2 Policy simulations comparing Models I–IV
Figure A1 compares the reduction in predicted overspending induced by forced attention
for Models II–IV (there is no attention stage in Model I). Compared to the effect we obtain
in our preferred Model IV, Model II and III yield interesting differences. In particular,
the distribution of the reduction of overspending is more concentrated in Model II and the
fraction of individuals for whom overspending increases is much smaller in both models.
These differences are due to the fact that Model II and III are more restrictive w.r.t
heterogeneity in acuity. This highlights again the importance of allowing for heterogeneity
in structural models of individual choice. This is particularly relevant if the policymaker
is interested in the trade-off between ‘winners’ and ‘losers’ of an intervention that forces
individuals to attend to a choice. (This insight most likely holds irrespective of any
additional assumptions that would be required to make welfare calculations.)
Figure A2 compares the reduction in predicted overspending by eliminating switching
costs for Models I-IV. Again, the distribution of the effects of this intervention depends
on the model specification. Interestingly, the effects are most dispersed in Model I, which
contains no attention stage at all and no heterogeneity in acuity. In that model removing
switching costs induces switching rates to increase the most. As Figure 3 shows, eliminating switching costs results in 80% switching rate in Model I compared to only 38% in
Model II, 20.5% in Model III, and 19.5% in Model IV. Due to the lack of an attention
stage and acuity in Model I, the random choice error is exacerbated so that overspending
increases even more for those individuals who end up in a worse plan. In contrast, in Models III and IV the attention stage is more important than switching costs (as discussed
above) so that removing switching costs has a very small effect.

61

Appendix Tables and Figures
Table A1: Results Model I - plan choice

Coefficient
Choice Stage
OOP cost [$1000]
Annual premium [$1000]
Deductible amount [$1000]
ICL amount [$1000]
No gap coverage [D]
Old plan coefficient mean (µγ )
Old plan coefficient variance (σγ2 )
Variance of OOP cost [($1000)2 ]
*** p <

SE

Marginal effects
Choose Plan
Choose Plan
(unconditional)
(cond. on attention)

-2.783 (0.026) ***
-0.010
-8.532 (0.052) ***
-0.029
-5.340 (0.051) ***
-0.018
0.783 (0.151) ***
0.003
-0.824 (0.031) ***
-0.004
9.156 (0.035) ***
0.334
3.574 (0.025) ***
-0.279 (0.011) ***
-0.001
0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05

-0.010
-0.029
-0.018
0.003
-0.004
0.334
-0.001

Notes: Average marginal effects on the probability that plan is chosen, unconditional and conditional
on attention. Stars indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from zero. The model also
includes five dummy variables for the largest plans.

62

Table A2: Results Model II - attention and acuity
Coefficient
Attention Stage
Constant
Gap coverage [D]
Hit the gap [D]
Gap coverage & hit the gap [D]
Hit catastrophic region [D]
Plan consolidated [D]
Change of premium [$1000]
Change of deductible [$1000]
Change of ICL [$1000]
OOP effect of formulary change [$1000]
Tiers with increases in copayments [share]
Switch between copay and coinsurance [D]
Onset of costly condition [D]
Onset of cheap condition [D]
Five or more doctor visits [D]
At least one ER visit [D]
At least one hospital stay [D]
Determinants of Acuity:
Male [D]
Non-white [D]
Age 70–79 years [D]
Age 80 years or older [D]
PDP experience [years]
Low education [ZIP-code share]
Low income [ZIP-code share]
High income [ZIP-code share]
Ever had depression [D]
*** p < 0.001, ** p <

0.173
-1.776
0.542
-0.193
0.172
0.362
4.776
2.498
1.397
0.512
-0.057
0.800
-0.038
-0.007
0.085
-0.063
-0.047
-0.097
-0.766
-0.187
-0.408
0.012
-0.639
-0.796
-1.296
-0.081
0.01, *

Marginal effects
Attention Switch

SE
(0.102)
(0.040)
(0.044)
(0.060)
(0.072)
(0.044)
(0.108)
(0.273)
(0.353)
(0.070)
(0.042)
(0.044)
(0.039)
(0.028)
(0.031)
(0.032)
(0.036)

***
***
**
*
***
***
***
***
***
***

**
*

(0.026) ***
(0.048) ***
(0.034) ***
(0.039) ***
(0.027)
(0.138) ***
(0.189) ***
(0.102) ***
(0.029) **
p < 0.05

-0.330
0.117
-0.041
0.037
0.078
1.028
0.538
0.301
0.110
-0.012
0.171
-0.008
-0.001
0.018
-0.014
-0.010

-0.082
0.026
-0.009
0.008
0.018
0.233
0.122
0.068
0.025
-0.003
0.039
-0.002
0.000
0.004
-0.003
-0.002

-0.021
-0.158
-0.040
-0.087
0.003
-0.137
-0.171
-0.279
-0.017

-0.005
-0.036
-0.009
-0.020
0.001
-0.031
-0.039
-0.063
-0.004

Notes: Average marginal effects on the probability to pay attention and the probability to switch plans.
Stars indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from zero. The model also includes year
dummies.

63

Table A3: Results Model II – plan choice
Marginal effects
Choose Plan
Choose Plan
(unconditional)
(cond. on attention)

Coefficient SE
Choice Stage
OOP cost [$1000]
-3.021 (0.029) ***
-0.009
Annual premium [$1000]
-9.382 (0.058) ***
-0.029
Deductible amount [$1000]
-5.955 (0.059) ***
-0.019
ICL amount [$1000]
1.017 (0.165) ***
0.003
No gap coverage [D]
-0.572 (0.035) ***
-0.002
Old plan coefficient mean (µγ )
6.469 (0.041) ***
0.660
2.799 (0.031) ***
Old plan coefficient variance (σγ2 )
Variance of OOP cost [($1000)2 ]
-0.277 (0.012) ***
-0.001
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05

-0.020
-0.061
-0.039
0.007
-0.004
0.282
-0.002

Notes: Average marginal effects on the probability that plan is chosen, unconditional and conditional
on attention. Stars indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from zero. The model also
includes five dummy variables for the largest plans.

64

Table A4: Results Model III - attention and acuity
Coefficient
Attention Stage
Constant
Gap coverage [D]
Hit the gap [D]
Gap coverage & hit the gap [D]
Hit catastrophic region [D]
Plan consolidated [D]
Change of premium [$1000]
Change of deductible [$1000]
Change of ICL [$1000]
OOP effect of formulary change [$1000]
Tiers with increases in copayments [share]
Switch between copay and coinsurance [D]
Onset of costly condition [D]
Onset of cheap condition [D]
Five or more doctor visits [D]
At least one ER visit [D]
At least one hospital stay [D]
Acuity coefficient (δa )
Determinants of Acuity:
Male [D]
Non-white [D]
Age 70–79 years [D]
Age 80 years or older [D]
PDP experience [years]
Low education [ZIP-code share]
Low income [ZIP-code share]
High income [ZIP-code share]
Ever had depression [D]
Unobserved Heterogeneity
*** p < 0.001, ** p <

-1.794
-1.399
0.468
-0.166
0.176
0.144
6.927
2.141
0.965
0.642
-0.225
0.744
-0.052
-0.001
0.052
-0.065
-0.073
2.075
-0.058
-0.462
-0.084
-0.226
0.030
-0.482
-0.381
-0.687
-0.060
1
0.01, *

Marginal effects
Attention Switch

SE
(0.115)
(0.054)
(0.042)
(0.069)
(0.086)
(0.047)
(0.125)
(0.241)
(0.352)
(0.071)
(0.045)
(0.045)
(0.043)
(0.030)
(0.034)
(0.035)
(0.039)
(0.040)

***
***
***
*
*
**
***
***
**
***
***
***

-0.120
0.048
-0.016
0.018
0.014
0.685
0.212
0.095
0.063
-0.022
0.080
-0.005
0.000
0.005
-0.006
-0.007

-0.060
0.023
-0.008
0.008
0.007
0.326
0.101
0.045
0.030
-0.011
0.038
-0.002
0.000
0.002
-0.003
-0.003

(0.015) ***
-0.012
(0.031) ***
-0.085
(0.018) ***
-0.017
(0.022) ***
-0.045
(0.014) *
0.006
(0.080) ***
-0.099
(0.113) ***
-0.078
(0.059) ***
-0.141
(0.017) ***
-0.012
(by normalization)
p < 0.05

-0.006
-0.040
-0.008
-0.022
0.003
-0.047
-0.037
-0.067
-0.006

***

Notes: Average marginal effects on the probability to pay attention and the probability to switch plans.
Stars indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from zero. The model also includes year
dummies.

65

Table A5: Results Model III – plan choice
Marginal effects
Choose Plan
Choose Plan
(unconditional)
(cond. on attention)

Coefficient SE
Choice Stage
OOP cost [$1000]
-3.096 (0.028) ***
-0.010
Annual premium [$1000]
-9.556 (0.059) ***
-0.030
Deductible amount [$1000]
-5.710 (0.059) ***
-0.018
ICL amount [$1000]
0.882 (0.165) ***
0.003
No gap coverage [D]
-0.670 (0.035) ***
-0.003
Old plan coefficient mean (µγ )
3.904 (0.057) ***
0.801
1.320 (0.056) ***
-0.001
Old plan coefficient variance (σγ2 )
Variance of OOP cost [($1000)2 ]
-0.268 (0.012) ***
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05

-0.037
-0.115
-0.069
0.011
-0.010
0.192
-0.003

Notes: Average marginal effects on the probability that plan is chosen, unconditional and conditional
on attention. Stars indicate whether coefficients are significantly different from zero. The model also
includes five dummy variables for the largest plans.

66

Figure A1: Reduction in overspending induced by forced attention – model comparison

Notes: Empirical CDFs of predicted reduction in overspending (overspending at baseline – overspending
after policy intervention). Results shown for Models II – IV (no attention stage in Model I). Policy
simulation: Forced attention setting the probability of attention to 1 for everyone.

67

Figure A2: Reduction in overspending induced by no switching costs – model comparison

Notes: Empirical CDFs of predicted reduction in overspending (overspending at baseline – overspending
after policy intervention). Results shown for Models I – IV . Policy simulation: No switching costs reduces
switching costs to zero.

68

